Irish Grassland  
Association  Journal
2006  VOLUME  40
IRISH  GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  
CORPORATE  MEMBERS  2006
ACCBank  
AIB Bank  
AIBP  
Alltech
Bank of Ireland  
Conroy  Recycling  Limited  
Bord Bia 
Dairygold
Dairymaster  Limited  
Dawn  Group  
Delaval  Limited  
FBD Insurances  
Germinal  Ireland  Ltd 
Glanbia
Goldcrop  Limited  
Grassland  Fertilizers  Limited
I.A.W.S  Group  pic
Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation  Society  Limited  
Irish Country  Meats  
Irish Dairy Board  
IFAC  Accountants  
Irish Farmers ’ Journal  
Irish Farmers ’ Monthly  
Janssen-Cilag  Limited  
Richard  Keenan  & Co. Ltd 
Kerry  Agribusiness  
Kingswood  Computing  Limited  
Lakeland  Dairies  
LELY Ireland  Limited  
McQuinn  Consulting  
Monsanto  Ireland  Limited  
Mullinahone  Co-op  
Osmonds
New Zealand  Genetics  (Ireland)  Limited  
Timac  Agri Business  Limited  
Ulster  Bank  
Volac
Wexford  Milk Producers
TEAGASC  EDUCATION  AND  ADVISORY  SERVICES
Cork East 
Cork West  
Laois  
Limerick
Regional  Advisory  & Training  Services,  Kildalton  
Tipperary  North  
Tipperary  South  
Wexford
Irish Grassland  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 40 2006
Edited  by 
David  McGilloway
ISSN 0332-0588
Printed  by Walsh,  Printer,  Roscrea
J. Conington,  
L. Bunger  
B. HosieCONTENTS
Breeding  for Resistance  to Footrot  in SheepPAGE
J.P. Hanrahan Observations  on Variation  in Weight  and Classification  
of Carcasses  fro Irish Lambs
T. Keady  
J.P. Hanrahan Efficient  Sheep  Production  in a Subsidy  Free 
Environment  - Research  from Athenry 15
A. Cromie Breeding  Quality  Cattle 28
M. Drennan Relationship  between  Beef Carcass  Classification  
Grades  with Meat  Yield and Value 35
P. O’Kiely Alternatives  Forages  to Grass  for Ensilage  and as 
Feeds  for Beef Cattle 44
S. Flanagan Irish Grassland  Association  1946-2006  ■ 
Delivering  the Benefits  from Grassland 62
COUNCIL  2006  - 2007
President  
Vice-President  
Past-President  
Generai  SecretaryJohn Donworth  
William  Kingston  
Jan Frederiks  
Grainne  Dwyer
Brendan  Barnes,  Kevin  Commins,  Andrew  Cromie,  Michael  Doran,
Jim Dwyer,  Edward  Egan,  Sean Flanagan,  John Fitzgerald,  Padraig  French,  
Brendan  Horan,  Pearse  Kelly,  Jack Kennedy,  Andrew  Moloney,  Pat McFeely,  
Mark McGee,  Nicholas  McGill,  David  McGilloway,  John O’Brien,
Philip  Donohoe,  Tony Pettit,  Robin  Talbot,  Peter  Young.
Irish Grassland  Association,  Moneymore,  Borris  in Ossory,  Co. Laois  
Phone/Fax  0505  41025 Email: grainne@irishgrassland.com
IV
Breeding  for Resistance  to Footrot  in Sheep
Joanne  Conington,  Lutz Bunger  and Brian Hosie  
SAC, West  Mains  Road,  Edinburgh  EH9 3JG
Introduction
Breeding  for resistance  to disease  is not a new concept  - farmers  and sheep  breeders  
have been doing  it for centuries.  However,  the more  recent  use of estimated  breeding  val­
ues (EBVs)  and new technologies  such as DMA  genotyping  are essential  tools in the cur­
rent era of animal  breeding,  which  have the potential  to be used for breeding  for resistance  
to footrot.
Footrot  in sheep  is a major  welfare  problem.  It is the main cause  of lameness,  and is es­
timated  to cost the UK sheep  industry  around  £24M per annum  (Nieuwhof  and Bishop,  
2005). Footrot-affected  sheep  frequently  experience  pain, discomfort  and have reduced  
mobility  that affects  their ability  to compete  for feed (Abbot  and Lewis,  2004). Affected  
sheep  are also more susceptible  to other  diseases  because  of their weakened  condition.  
The causative  organism  is Dicheiobacter  (Bacteroides)  nodosus  (D. nodosus),  which is 
highly  contagious,  being easily  transmitted  from sheep  to sheep  via pasture,  bedding  or 
handling  pens. Considerable  effort is expended  to manage  footrot  in such a way as to 
minimise  its impact  on the productivity  of sheep  flocks,  such as footbathing  with formalin  
or zinc sulphate,  the use of antibiotic  sprays,  vaccination  and foot trimming.  However,  
these treatments  are generally  labour-intensive  and are costly  both in economic  and en­
vironmental  terms. Initial research  at SAC has shown  that there  is a wide variation  in the 
prevalence  of footrot  between  offspring  of different  sires, with some  having  up to 25% of 
offspring  affected,  and others  having  none. This shows  that the exploitation  of the genetic  
basis  for footrot  resistance  is likely  to offer a long-term  and sustainable  solution  to breeding  
healthier  sheep.
Prevalence  of footrot  in UK sheep  flocks
At a recent  SAC footrot  workshop  (Hosie,  2004),  footrot  was identified  as being  a serious  
welfare  problem  that has major  implications  for flock productivity.  In a recent  survey  of 
farmers'  practices  and attitudes  towards  footrot  (Wassink  and Green,  2001; Hosie,  2003),  
more  than 90% of sheep  farmers  had seen footrot  in their sheep  in the past year and 31 % 
considered  that 6% or more of their flock were affected  with footrot. In these  surveys,  
which rely on farmers ’ diagnoses,  the prevalence  of footrot  could be overstated  because  
farmers  may not distinguish  footrot  from other  causes  of foot lameness  (such  as scald  and 
Contagious  Ovine  Digital  Dermatitis,  CODD).  It can also be argued  that these  estimates  
may be understated  because  of failure  to diagnose  early  predisposing  foot conditions,  e.g. 
‘scald ’, where there  are signs  of Inflammation  of the interdigital  skin. This can only be seen 
if individual  feet are inspected,  as this condition  is not always  accompanied  by lameness.  
Also, recent  results  from research  that Is currently  underway  in the UK have shown  that 
the prevalence  of footrot  is much  higher  than in the other  studies  cited in the questionnaires  
reported  above. In 2005,  3,852  Scottish  Blackface  and Mule sheep  located  on experimen ­
tal flocks  in Scotland,  England  and Wales  had each foot inspected  and scored  for foot le­
sions individually.  The results  from these inspections  show that overall,  16% of all feet
were affected,  which  equates  to 44% of all sheep  being  affected.  There  were large differ ­
ences  between flocks,  with 25% of Blackface  sheep and 56% of mule sheep  being  affected. 
However,  it is important  to note that these  figures  cannot  be used as a breed  comparison,  
because  none of the flocks  scored  had both breeds  running  together  as one flock. Figure  
1 shows  the prevalence  of the footrot  and other  foot conditions,  with scores  1 -4 represent ­
ing different  severities  of footrot  (1 = inflammation  of the interdigital  skin and score  4 = se­
vere under-running  of the hoof).
Figure  1. Prevalence  of footrot  in Scottish  Blackface  (SBF)  and Mule sheep
□ SBF 
■ Mule
F/rot1 = footrot  scoret , F/rot2=footrot  score  2. F/rot3=footrot  score  3, F/rot  4=footrot  score 
4, o’grown=overgrown,  mis-shape=mis-shapen,  shelly = shelly hoof, WLA=White  line 
abcess
Genetic  variation  in resistance  to footrot
The exploitation  of inherent,  or natural  resistance  to footrot  to implement  genetic  selection  
to reduce  footrot  incidence  has been undertaken  since the 1980's  in Australia.  Using 
Merino  sheep,  a footrot  lesion  scoring  method  was developed,  with severity  scored  on a 
scale  of 0 to 4 (Egerton  and Roberts,  1971). Successful  breeding  for enhanced  footrot  re­
sistance  in Merinos  has been described  using this approach  (Patterson  and Patterson,  
1989),  and an evaluation  of lines of Corriedale  ewes  selected  for enhanced  footrot  resist ­
ance, in New Zealand,  has been reported  (Skerman  and Moorhouse,  1987). The scoring 
system  was further  developed  with sub-classes  that separated  clinical  signs into 8 cate­
gories  (Raadsma,  2000). An application  of this 8-point  scoring  system  in a genetic  study  
following  challenge  and subsequent  vaccination  concluded  that there  is substantial  genetic  
variation  in resistance  to challenge  with virulent  isolates  of D. nodosus  (Raadsma  et a!., 
1994). Heritability  estimates  of between  0.09 and 0.4 for several  different  immune  re­
sponse  parameters  were reported.  It is likely  that conventional  breeding  for resistance  to 
footrot  can be formalised  into EBVs  for resistance  to footrot,  so that appropriate  weighting 
can be attributed  to it, in relation  to other  breeding  goals  such  as growth  rate. Indeed,  cur­
rent research  in the UK aims  to quantify  genetic  variation  in footrot  in the Texel  and Scottish  
Blackface  breeds  initially,  and investigate  the rates of response  to selection  from the use 
of EBVs  for footrot  as part of multi-trait  breeding  programmes  in these  breeds.
Research  at SAC using Scottish  Blackface  sheep  reared  on two contrasting  hill environ ­
ments has developed  breeding  indices  for hill breeds  combining  carcass  and maternal  
characteristics  (Conington  et al., 2001, 2004, 2006). As part of that research,  health  
records  on animals  kept in the flocks  have  been maintained  so that the effects  of selection  
on the long-term  health  of different  genetic  lines can be determined.  These  data were  
used to look at whether  or not differences  exist in footrot  between  lambs  from different  
sires. Figure  2 shows  the results  for 17 out of a total of 33 sires used across  the two SAC  
hill flocks. Each bar of the graph  represents  the percentage  of lambs  that were  treated  for 
footrot  according  to individual  sires. Each sire had an average  of 44 progeny,  and the 
other 16 sires (not shown  on the graph)  had no progeny  that were  treated  for footrot.  The 
results  show clearly  that there is a large difference  between  sires in the percentage  of 
progeny  treated  for footrot.
Figure  2. Sire differences  in % progeny  affected  by footrot  
25
%
offspring
affected20
15
10
5
0,11 ■ ,■ ■ ,1 ,1 ,1 ,1 ,1 ,
o'P ^ oVT?(iS
Sire id
The use of Molecular  genetics  in breeding  for resistance  to footrot
Although  conventional  methods  of selection  for footrot  resistance  have been proven  to be 
successful,  the development  and additional  use of a molecular  genetic  test for footrot  re­
sistance  potentially  has enormous  advantages.  This is because  of the practical  difficulty  
of objectively  scoring  feet lesions,  and of classifying  them objectively  and repeatably.  In 
addition,  with genetic  markers,  animals  that are candidates  for selection  do not have  to be 
exposed  to infection  to determine  whether  they are genetically  susceptible  or not. Addi ­
tionally,  this method  can shorten  the generation  interval  and hence  accelerate  responses  
to selection  for-resistance.  Therefore,  genetic  markers  potentially  offer  a practical  alterna ­
tive to laborious  scoring,  and protocols  that require  exposure  to infection.  The exploitation  
of genotype  information  via the use of genetic  markers associated  with resistance to  footrot,  
potentially  allows  breeders  to select  sheep  to breed  for increased  footrot  resistance.  A 
group  of genes  important  for controlling  immune  response  lies within  the Major  Histocom ­
patibility  Complex  (MHC)  on chromosome  20 in sheep. These  genes  show  great  genetic  
diversity  between  individuals,  and it is thought  that some  alleles  are more efficient  at initi­
ating an immune  response  to specific  pathogens  than others. Data exist, which  suggest  
an association  between  genetic  polymorphisms  within  the MHC Class II region  and re­
sponse  to footrot  infection  (Litchfield  etal., 1993;  Escayg  etal., 1997). Indeed,  genetic  vari­
ation within  the ovine MHC loci in the class II region,  specifically  at the DQA2  gene, has 
subsequently  been used by Lincoln  University,  New  Zealand  (NZ)  to develop  genetic  mark ­
ers for footrot  resistance  (Hickford  et al., 2004).
Molecular  testing  for footrot  resistance
A footrot  test, based  on the association  of different  DQA2  alleles  and footrot  resistance  in 
sheep  breeds  in NZ is now commercially  available  to the NZ sheep  industry  to select  more  
tolerant  or resistant  animals,  without  having  to expose  the animals  to infection  (Hickford,  
2000). The NZ test categorises  animals  according  to their risk of contracting  footrot,  fol­
lowing  a severe  footrot  challenge.  Figure  3 shows the  categories,  with the best groups  pre­
dicted  to have between  7 and 19% of offspring  affected  following  a severe  challenge,  and 
the least resistant  category  to have between  22 and 83% of offspring  affected.  More  than 
28,000  sheep  have now been genotyped  in NZ for 258 ram breeder  clients  and it is esti­
mated  that over 1 million  sheep  have already  been born to rams  that have been screened  
using the ‘NZ footrot  DNA  test'. The results  of a recent  report  on the use of footrot-gene  
tested  sheep  show a reduction  in production  losses  attributable  to footrot  of between  60 
and 80% which,  over a ten-year  period,  is estimated  to be worth between  $NZ 3M and 
$NZ 6M per annum  (Greer,  2004). While  it is possible  that the NZ information  will be rel­
evant  to sheep  populations  in the UK, it is not appropriate  or advisable  to use the NZ test 
on UK sheep  breeds  under  local  conditions  without  prior  testing.  This is because  it is pos­
sible that UK breeds  have unknown  and different  haplotypes  in the DNA region  tested,  or 
the genetic  background  interacts  with the underlying  genes  differently,  or simply,  that the 
associations  between  resistance  and susceptibility,  and genotype  categories  are different  
(Such  validation  processes  are also required  for gene tests for other traits and in other  
livestock  species  that have been developed  in different  breeds  and different  countries).
Figure  3. New  Zealand  footrot  gene  test categories
90
80
% progeny 70
affected 60
(following 50
a severe 40
challenge) 30
20
10
Note: Different  colours  show  that (e.g.)  between  7 and 19% of sheep  with gene  test cate­
gory 1 will show  footrot  symptoms  following  a severe  footrot  challenge  
(J. Hickford,  pers. comm.)
New footrot  research  - combining  conventional  breeding  with molecular  testing  
A new LINK-funded  research  project  led by SAC started  in 2005, builds  on the research  
undertaken  in NZ on footrot  resistance.
The aims of the project  are.
To test and further  develop  a robust  scoring  procedure  to enable  studies  of the genetic  
control  of footrot  resistance;
To estimate  heritabilities  for footrot  resistance  using the information  generated  from the 
footrot  scores  and to explore  the relationships  (genetic  correlations)  between  footrot  resist ­
ance and other  traits  of economic  importance  such as lamb  weights  and maternal  charac ­
teristics;
To investigate  associations  between  footrot  resistance  and (a) polymorphisms  at the DQA2  
gene (the ‘NZ footrot  DNA test’), and (b) other genetic  markers  within  and close to the 
MHC region;
To predict  the genetic,  epidemiological  and total financial  benefits  from breeding  for footrot  
resistance,  This project  will provide  options  to enable  breeders  to select  animals  for en­
hanced  resistance  to footrot  combining  both phenotypic  information  and molecular  genetic  
information.
Even in the event  that the genetic  markers  are not sufficiently  strongly  associated  with 
footrot  resistance  in UK breeds  under  local  environments,  or that they prove to be not eco­
nomically viable,  breeders will still have the option  of using  Best Linear  Unbiased  Prediction  
(BLUP)-based  selection  to maximise  the utility  of phenotypic  information.
The project  is testing  flocks  of Texel,  Blackface  and Mule sheep  across  the UK and taking  
blood  samples  to be used for DNA  analyses.  To date, 3,853  animals  have been scored  at 
least once on experimental  flocks  at SAC, IRS and ADAS.
Benefits  of footrot-resistant  breeding  stock
There  are four main categories  of benefit  from having  more  footrot-resistant  breeding  stock, 
all of which  should  lead to improvements  in the sustainability  of sheep  farming  in the UK. 
These  are; i) animal  welfare  benefits,  as fewer  animals  are likely  to be affected  by, and In­
voluntarily  culled  for, footrot  with every  successive  generation,  ii) economic  benefits,  as it 
is anticipated  that the current  estimated  cost of footrot  of £24M  will be reduced  by lower  
need for handling  and treatments,  iii) environmental  benefits,  as the use of formalin,  zinc 
sulphate  and antibiotics  will be reduced  in animal  populations  that are more resistant  to 
footrot;  and iv) improved  societal  acceptance,  as the successful  breeding  for enhanced  
resistance  will lead to fewer  lame  sheep  In our landscape,  which  will improve  public  accept ­
ability  of sheep  farming.  This is an issue of growing  importance  as public  access  to the 
countryside  widens.
Conclusions  and future  prospects
It Is clear  that the problem  of footrot  in sheep  can be alleviated  through  the use of breeding  
strategies  to select footrot-resistant  breeding  stock. The use of sustainable  breeding  so­
lutions  has been demonstrated  to be effective  in sheep  populations  in other parts of the 
world,  and it is likely  that they will be also be used in the UK in the near  future. Recent  re­
search  underway  in the UK has shown  that within-breed  genetic  variation  exists  in the ex­
pression  of footrot,  which is a cornerstone  in the tool pack of sheep  breeders  that are 
breeding  footrot-resistant  sheep. The UK-wide  footrot  research  consortium  uses the ex­
pertise  of international  scientists,  and evidence  from flocks  across  Britain. It aims to use 
state-of-the-art  genomic  information  in tandem  with foot scores  from several  thousand  an­
imals so that the 'best' way to breed  footrot-resistant  sheep  can be determined,  and taken  
up by the UK sheep  industry.
References
Abbot,  K.A. and Lewis,  C.J. (2004). Current  approaches  to the management  of ovine  
footrot. Veterinary  Journal,  169:28-41.
Conington,  J., Bishop,  S.C., Lambe,  N., Bunger  L. and Simm,  G. (2006).  Testing  new se­
lection  indices  for sustainable  hill sheep  production  - lamb  growth  and carcass  traits. An­
imal Science,  {In press).
Conington,  J., Bishop,  S.C., Waterhouse,  A. and Simm,  G. (2004). A bio-economic  ap­
proach  to derive  economic  values  for pasture-based  sheep  genetic  improvement  pro­
grammes.  Journal  of Animal  Science,  82: 1290-1304.
Conington,  J., Bishop,  S.C., Grundy,  B., Waterhouse,  A. and Simm,  G (2001).  Sustainable,  
multi-trait  selection  indexes  for UK hill sheep. Animal  Science,  73 (3) 413-424.
Egerton,  J.R. and Roberts,  D.S. (1971).  Vaccination  against  ovine  footrot.  J. Comparative  
Pathology,  81: 179-370.
Escayg,  A.R, Hickford,  J.G.H.  and Bullock,  D.W. (1997).  Association  between  alleles of the 
ovine major  histocompatibility  complex  and resistance  to footrot. Research  In Veterinary  
Science,  63 (3): 283-287,
Greer,  G. (2004). The costs  of footrot  and the impact  of the Footrot  Gene-Marker  Test in 
New Zealand.  Research  report  274, Agribusiness  and Economics  Research  Unit, Lincoln  
University,  NZ. IBSN 0-909042-57-8.
Hickford,  J. (2000). Development  of a sustainable  method  of natural  footrot  control.  Report  
to the NZ Meat Research  and Development  Council.  Lincoln  University.
Hickford,  J.G.H.,  Zhou, H., Slow, S., and Fang, Q. (2004). Diversity  of the ovine DQA2 
gene. Journal  of Animal  Science,  82 (6): 1553-1563.
Hosie,  B. (2003).  Ovine  footrot:  A Scottish  perspective.  Sheep  Veterinary  Society  autumn  
meeting,  Bath. September  2003.
Hosie,  B. (2004). Footrot  and Lameness  in sheep. Veterinary  Record,  154, 37-38
Litchfield,  A.M., Raadsma,  H.W., Hulme,  D.J., Brown,  S.C., Nicholas,  F.W. and Egerton,  
J.R. (1993). Disease  resistance  in Merino  sheep.  II. RFLPs  in Class  2 MHC and their as­
sociation  with footrot. Journal  of Animal  Breeding  and Genetics,  110 (5): 321-334.
Nieuwhof,  G.J. and Bishop,  S.C. (2005). Costs  of the major  endemic  diseases  of sheep  
in Great  Britain  and the potential  benefits  of reduction  in disease  impact.  Animal  Science,  
81: 23-29
Patterson,  R.G. and Patterson,  H.M. (1989).  A practical  approach  to breeding  for footrot  
resistant  Merinos.  Journal  of the New  Zealand  Mountain  Lands  Institute,  pp64-75.
Raadsma,  H.W., Egerton,  J.R., Wood,  D., Kristo,  C. and Nicholas,  F.W. (1994). Disease  
resistance  in Merino  sheep.  III. Genetic  variation  in resistance  following  challenge  and sub­
sequent  vaccination  with an homologous  rDNA  pilus vaccine.  Journal  of Animal  Breeding  
and Genetics,  111 (5-6): 367-390.
Raadsma  ,H.W. (2000). Genetic  aspects  of resistance  to ovine  footrot. In ‘Breeding  for 
disease  resistance  in Farm  Animals ’pp219-214.  Eds. R.Axford,  S. Bishop,  F. Nicholas and 
J. Owen.  CABI.
Skerman,  T.M. and Moorhouse,  S.R. (1987). Broomfield  Corriedales:  a strain of sheep  
selectively  bred for resistance  to footrot. New  Zealand  Veterinary  Journal,  35: 101-106.
Wassink,  G.J. and Green,  L.E. (2001). Farmers'  practices  and attitudes  towards  footrot  in 
sheep. Veterinary  Record,  149: 489-490.
Acknowledgements
Some  of the work and data cited in this paper  has been obtained  as part of a collaborative  
LINK - funded  research  programme.  The funders  of this project  are Defra, SEERAD,  
QMS, EBLEX  and HCC. Partners  in this work include  IRS (Aberystwyth),  ADAS,  MLC, 
Roslin Institute,  Blackface  Elite, the Texel Sheep  Society,  Innovis,  the University  of Mel­
bourne,  Australia  and the University  of Lincoln,  New Zealand.  We are very grateful  to tech­
nical staff Maureen  Steel,  Ann McLaren,  Laura  Nicoll,  Claire  Brockie  (SAC),  Maddy  Lewis  
(IRS) and Karen  Wheeler  (ADAS)  for data handling.
Observations  on Variation  in Weight  and 
Classification  of Carcasses  from Irish Lambs
J.P. Hanrahan
Animal  Production  Research  Centre,  Teagasc,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Introduction
Lamb carcasses  are the key output  from the sheep  enterprise  and should  be the unit 
around  which information  on market  requirements  is focussed.  Ultimately  the consumer  
of meat  is the constituency  that places  a value  on this primary  product  and therefore  pro­
ducers  deserve  clear information  about  consumer  requirements.  There  is a general  con­
sensus  that consumers  do not want to buy fat, and that excessive  amounts  of fat is a 
problem  for sheep  meat. This information  can only flow via the chain from consumer  to re­
tailer  to processor  (abattoir)  and the latter should  be able to reflect  this intelligence  in the 
value placed  on a particular  carcass.  There  is certainly  a case to be made  that this ide­
alised  flow of information  is not effective  at present  and thus not serving  the long-term  in­
terests  of the sheep  sector. This is perhaps  best exemplified  by the scope  for producers  
to simply  increase  carcass  weight  to maximise  returns  per carcass.  This has clear impli ­
cations  for the quality  of the ‘meat ’ produced  -it will contain  significantly  more  fat- and the 
size of the joints  offered  to consumers.  Is this what  the consumer  is willing  to spend  money  
on or is it undermining  the future  of the market?
This paper  will present  observations  on the nature  and composition  of the product  as an 
aid to constructive  dialogue  about  industry  objectives.
Basic  principles  of carcass  composition
The information  summarised  in Figure  1 provides a description  of how carcass  composition  
changes  as lambs  grow and carcass  weight  increases.  As carcass  weight  increases  the 
proportion  of subcutaneous  fat (i.e. fat on the surface  of the carcass)  increases steadily  and 
the proportion  of bone decreases.  While  consumers  eat muscle  plus some  of the visible  
fat (subcutaneous  and intermuscular)  depending  on their individual  tastes,  the term meat  
(i.e. the carcass  minus  the bone and subcutaneous  fat) will be used as a reasonable  ap­
proximation  for what is consumed.  The proportion  of (chemical)  fat in the meat also in­
creases  steadily  as the carcass  gets heavier,  to the extent  that as carcass  weight  increases  
from about  16kg to 22kg,  the proportion  of fat in the meat  goes  from 15g per lOOg to 22g 
per lOOg - an increase  of 50% in the proportion  of fat in the meat.
While it is possible  to nutritionally  manipulate  the fat content,  the consequences  of in­
creased  carcass  weight  are inevitable,  and everybody  with an interest  in maintaining  the 
place  of lamb in the basket  of meat purchased  by the consumer  needs  to recognise  that 
people  do not want  to eat fat - what is required  is just enough  fat to ensure  a good eating  
experience  (tenderness  and flavour).  If it is agreed  that this basic  premise  is correct  then 
the producer  deserves  to have  clear  signals  from the market  that reflect  this proposition  or 
else it must be asked  whether  this premise  is wrong!
Figure  1. Shows  the relationship  between  carcass  weight  and the proportion  of sur­
face fat on the carcass  {= subcutaneous  fat), bone  and meat  (= carcass  (bone  + sub­
cutaneous  fat))
(S
<u
Carcass  weight  (kg)
Carcass  classification
Carcass  classification  refers to  the description  of carcass  in terms  of conformation  (shape)  
and fat cover  (including  internal  fat on the carcass  in the kidney  and pelvic  areas).  It is im­
portant  to appreciate  that classification  does not inherently  address  the issue  of carcass  
' value. The basis  for the sheep  carcass  classification  is set out in EU Regulation  2137/92  
and its objective  was to improve  market  transparency.  It was designed  to provide  informa ­
tion on the carcass  attributes  that allow  the market  valuation  to be reflected  back  to the pro­
ducer. This regulation  has been implemented  by export  abattoirs  and is monitored  by the  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food.
The classification  profile of more than 250,000  lamb carcasses  classified  by one Irish abat­
toir between  April and December  2004 is summarised  in Table 1. The lambs  were from 
lowland  flocks. This shows  that the vast majority  of lambs  from lowland  flocks  are in three  
categories  and the evidence  suggests  that very few carcasses  are over  fat, i.e. fat class  4 
or 5. However,  this is probably  an overly  optimistic  interpretation,  and it is suggest  that the 
classification  applied  is not very severe  on fat cover  and that many  class  3 carcasses  are 
in fact over  fat. The basis  for this interpretation  is that carcass  weight  has increased  by at 
least 1kg since  the mid 1990s,  and when  Teagasc  staff classified  around  6000 carcasses  
from commercial  flocks  during that period  our classification  yielded  around  30 to 40% in the 
over-fat  categories  (Hanrahan,  1999). The evidence  is summarised  in Table  2, which  also 
includes  classification  results for lamb classified  at British  abattoirs  in 2000  and 2001 (MLC, 
2002 )
Table  1. Summary  of carcass  classification  data for lambs  at export  abattoir  in 2004
Conformation Fat
Class Percent Class Percent
E 0.3 2 11.4
U 33.2 3 82.4
R 63.8 4 6.2
0 2.4 5 <0.1
P 0.3
Most  carcasses  were either  R3 (51.5%)  or U3 (29.5%)
Table  2. Carcass  fat class  from observations  on Irish and British  lambs
These  findings  reflect  the inherent  problem  in comparing  classification  results  - the stan-
Fat class Source
IRL 93/96 IRL 97/00 IRL 04 Britain  00/01
2 10.3 6.7 11.4 18.6
3 58.3 51.4 82.4 71.9
4 25.1 33.5 6.2 5.1
5 5.5 8.4 <0.1 2.4
Average  carcass  weight 18.8 19.6 20.0 -
dards  used must  be equivalent  and this takes  considerable  effort. Obviously  an objective  
(machine  based)  system  is highly  desirable.  In the next section  results  from recent  and on­
going  research  on carcass  composition  is summarised  to indicate the association  between  
classification  and composition.
Classification  and composition
The relationship  between fat classification  and the percent  fat in the soft tissue  (i.e. carcass  
minus  bone)  from two recent  studies  in Teagasc  is summarised  in Tables  3 and 4. In both 
studies,  the percent  fat increased  substantially  as fat class  increased  from 2 to 3 to 4. The 
values  in Table  3 are for carcasses  classified  by the Teagasc  staff (using  MLC standards)  
whereas  the results  in Table  4 are for lambs  classified  by staff at an export  abattoir.  The 
comparison  of the carcass  weight  and percent  fat strongly  support  the earlier  proposition  
that the apparently  satisfactory  overall  classification  results  for Irish lamb (Table  1) is too 
lenient  in terms  of fat percentage  and should  not be used to conclude  that all is OK with 
the quality  of Irish lamb at the point  of slaughter.
Table  3. Results  from chemical  analysis  of soft tissue  (carcass  minus  bone)  from  
171 lambs  classified  using MLC standards  (from study  described  by Hanrahan,  
1999).
Fat class Carcass  weight  (kg) Percent  fat
2 16.9 11
3 19.0 15
4 23.0 23
10
Table 4. Results  of chemical  analysis  of soft tissue  (carcass  minus  bone)  from  
lambs  based  on abattoir  ciassification  (n = 56), (Hanrahan  and Allen,  unpublished  
data).
Fat class Carcass  weight Percent  fat
2 17.3 16.7
3 21.5 23.5
4 23.9 31.2
A similar  association  exists  between  conformation  and fat percentage.  Thus,  as conforma ­
tion goes  from an 'O’ to an 'R' the percent  fat goes  from about  17% to 30%; going  from ‘R’ 
to ‘U’ is associated  with another  jump of about  8 percentage  points.
Carcass  weioht
This attribute  of the carcass  can be objectively  measured  and, as shown  in Figure  1 is 
clearly  related  to carcass composition  and can thus provide  objective  information  about  the 
product.  If the old, and very apt adage,  that “a lamb  is only fit for slaughter  once  in its life” 
is taken as a starting  point, then given  the relationship  in Figure  1, it is necessary  to look 
at variability  in carcass  weight.  The variation  in carcass  weight  at export  plants  is shown  
in Figure  2.
Close inspection  of this evidence  reveals  that it takes a spread  of 7kg to accommodate  
90% of the carcasses.  This is an enormous  range! Data from research  flocks,  where  
lambs are drafted  for sale using weight,  and an assessment  of finish - with the objective  
of avoiding  over  fat carcasses  and getting  an average  carcass  weight  of about  18.5kg,  the 
range in carcass  weight  is no more  that 4 kg.
Figure  2. The distribution  of carcasses  by weight;  the red bars mark  the points  be­
tween  which  90% of ail carcasses  are found
Processors  frequently  express  the view that carcass  'quality'  is great in spring  but deteri ­
orates  as the season  progresses.  This 'fact' is not clearly  reflected  in classification  results  
as indicated  in Figure  3. Yes, the proportion  of U3 carcases  declines  from April to June, 
with a corresponding  increase  in proportion  of R3, but the classification  profile then  remains  
essentially  steady  right through  until December.  However,  there is another  pattern  that is
11
evident  over  the season  and this is sho\A/n  in Figure  4. This shows  the variability  in carcass  
weight  and how it changes  over the season.  In May and June the variability  (measured  
here by the standard  deviation  within batches  of iambs  from a given supplier  on a given 
day) is about 1.6kg, this increases  steadily  over the year; 1.8kg in Juiy/September  and 
around  2.0kg  in October/November.  It gets even worse  in the December  to February  pe-^ 
hod.
Figure  3. The change  in carcass  classification  between  April and December  (Over  
fat = Fat classes  4 and 5 combined)
0)>
O
Figure  4. Variability  (measured  by the standard  deviation  of carcass  weight),  on the 
basis  of lambs  at the abattoir  on a given  day, among  lambs  from a given  supplier  
(S.D. (within))  and among  all lambs  (S.D. (tot)).
3.00
3
0)•<c_c
3C_
C> w o z ac (D o o <D(Q ■o < O
Translating  these  statistics  into the profile  of carcass  weight  shows  that the spread  in car­
cass  weight  for a given  supplier  increases  from ~5kg in May/June  to ~6kg in July/Septem ­
ber to ~7kg in October/November.  It must  be emphasised  that this spread  represents  whai
12
the average  supplier  is sending  on a given day! Factor  in the variation  among  suppliers  
to get a picture  of the carcass  profile  that must be marketed  from a given  abattoir  on any 
given day... - examples  of the spread  in carcass  weight  within  an abattoir  on a given day 
are as follows:
7kg in May,
7.5kg in August  
8.5kg in October  
Over  9kg in December
This makes  effective  marketing  of the product  very difficult  (imagine  the resulting  variability  
in the size of joints  and cuts)  and processors  need  to address  this issue  or else make  clear  
that it has no relevance  to the price that they can obtain  for the product  and hence  the 
price offered  to the producer.
One factor  that contributes  to the increased  variability  is the pattern  of lamb drafting  for 
slaughter.  The evidence  for this is summarised  in Table  5 and shows  that in the early part 
of the season  the interval  between  lamb drafts  is around  10 days;  this increases  to over 3 
weeks in June/July,  4 weeks in August/September  and hits around 5 weeks in 
November/December.
Table 5. The number  of days between  drafting  lambs  from an average  flock as the 
season  progresses  and the mean  number  of lambs  per batch  (based  on over  250,000  
records  from one export  abattoir  in 2004)
Month No. of days Lambs  per batch
April 9 15
May 12 20
June 16 22
July 19 25
August 25 29
September 28 28
October 28 29
November 35 28
Carcass  weight  and classification
Even allowing  for the above  concerns  about  the precise  interpretation  of classification,  it 
is instructive  to look at what  happens  as carcass  weight  increases.  Evidence  is presented  
in Table  6, which  groups  Fat classes  4 & 5 together  as definitely  over  fat. Included  also are 
the small number  of "E' carcasses  with the 'Ll' category.
Table 6. Association  between  carcass  weight  and classification
Carcass  weight  range  (kg) Over fat Conformation  class U
14.0 to 16.9 0.2% 3.0%
17.0 to 19.9 1.5% 25.1%
20.0 to 22.9 6.5% 52.8%
23.00 to 25.9 15.5% 71.7%
13
The expected  pattern  is evident  - as weight  goes up the incidence  of over-fat  carcasses  
goes  up and  so does 'good'  conformation.  This reflects  a well established  aspect  of sheep  
carcass  classification  systems  - good conformation  is associated  with increased  fatness.
Conclusions
The evidence  presented  in this paper  shows  the following:
As carcass  weight  increases  the fatness  of the product  increases.  An increase  of one unit 
in fat class is associated  with an increase  in chemical  fat by 1.5 times (e.g. from 11% to 
15%).
The same  relationship  holds  for conformation  changes  and the percent  of subcutaneous  
fat.
The variability  in carcass  weight  is excessive.  The industry  as a whole  needs  to reflect  or 
this issue,  and clear  evidence  is needed  on whether  solving  this problem  can deliver  better  
returns  to the serious  producer.
Unfortunately,  at the present  time there is a grossly  inadequate  specification  of what  the 
market  requires  and thus an absence  of consistent  and clear  signals  to the producer  (and 
researcher!).  While  this deficiency  will require  considerable  effort  to resolve,  and the res­
olution  will have to involve  both producers  and processors,  the hope is that the evidence  
summarised  in this paper  will contribute  to an informed  debate  on the issue.
References
Meat and Livestock  Commission  (2002). Sheep  Yearbook  2002, page 73.
Hanrahan,  J. P. (1999).  Genetic  and non-genetic  factors  affecting  lamb growth  and carcass  
quality. End of Project  Reports:  Sheep  Series  No. 8, Teagasc,  ISBN 1 84170  062 2
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1999).  Carcass  composition  of Suffolk  and Texel  lambs. Research  report  
1999,  Athenry  Research  Centre,  Teagasc.  Page 20.
14
Efficient  Sheep  Production  in a Subsidy  Free 
Environment  - Research  from Athenry
Tim Keady  and Seamus  Hanrahan  
Teagasc,  Animal  Production  Research  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway
Introduction
Ireland  has 4.26 million  sheep  (the fifth largest  flock in the EU 25), accounting  for approx ­
imately  5% of the total  ewe number.  In 2005  the output  from sheep  production  was equiv ­
alent to €192 million,  which was 3.9% of the Gross  Agricultural  Output. Since the 
implementation  of the Mid Term Review  (MTR)  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy  (CAP)  
sheep production  is in the process  of transition  from an environment  in which  decisions  
were often subsidy  driven  to a market  orientated,  subsidy  free system.  With the decoupling  
of subsidy  from farm production  and the proposed  reduction  of tariffs  in World  trade, it is 
predicted  that the Irish ewe flock will decline  by up to 24%. Since  the implementation  of 
the MTR of the CAP on January  1 2005,  ewe numbers  have  declined  by 7.5%. Sixty  eight  
per cent of flocks  have less than 100 ewes with only 11% of flocks  having  greater  than 
200 ewes.
Prior to December  31 2004 (in subsidy  driven  systems  of sheep  production),  the subsidy  
received  equated  to €1.43/kg  carcass  produced.  To achieve  a viable  income  from sheep  
production  in the future,  producers  will have to increase  flock size, increase  output  per 
labour  unit, and improve  production  efficiency  whilst  at the same  time obtaining  a higher  
return  from the market  place  to offset  the loss of the €1.43/kg  carcass  in subsidy  forgone.  
The aim of this paper  is to highlight  the potential  savings,  which  can be made  in the cost 
of sheep  production  based  primarily  on research  studies  undertaken  at Teagasc  Athenry.
What is the current  output  of lamb,  and what  is achievable?
Weight  of lamb carcass  output  per ewe put to the ram but ultimately  per hectare  are the 
major factors  affecting  margins  from sheep  production.  Recent  studies  undertaken  at 
Athenry  and Knockbeg  have reported  annual  lamb  carcass  output  of up to 500kg/ha  (Table  
1). These  high carcass  outputs  were achieved  from a combination  of high stocking  rate 
and high weaning  rate. Currently  a large proportion  of flock  owners  are participants  in the 
Rural Environment  Protection  Scheme  (REPS),  which  limits  potential  stocking  rate. Stud ­
ies at Athenry  involving  outdoor  year round  grazing  compatible  with REPS,  have shown  
that an output  of 344kg  lamb carcass  per hectare  is achievable  (Table  1). Data from the 
National  Farm Survey  (Table  1) indicates  that the national  average  output  of lamb  carcass  
on lowland  farms  is only about  197kg/ha,  which  is due to a low stocking  rate combined  with 
low number  of lambs  reared  per ewe put to the ram. The output  of lamb  carcass  achieved  
in research  flocks  in conventional  and REPS  compatible  grass  based  systems  were 150%  
and 80% greater  than the national  average.
15
Table  1. Achieved  lamb output  at Athenry  and the national  average  output
Athenry National
Conventional Conventional REPS Average
Ewes/ha 16.5 14 10 8.3
Lambs  reared/ewe 1.70 1.86 1.78 1.25
Lamb  carcass  output  
kg/ewe 31.3 35.3 34.4 23.8
kg/ha 494 494 344 197
(Nolan  and 
McNamara,  
2002)(Flanagan,
2000)(Flanagan,
2000)(Kinsella,
2005)
Improving  Efficiency
Improvement  in efficiency  on farms  is possible  by exploiting  changes  in genetics,  nutrition  j 
and management  of the ewe flock.  j
I
Improvements  in genetics
Whilst  improvements  in efficiency  of sheep  production  due to breeding  are slow, the 
changes  are cumulative  and permanent.  Improvements  in genetics  are achievable  through 
the ewe and the sire.
Ewe genotype
Weight  of lamb sold per ewe joined  to the ram is the major  factor  affecting  profitability  at 
farm level. Changing  genetics  is the cheapest  and often the only method  available  to im­
prove  lamb  output  per ewe. A major  study  involving  2000  ewes  was undertaken  at Athenry  
to evaluate  the impact  of ewe genotype  on lamb output. Eight  sire breeds  were mated  to 
Scottish  Blackface  ewes and the female  progeny  were evaluated  to determine  the effect  
of ewe genotype  on fertility,  litter size and weaning  rate (lambs  reared  per ewe joined  to 
the ram). The results  are presented  in Table  2. Fertility  is the proportion  of sheep  let to 
the ram that produce  lambs. The Belclare  X, Border  Leicester  X, and Scottish  Blackface 
had the highest  fertility  whilst  the Cheviot  X and Galway  X had the lowest.  The Belclare  X 
produced  the highest  litter size being  0.41 greater  than Scottish  Blackface  and 0.18 greater 
than the Bluefaced  Leicester  X (Mule).  The number  of lambs  reared  per ewe put to the ram 
(weaning  rate) provides  an overall  index of reproductive  performance.  Choice  of ewe 
genotype  altered  weaning  rate by 0.36 lambs/ewe  and the value  of lamb sales  by €22/ewe  
put to  the ram (based  on 2005 lamb price). The Belclare  X produced  the highest  weaning 
rate, being  0.16 greater  than the mule (€10/ewe),  and 0.34 (€22/ewe)  greater  than the Suf­
folk X. Currently  the national  flock consists  of 45% Suffolk  and Suffolk  crosses.
The data presented  in Table  2 clearly  illustrate that  total weaning  rate can be increased  dra­
matically  by changing  the ewe genotype.  Use of Belclare  in the first cross with  the Scottish  
Blackface  resulted  in an extra 36 and 21 lambs  being weaned  per 100 ewes put to the 
ram relative  to the purebred  Scottish  Blackface  and Suffolk  X, respectively.  Furthermore  
increasing  the proportion  of Belclare  genes  in the ewe will increase  the weaning  rate fur­
ther. Recent  data from  Athenry  show  that a weaning  rate of 1.95 lambs  per ewe put to the 
ram is achievable  when  using  purebred  Belclare  ewes. As the litter size increases  the pro­
portion  of ewes in the flock producing  triplets  increases.  Some  producers  wish to avoid
16
triplets,  as they believe  that they are difficult  to finish. Recent  data from this Research  
Centre  have shown  that lambs  reared  as triplets,  using  appropriate  management,  only re­
quire an additional  14 days to achieve  similar  carcass  weights  as lambs  reared  as twins.
Table  2. Effect  of ewe genotype  on reproductive  performance
Ewe genotype Fertility Litter  size Weaning  rate
Belclare  x S. Blackface 0.94 1.89 1.54
Blue Leicester  x S. Blackface 0.91 1.71 1.38
Border  Leicester  x S. Blackface 0.94 1.60 1.36
Suffolk  x S. Blackface 0.91 1.65 1.33
Texel x S. Blackface 0.93 1.58 1.33
Galway  x S. Blackface 0.83 1.63 1.20
S. Blackface 0.94 1.48 1.18
Cheviot  x S. Blackface 0.86 1.51 1.11
(Hanrahan,  1994a)
More recent  studies  (Table  3) have shown  that Belclare  x Cheviot  ewes  have increased  the 
number  of lambs  weaned  by 15 and 20 per 100 ewes  put to the ram relative to  Blue Leices ­
ter X Cheviot  and Suffolk  x Cheviot  ewes respectively.  The Technology  Evaluation  and 
Transfer  (TET)  project  which  was initiated  in 2001 by Teagasc on 40 sheep  units throughout  
Ireland  for a three  year period  clearly  illustrates  that flocks  which  comprised  predominantly  
(but not solely)  Belclare  X ewes had higher  weaning  rates of 0.08 and 0.24 relative  to 
flocks  which  were either  Mules  or Suffolk  X.
In recent  years there  has been interest  in the use of the Vendeen  breed.  A major  study  was 
undertaken  on a large commercial  farm (1140  ewes)  by Teagasc to  evaluate  the effects  of 
Vendeen  X and Belclare  X ewes  on prolificacy.  The ewes had been bred on the farm as 
flock replacements  and performance  was recorded  over a three year period. The data 
from the study showed  that the Belclare  X ewes produced  larger  litters and number  of 
lambs  born alive per litter. For the Belclare  X and Vendeen  X ewes  litter size was 2.15 and 
1.95 lambs/ewe  and number  of lambs  born alive were 2.00 and 1.81 lambs/ewe  respec ­
tively. Therefore  the major  effects  of ewe genotype  on weaning  rate observed  in many  
studies  at Athenry  have been confirmed  at farm level.
Table 3. Effect  of ewe genotype  on reproductive  performance
Ewe genotype Litter  size Weaning  rate
Belclare  x Cheviot 1.87 1.62
Blue Leicester  x Cheviot 1.78 1.47
Suffolk  X Cheviot 1.72 1.42
(Hanrahan,  1997)
Terminal  sire breed
Using  the payment  schemes  currently  in use by the majority  of export  meat  plants,  growth  
rate is the most important  characteristic  when choosing  a terminal  sire breed. Increased  
growth  rate enables  lamb to be finished  earlier,  reducing  feed costs whilst  at the same  
time avoiding  lower  prices  as the season  progresses.
17
Most processors  offer bonuses  of 6c/kg for U grades.  Assuming  a 20kg  carcass,  the bonus 
of 6c/kg  is worth  €1.20,  which  is equivalent  to either  0.36kg  carcass  or the additional  weight  
gain achieved  by keeping  the lambs  approximately  4 days longer  on your holding  prior  to 
slaughter.  However  selecting  sire breeds  for improved  conformation  is unlikely  to increase  
the proportion  of U grades  by as much  as 20%, an increase of this magnitude  is equivalent  
to 1.2c/kg  carcass  of all lambs  marketed.  Furthermore  it should  be noted  that breeds  with 
improved  conformation  characteristics  tend to have lower  growth  rates, therefore  being 
older  at the point  of marketing.  Consequently  increased  feed costs  will accrue  whilst  at the 
same  time lamb price is likely  to decline  as the season  progresses.  Therefore  whilst  con­
formation  is a frequently  discussed  topic in the industry,  the reward  is relatively  small.
A major  study  at Athenry  has evaluated  the effect  of nine sire breeds  on progeny  perform ­
ance (Table  4). Choice  of sire breed  altered  weaning  weight  by up to 2.5kg and days to 
slaughter  by up to 20 days. The progeny  of Suffolk  rams were heaviest  at weaning  and 
earliest  to reach slaughter.  Relative  to the Suffolk,  the Charollais  and Texel progeny  re­
quired  an additional  5 and 9 days to  reach  slaughter  weight  respectively.  Progeny  from the 
other  sire breeds,  required  between  12 and 20 days relative  to progeny  from the Suffolk  to 
reach  slaughter.  The Beltex  produced  progeny  with the best conformation  followed  closely  
by lie de France,  Suffolk,  Charollais,  Texel and Vendeen.  Beltex  had the highest  kill out 
proportion  followed  closely  by He de France,  Charollais  and Texel.
Due to interest  within  the industry  in the Vendeen  as a terminal  sire, a further  evaluation  
of the breed,  in direct  comparison  with the Belclare,  was undertaken  on a large  commercial  
farm (1140  ewes). At weaning,  lambs  sired by Vendeen  and Belclare  rams  weighed  31.9 
and 31.0 kg respectively,  similar  to the differences  observed  in the large breed  study un­
dertaken  at Athenry,  which  concluded  that lambs  sired by Vendeen  and Belclare  rams pro­
duce carcasses  of similar  characteristics  at the same  age.
Table  4. Effect  of terminal  sire breed  on progeny  performance
Extra  days  to Carcass
Sire breedwt. (kg)finish relative  to 
the Suffolk(g/kg) Conformation^ Fat^
Suffolk 31.8 - 438 3.3 3.3
Charollais 31.0 5 449 3.3 3.2
Texel 30.6 9 446 3.3 3.2
Beltex 30.5 16 446 3.5 3.3
He de France 30.2 20 452 3.4 3.4
Rouge  de I'Quest 30.2 12 438 3.2 3.2
Vendeen 30.0 14 445 3.3 3.2
Bleu du Maine 29.4 18 435 3.2 3.1
Belclare 29.3 15 442 3.1 3.3
EUROP  scale  where  E=5, U=4, R=3, 0=2, P=1 . 
^1 = leanest;  5 = fattest
(Hanrahan,  1999)
18
Recently  the Suffolk,  Texel and Beltex  terminal  sire breeds  have been evaluated  in North ­
ern Ireland  (Table  5). Similar  to previous  work at Athenry,  the data from Northern  Ireland  
confirm  that relative  to the Suffolk,  progeny  from Texel sires take slightly  longer  to finish  
whilst  progeny  from the Beltex  require  an additional  22 days to achieve  similar  finish  and 
carcass  weight. However Beltex  progeny  had improved  conformation  and increased  kill out 
proportion  in agreement  with Teagasc  data.
Table 5. Effect  of terminal  sire breed  on carcass  characteristics  of lambs  slaugh ­
tered at Fat class  3
Sire Breed
Suffolk Texel Beltex
Weaning  weight  (kg) 37.5 36.6 34.7
Age at slaughter  (days) 156 159 177
Kill out (g/kg) 434 456 459
Carcass  characteristics
Weight  (kg) 19.2 19.5 19.4
Conformation^ 3.0 3.3 3.5
'EUROP  scale  where  E=5, U=4, R=3, 0=2, P==1
(Carson  etal.,  2004)
Currently  Suffolk  and Suffolk  X account  for approximately  45% of the national  ewe flock.  
Data from Athenry  has concluded  (Table  6) that when choosing  a terminal  sire breed  for 
Suffolk  X ewes, use of Texel and Charollais  rams tends to produce  heavier  progeny  at 
weaning,  which  finish  earlier  relative  to progeny  from Suffolk  rams. This is probably  due 
to reduced  hybrid  vigour  when Suffolk  rams are used on Suffolk  X ewes.
Table 6. Effect  of sire breed  on the performance  of progeny  from Suffolk  X ewes
Sire breed
Suffolk Texel
Weaning  weight  (kg) 33.8 34.2
(Hanrahan,  1994b)
The data from these  studies  clearly  illustrate  that when choosing  a terminal  sire, the only 
breeds  which  merit  serious  consideration  are the Suffolk,  Charollais  and Texel. The other  
breeds  produce  progeny  which  take considerably  longer  to reach  market  and with little or 
no benefit  in carcass  characteristics.  Furthermore,  it is of interest  to note, that the Belclare  
breed  which was developed  for its maternal  characteristics  resulted  in carcasses  of similar  
characteristics  to the other breeds  and take only 15 days longer  to finish relative  to the 
Suffolk,  similar  to the results  of the five of the other  eight  breeds evaluated.  In terms  of cost 
of lamb production,  terminal  sire breed  has a small  impact  on production  efficiency  altering  
the cost of production  by about  7c/kg  carcass  produced,  or €1.40/Iamb.
Nutrition  of the ewe and her oroaenv
Plane  of nutrition  can be altered  at any stage  during  the annual  cycle  of the ewe or during  
the life-time  of the progeny  and will have an immediate  effect  on performance.
19
Nutrition  in late pregnancy
The nutrient  requirement  of the ewe increases  dramatically  in late pregnancy  due to the 
rapidly  growing  foetuses.  The weight  of the foetus  increases  by 85, 50 and 25% respec­
tively  during the last 8,4 and 2 weeks  of pregnancy.  During  the last six weeks  of pregnancy  
the energy  requirements  of ewes carrying  singles,  twins and triplets  increases  by 40, 60 
and 70% respectively.  Currently  in Ireland  a large proportion  of ewes are housed  in late 
pregnancy  and offered  either  grass  silage  or hay ad-libitum  as the sole forage.  Concentrate  
supplementation  is required  in late pregnancy  to meet the rapidly  increasing  nutrient  re­
quirements  whilst  at the same  time food intake  capacity  is declining.  The decline  in food 
intake  is due to the  rapidly  growing  foetuses  reducing  available  space within  the abdominal  
cavity  for the digestive  system  and its contents.  The level of concentrate  supplementation  
required  depends  on the forage  feed value  and the expected  litter size.
Forage  feed value
The major  factors  affecting  the feed value of grass silage  for sheep  are digestibility  and 
chop length. The effects  of silage  chop length  on the performance  of finishing  lambs  are 
presented  in Table  7. Reducing  the chop length  dramatically  increased  silage  intake  re­
sulting  in improved  animal  performance  as measured  by daily liveweight  gain and final 
carcass  weight.  These  data clearly  illustrate  that chop length  has a major  effect  and that 
the shorter  the chop length  the higher  the silage  intake.
Table  7. The effect  of silage  chop length  on the performance  of finishing  lambs
Harvester  type
Single Double Precision
Chop Chop Long  Short
Liveweight  gain (g/d) 40 53 85 151
Carcass  weight  (kg) 16.6 18.5 20.0  22.7
(Fitzgerald,  1996)
Digestibility  (DMD)  is the most important  factor  affecting  silage  feed value  as it impacts on 
both the metabolisable  energy  concentration  of the forage  and also on its intake  charac­
teristics.  Increasing  silage  digestibility  increases  feed value  and reduces  the level of con­
centrate  supplementation  required  during  late pregnancy.  The impact  of silage  digestibility  
and chop length  on concentrate  requirement  of twin bearing  ewes during  late pregnancy  
are illustrated  in Table  8. Increasing  levels of concentrate  are required  as silage  digestibility  
declines  and also as the chop length  increases.  It can be assumed  that the intake  char­
acteristics  of single  chop and big bale silages  are similar  if ensiled  under  identical  condi ­
tions. The data clearly  illustrate  that silage  digestibility  and chop length  can impact  on the 
quantity  of concentrate  required  during  late pregnancy  by up to 400%. Each 5 unit increase  
in silage  digestibility  offered  during  a standard  winter  housing  period  improves  efficiency  
of lamb production  by 16c/kg  carcass  through  a combination  of reduced  concentrate  re­
quirement  in late pregnancy  and better  nutrition  in mid pregnancy  which increases  lamb 
birth weight  and subsequent  performance  (heavier  weaning  weight  and earlier  sale date).
20
Table 8. Effect  of silage  chop length  and digestibility  on concentrate  requirements  
of twin bearing  ewes  in late pregnancy  (kg/ewe)
. ^ . Silage  DMD (%)ndivcait?!  1 ypc79 72 64
Precision 8 12 20
Single  chop  / big bale 12 20 30
Utter  size
Litter size has a major  influence  on the level of concentrate  required  in late pregnancy.  As 
litter size increases  concentrate  input must increase  to meet additional  nutrient  require ­
ments. For the 72 and  64 DMD  silages  in Table 8, concentrate  feed levels  can be reduced  
by 11 kg/ewe  for single  bearing  ewes  and should  be increased  by 7 kg/ewe  for triplet  bear ­
ing ewes during  the last 6 weeks  of pregnancy.
Protein  requirements  increase  dramatically  during  the last 4 weeks  of pregnancy.  Conse ­
quently,  during  this period  the crude protein  level in the concentrate  should  be 18% for 
ewes offered  moderate  to high feed-value  silages. However,  for ewes offered  low feed-  
value grass  silage  or hay the protein  level of the concentrate  should  be increased  to 20%.
Concentrate  price
Concentrate  price can vary dramatically.  High quality  concentrate  can be produced  cost 
effectively  by mixing  a blend  of straights  together  with a proprietary  sheep  mineral  and vi­
tamin mixture  and offered  as a course  ration. Examples  of cost effective  high quality  con­
centrate  mixtures  are presented  in Table  9. In late pregnancy  good  quality  protein  sources  
are desirable.  Soyabean  is a high quality  protein  source  and should  be included  in all sup­
plements  offered  to sheep  in late pregnancy.  Replacing  5% of barley  in these  mixes  with 
5% soyabean  meal  alters  the crude  protein  concentration  by 2%. Concentrate  price is fre­
quently  discussed  in the sheep  industry.  However,  changing  the price of concentrate  by 
€30/tonne  only alters  efficiency  of lamb production  by 2c/kg  lamb carcass  produced.
Table  9. Simple  concentrate  mixes  for sheep
(1)
(2)40% barley,  35% beet pulp, 25% soyabean  meal + 25 kg mineral/vitamins  
{Crude  protein  = 18%)
30% barley,  30% citrus  pulp, 10% maize  gluten,  10% distillers,  20%  
soyabean  + 25 kg mineral/vitamins  {Crude  protein  = 18%)
Grassland  management
When  all the costs  of production  and utilisation  rate are considered,  grazed  grass  is not a 
cheap  feed to produce.  Recent  costings  (Table  10) demonstrate  that whilst  grass is the 
cheapest  forage  to produce,  it is only 6 to 31 % cheaper  than ensiled  forages.  For example,  
maize  when  grown  under  the complete-cover  plastic  mulch  system  can now be produced  
and fed to farm animals at a similar  cost to grazed  grass. Furthermore,  three  cut silage  only  
costs 16% more  than grazed  grass.
21
Table 10. The relative  costs  of forage  production  (all production  costs  including  
land charge)
Forage Cost (€/t DM consumed) Relative  Cost
Grazed  grass 104 100
3-cut  silage 121 116
4-cut  silage 136 131
Fermented  whole  crop 126 121
Maize - no plastic 134 129
- plastic 110 106
(after  Keady  et al, 2002)
Forage Cost (€/t DM consumed)  Relative  Cost Grazed  grass 104 100 3-cut silage  121 
116 4-cut silage 136 131 Fermented  whole  crop 126 121 Maize - no plastic  134 129 
- plastic  110 106 (after  Keady  etal, 2002)
In mid season  fat lamb production,  the forage  component  of the diet consists  primarily  of 
grazed  grass. Additional  feeds  offered  if required,  are likely  to be concentrate  (€260-350/t 
dry matter),  which  is 300%  or 690%  more  costly  than grazed  grass  when  all grass  produc­
tion costs  or cash costs  are included  respectively.  Consequently  it is essential  to increase  
daily performance  from  grazed  grass  to reduce  production  costs  and enable  lambs to finish  
earlier  whilst  avoiding  price  falls in the market  due to late finishing.  Many studies atAthenry 
have been undertaken  to determine  the optimum  level of performance  from mid season  
flocks  at pasture.  During  the grass  growing  season  daily grass  growth  rates vary dramat­
ically,  e.g. 10,40,  90, 50, 60, 30 and  20kg DM/hectare/day  for March,  April,  May, June,  July, 
September  and October  respectively.  At the same  time the demand  of the flock varies  as 
the lamb grows  pre weaning,  whilst  post weaning  ewe requirements  decline.  AtAthenry,  
sward  height  has been used to manage  grassland.  The impact  of sward  height  on lamb 
performance  pre weaning  and post weaning  are presented  in Tables  11 and 12 respec ­
tively. Increasing  sward  height  to 6cm during  the pre-weaning  period  increased  animal  
performance.  However  increasing  sward  height  had no further  beneficial  effects on animal  
performance.  However  lax grazing  pre weaning  resulted  in swards  that had stemmy,  low- 
digestibility  herbage  later in the season  and consequently  poor lamb performance  post 
weaning.  Increasing  sward  height  to 9cm in the post weaning  period  increased  animal  
performance.  From numerous  studies,  the target  sward-height  to achieve  optimum  levels  
of performance  are 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9cm in the months  of April, May, June, July, August  and 
September  respectively.  Also to maintain  good performance  at pasture  it is essential  to 
practice  an effective  parasite  control  regime.
Table  11. Effect  of sward  height  on lamb performance  in May and June
Sward  height  (cm) Liveweight  gain (g/d)
4 267
6 306
9 315
(Grennan  and O’Riordan,  1996)
22
Table 12. Effect  of sward  height  on lamb performance  post weaning
Sward  height  (cm) Liveweight  gain (g/d)
5 115
7 141
9 162
(Grennan  and O’Riordan,  1996)
Creep  feeding
There is a lot of interest  in creep  feeding  lambs  presumably  with the intention  of finishing  
lambs earlier. The response  to creep  feeding  depends  on grass  availability.  The results  
of a number  of studies  at Athenry  undertaken  to evaluate  creep  feeding  are summarised  
in Table 13. Creep  feeding  increased  weaning  weight  regardless  of sward  height. How­
ever, it should  be noted  that creep  feeding  300g concentrate/lamb/day  on the low swards  
resulted  in the same  level of performance  as lambs  grazing  the high swards  with no creep  
feed. Therefore  creep feeding  replaced  good grassland  management.  Lambs  offered  300 
and 600g creep/day  consumed  30 and 50kg concentrate  respectively.  For lambs  offered  
creep feed, 14kg concentrate  was required  to produce  each additional  1kg of carcass  
weight,  which  is a poor  food conversion  ratio. Creep  feeding  reduced  age to slaughter  by 
28 days. However  increasing  grass  height  from 5 to 6cm reduced  age at slaughter  by 13 
days, half the effects  of feeding  32.5kg  creep/iamb.
Table 13. Effect  of creep  feeding  and sward  height  on lamb  weaning  weight  (kg)
Creep  feed (g/lamb  per day)
Low sward  height High sward  height
0 300 600 0 300 600
Weaning  weight  (kg) 31.4 34.3 36.9 33.7 36.7 37.5
Drafted  at weaning  (%) 7.3 20.7 42.8 20.4 41.2 53.7
Age at sale (days) 167 140 125 154 126 118
Creep  intake  (kg) 0 32.5 52.9 0 27.5 46.0
(Grennan  and McNamara,  2005)
Although  creep  feeding  enables  animals  to be drafted  at a younger  age (and most likely  
at a higher  price),  the question  often asked  is ‘‘does it pay”? Assuming  market  price con­
ditions  that prevailed  in 2004 and 2005, lamb price declined  from €3.54 in early July to 
€3.10/kg  carcass  in late October,  the period  when the majority  of mid season  fat lamb is 
marketed.  The effect  of creep  feeding  on carcass  value  of the March  born lambs  relative  
to the carcass  value  of lambs  receiving  no creep (using  the prevailing  market  prices  of 
2004 and 2005),  and allowing  for the cost of creep  consumed  by the lambs  at concentrate  
prices  ranging  from  €150  to €325/t  is presented  in Table  14. The data  clearly  illustrates  that 
regardless  of grass  height,  offering  creep  to lambs,  which  enabled  slaughter  at a younger  
age did not cover  the cost of the creep  within a concentrate  price range  from €150 to 
€325/t. It is also observed  that increasing  sward  height  from 5 to 6cm increased  carcass  
value by €2.50/head.  Whilst  no allowance  has been made  for the additional  grass  required  
to feed the lambs  without  creep feed,  the grass  cost will have little impact  on the economics  
of production.  Many  sheep  farms  in Ireland  are moderately  stocked  which  enables  greater  
production  of grass  at little extra cost. Prior to slaughter,  40kg lambs  consume  approxi ­
23
mately  1kg grass  DM/head/day,  requiring  an additional  27kg DM to finish. Whilst  the total 
cost of grass  production  is€104/tDM  (Table  10) the cash  cost is €44/t  DM. Consequently, 
the additional  grass  required  without  creep  feeding  would  cost €1.18. Even allowing  for 
grass  cost, creep  feeding  concentrate  at a cost greater  than €175 does not break  even.  
Furthermore  the producer  requires  additional  returns to cover  the cost of purchase  of feed­
ers, concentrate  storage  and labour.  Also if lambs  are fed creep  to finish  early,  the producer 
must  establish  what, if any, is the opportunity  cost of the grass  remaining?  It is concluded  
that creep  feeding  mid season  lamb does not give an economic  return.
Table  14. Effect  of creep  feeding  on carcass  value  (€) of March  born lambs,  after  cost 
of creep,  assuming  market  conditions  of 2004/05  relative  to lambs  receiving  no creep  
at two sward  grazing  heights  (€/carcass)
Creep  feed level (g/day)Sward  height  (cm)
5 6
300 600 300 600
Concentrate  price (€/t)
150 -0.56 -0.55 -0.45 -2.15
175 -1.37 -1.87 -1.14 -3.30
200 -2.19 -3.19 -1.83 -4.45
225 -3.00 -4.51 -2.51 -5.60
250 -3.81 -5.84 -3.20 -6.75
275 -4.62 -7.16 -3.89 -7.90
300 -5.44 -8.48 -4.58 -9.05
325 -6.25 -9.80 -5.26 -10.20
Management  practices
Changes  in some  farm management  practices  can increase  efficiency  of lamb  production  
at no extra cost.
Finishing  male lambs  as rams
Traditionally  male lambs  were castrated  to facilitate  management  post weaning  when 
lambs  are reaching  sexual  maturity. However  there is plenty  of evidence  from other  
species,  e.g. beef  cattle,  that finishing  the male  progeny  entire  increases  growth  rate, food 
conversion  efficiency  and produces  leaner  carcasses.  A major  study  was completed  at 
Athenry  to evaluate  the effect  of finishing  male lambs  entire  (as rams)  on animal  perform ­
ance. The results  are presented  in Table  15. Lambs  finished  entire  were 1.8kg heavier  at 
weaning,  produced  leaner  carcasses  and were slaughtered  16 days earlier  than lambs 
which  were castrated  shortly  after birth. The data clearly  show  that finishing  male lambs  
entire  increases  performance.  Finishing  lambs  entire,  improved  efficiency  by 13c/kg  for 
male  lambs  or by 7c/kg  if all progeny  from the flock  are slaughtered,  similar  to the response 
obtained  from choice  of terminal  sire breed. However  it should  be noted  that post  weaning, 
ram lambs  should  be managed  separately  from ewe lambs,  otherwise,  the potential  ben­
efits in growth  rate will be foregone  as young  rams will be very active  in the presence  of 
females.  Furthermore  if the current  production  system  is not capable  of delivering  the ma­
jority  of lambs  to slaughter  by late August,  then the potential  advantages  of leaving  lambs 
entire  is reduced  and product  quality  may be compromised.
24
Table 15. Effects  of finishing  male lambs  entire  on animal  performance
Treatment
Castrated Entire
Weaning  weight  (kg) 29.9 31.7
Carcass  weight  (kg) 18.2 18.1
Kill out (%) 44 43
Fat score' 3.1 2.9
Sale date 24 August 8 August
Fat score 1 to 5
(Hanrahan,  1999)
Winter  shearing
All sheep  must  be shorn  once  per year. At current  wool price  and shearing  cost, the value  
of the fleece  does not cover  the expense  of shearing.  A recent  study at this Research  
Centre  has evaluated  the impact  of shearing  housed  ewes  in mid pregnancy  or grazing  out 
doors  all winter  and lambing  at pasture  on subsequent  lamb  performance.  Ewes that were  
shorn had their  fleeces  removed  in mid December.  All sheep  lambed  in early March.  The 
effects  on lamb performance  are presented  in Table 16. Shearing  housed  ewes had the 
same impact  on lamb birth weight  and subsequent  performance  as outwintering  on grass  
and lambing  outdoors.  Shearing  increased  lamb birth weight  by 0.6  kg/lamb  and weaning  
weight  by 2.4kg  relative  to lambs  from ewes  that were housed  but not shorn. The data  from 
this study  illustrate,  that shearing  housed  ewes  increases  subsequent  lamb performance  
such that they are fit for slaughter  two weeks  earlier  than lambs  from housed  ewes  that 
were unshorn.  The increased  weaning  weight  due to winter  shearing  improves  efficiency  
of lamb production  by 15c/kg  carcass.  Furthermore  shearing  facilitates  management  and 
reduces  fixed costs  as space  requirements  at the trough  and in the house  are reduced.
Table  16. The effects  of shearing  housed  ewes  and outdoor  lambing  on subsequent  
lamb performance
Ewe treatment
Indoors
unshornIndoors  shornOutdoors
Unshorn
Lamb  birth weight  (kg) 4.2 4.8 4.9
Liveweight  gain (g/d)
(birth  - weaning)288 307 312
Weaning  weight  (kg) 32.4 34.8 35.2
(Keady  et al, 2006)
Condition  score
Condition  score  is a method  of accessing  the fatness  or condition  of animals.  It is assessed  
by handling  the ewe over and round  the backbone,  in the area of the loin behind  the last 
rib. Condition  score  is based  on a scale  from one to five where  one and five represent  ex­
tremely  thin and fat ewes  respectively.  In dairying  and suckler  cow production,  condition  
score is a management  tool used in late lactation,  at calving  and during  the breeding  sea­
son to monitor  cow condition  score  change.  In sheep  production  the most  important  time 
to have the ewes  in the optimum  condition  is at the time of joining  the rams  with the flock.
25
Teagasc  has studied  the effects  of condition  score of the ewes at the beginning  of the 
breeding  season  on subsequent  flock productivity.  Work undertaken  on 40 commercial  
farms  as part of the TET project  concluded  that each one unit increase  in condition  score  
within the range  of 2.5 to 4.5 increases  ewe liveweight  by 12kg and lambs  weaned  per 
ewe joined  by 0.10.
Is there  a viable  future  for sheep  production?
Many  different  aspects  of mid season  fat lamb production  has been discussed  in the cur­
rent paper. ‘Maximum  potential ’ improvements  in efficiency  on Irish sheep  farms,  and 
those  ‘achievable  in practice ’ are presented  in Table 17. The data demonstrate  that if all 
the individual  potential  improvements  in efficiency  for genetics,  nutrition  and management  
of the ewe and lamb were achieved,  the cost of production  could be reduced  by up to 
132c/kg  carcass.  However,  whilst  all of the individual  improvements  are possible,  they are 
not all cumulative  and consequently  are not possible for every  lamb finished.  Nonetheless, 
on most farms  it should  be possible  to achieve  half of the ‘potential  in practice  improve ­
ments ’ in efficiency.  Therefore  improvements  in efficiency  could  reduce the  cost of produc ­
tion by up to 66c/kg  carcass.  Average  lamb price for 2004 was €3.66/kg carcass.  In 
addition  €1.43  was received  in subsidy  per kg of lamb carcass  produced.  Consequently, 
even allowing  for an improvement  in efficiency  of 66c/kg  lamb carcass  produced,  the pro­
ducer  would  require  €4.43/kg  carcass  to maintain  the income  received  in 2004 prior  to im­
plementation  of the Mid Term Review  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy.
Table  17. Opportunities  to improve  efficiency  and profitability  in sheep  production
Maximum
Potential€ / head
Potential  in 
PracticeCarcass  (c/kg)
Ewe genotype 22 13 48
Grassland 10 5.0 26
Silage 7.5 3.20 16
Winter  shearing 2.9 2.9 15
Condition  score 6 3 11
Entire  progeny 2.5 1.3 7
Terminal  sire breed 3.0 1.4 7
Concentrate 0.6 0.4 2
It is of interest  to note from Table 17, that two of the most  discussed  topics  by sheep  pro­
ducers,  namely  terminal  sire breed  and concentrate  price,  have  the smallest  impact  on im­
proving  efficiency.  The factors  that have the greatest  impact  on efficiency  are ewe 
genotype,  grassland  management,  winter-shearing  and high quality  grass  silage.
Conclusions
It is concluded  that: -
Improvements  in efficiency  pre farm gate of up to 66c/kg  carcass  are possible.
The major  factors,  in order  of importance,  to improve  efficiency  pre farm gate are as fol­
lows
Increasing  litter size. Use Belclare  or a breed  with similar  genetic  merit.
- Good  grassland  management.  Use sward  height  as a management  tool.
- Winter  shearing  of housed  ewes  to reduce  age at slaughter  of the progeny.
26
- Produce  high quality  grass  silage  (greater  than 75%DMD)  for feeding  housed  ewes  in 
mid and late pregnancy.
- Finish  male lambs  entire  provided  they are offered  a good plane  of nutrition.
- Use a mixture  of straights  as supplements  to reduce  concentrate  cost.
- Choice  of terminal  sire breed. Suffolk,  Charollais,  Texel and Belclare  are probably  the 
only breeds  that merit  serious  consideration.
- Creep  feeding  does not provide  a return  to the producer  of mid season  fat lamb, even  
allowing  for earlier  drafting  and assuming  market  price changes  during  2004  and 2005.
References
Carson,  A.F. and Dawson,  L.E.R.  (2004). Developing  easy care lambing  systems.  Tech­
nical Report  present  to Agri  Search,  Northern  Ireland.
Flanagan,  S. (2000). Maximising  grazed  grass  in the diet of the ewe for mid-season  lamb 
production.  Teagasc,  Athenry  Research  Centre  Research  Reports  pp. 4-7.
Fitzgerald,  J.J. (1996).  Grass silage as a basic  feed for store  lambs. 2. Effect  of harvesting  
systems  and chop length  of grass  silage  on silage  intake  and performance  of store lambs.  
Grass  and Forage  Science  51, 378-388.
Grennan,  E.J. and O’Riordan,  E.J. (1996).  Efficient  use of grass  for mid-season  lamb pro­
duction. Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  Journal  30, 119-128.
Grennan,  E.J. and McNamara,  N. (2005). Finishing  lambs  on summer  pasture  and re­
sponse  to creep  feeding.  End of Project  Reports:  Sheep  Series  No 23: p. 21. Teagasc, 
Animal  Research  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1994a).  Evaluation  of crossbred  ewe types;  ovulation  rate and prolificacy.  
Proceedings  of the Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  Scientific  Meeting
pp. 21-22.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1994b).  Evaluation  of breeds  as terminal  sires. Teagasc,  Belclare  Re­
search  Centre  Research  Report,  pp. 27-28.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1997). Exploiting  genetic  resources  to enhance  the competitiveness  of 
lowland  sheep  systems.  Proceedings  of the Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Asso ­
ciation  Journal  pp. 106-115.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1999).  Genetic  and non-genetic  factors  affecting  lamb growth  and carcass  
quality. End of Project  Reports:  Sheep  Series  No. 8, p. 35. Teagasc  Animal  Research  
Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Keady,  T.W.J.,  Hanrahan,  J.P. and Flanagan,  S. (2006).  The effects  of flock management  
during  mid and late pregnancy  on lamb birth weight  and subsequent  performance.  Pro­
ceedings  of the Agricultural  Research  Forum p. 58.
Keady,  T.W.J.,  Kilpatrick,  C.M., Cushnahan,  A. and Murphy,  J.A. (2002).  The cost of pro­
ducing  and feeding  forages.  Proceedings  of the XIII"' International  Silage  Conference,  
Auchencruive,  Scotland,  pp. 322-323.
Nolan,  T. and McNamara,  N. (2002). High output  mid-season  lamb meat  systems.  End of 
Project  Reports:  Sheep  Series  No. 20. p. 42. Teagasc,  Animal  Research  Centre, Athenry,  
Co. Galway.
Kinsella,  A. (2005). National  Farm Survey  Teagasc.
27
Breeding  Quality  Cattle
Andrew  Cromie
Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation,  Highfield  House,  Bandon,  Co. Cork
Introduction
Breeding  is one of the most  effective  means  of increasing  the profitability  of beef  farming.  
However,  in order  to increase  profit  from beef breeding,  structures  and systems  must be 
put in place  to that will allow;
The accurate  collection  of relevant  beef cattle  breeding  data;
The calculation  of genetic  indexes  that will allow  the best animals  be selected  for breed ­
ing;
A breeding  program  that ensures  the best animals  are used throughout  the cattle  breeding  
industry.
These  areas  have  been  the major  focus  of the Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federations  work  over 
the past 3 years,  from the launching  of Animal  Events  In beef herds  (January  2004)  to the 
imminent  release  of the new Total Beef Indexes  and new breeding  programs  for Irish beef 
farmers.  This paper  is a summary  of work  over the past 3 years.
1. Accurate  collection  of relevant  beef cattle  breeding  data
Quality  & Profit
According  to the Cambridge  English  dictionary  the definition  of quality  & profit are as fol­
lows:
• Quality  - how good or bad something  is, a high standard.
• Profit  - money  that is earned  in trade  or business,  especially  after paying  the costs  of 
producing  and selling  goods  and services.
Profit is the ‘all-encompassing ’ word reflecting  the essential  deliverables  for Irish beef  farm­
ers. However,  if we think of quality  in the context  of ‘quality  maternal  replacements ’ as 
well as ‘quality  weanlings ’ then ‘quality  & profit ’ are linked. In establishing  the Irish Cattle  
Breeding  Federation  database,  ICBF have been  focused  on collecting  relevant  data  on all 
of the traits  linked  to profitable  beef  production,  that is, traits  associated  with calving,  wean ­
ing, slaughter  & maternal.
The ICBF cattle breeding  database
The cattle breeding  database  was first launched  on beef farms In January  2004. Since  
then it has grown  steadily,  with some 15,000  suckler  beef & 15,000  dairy herds  now con­
tributing  to the database,  totalling  about  1 million  calf births  (Figure  1).
28
Figure  1. Overview  of the ICBF  cattle  breeding  database
Farmers  involved  in the cattle  breeding  database  record  their birth records  through  Animal  
Events,  a simple  and easy  to use system  that allows  farmers  record  all of the data required  
for EU passport  application,  as well as pedigree  registration  and genetic  evaluations.  In 
addition,  to having  a simple  system  for recording  data on-farms,  the database  is also linked  
to the many  other industry  systems  that are also collecting  beef cattle data, e.g., factory  
and mart data. ICBF has an excellent  relationship  with these  various  organisations,  en­
suring  that valuable  cattle breeding  data (e.g., weights,  conformation  & price/kg)  is col­
lected at minimal  cost and hassle  for farmers  and the industry.
Figure  2. Increase  in number  of calving  performance  records  (1999-2005)
4000001  
350000  
300000  
250000  
200000  
150000  
100000  
50000  
0
1999 2000 2001 2003 2004 2005
29
These  initiatives  have  resulted  in a major  increase  in the quantity  and quality  of data avail-)  
able for beef  cattle  breeding.  For example,  the number  of records  available  for the genetic|  
evaluation  of calving  difficulty  has increased  from 12,000/year  in 2000  to some  380,000  col­
lected/year  in 2005  (Figure  2). Similar  Improvements  are apparent  for other  traits  such  as 
carcass  weight,  conformation  and fat score,  where  the number  of records  available  for ge-' 
netic evaluation  has increased  from 15,000  in 2002 to almost  440,000  in 2006.
Whilst  there  have been notable  improvements  in traits such as calving  and carcass,  prob­
lems still exist  with traits  linked  closely  to the  sucker  herd, i.e., maternal  traits. For example,  
a recent  analysis  of % bred suckler  cows  involved  in the cattle  breeding  database  has in­
dicated  that of the 240,000  cows  involved  in the database  only 29% have a known  sire, and 
only 60% of these  (i.e., 46,000  cows)  are Al bred. This low level of cow ancestry  recording  
(29%),  coupled  with the small  average  herd-size  in Ireland  (15 cows)  and the low heritabilily  
of these  traits  (generally  about  5%) makes the  job of evaluating  maternal traits very  difficult  
Given  the importance  of suckler  herd improvement  to our National  beef  industry,  it is critical  
that we give increased  focus  to improved  data recording  in our national  suckler  herd. The 
launch  of the new suckler  cow  scheme  for beef  farmers  by DAF  Is a welcome  step forward  
In this regard.
2. Calculation  of genetic  indexes  that aliow  identification  of the best animais  for. 
breeding
Data and genetic  indexes
The second  stage  in a beef  improvement  program  is to ensure  that the data is summarised|  
in a simple  way that will easily  allow  farmers  use the information to select  animals  for breed-|  
ing (e.g.,  Al bulls, stock bulls and cows for breeding  replacement).  Given  the number  of, 
traits  for which  data is now collected  (some  60 across  calving,  slaughter,  Tully, linear  typel 
& maternal),  this is no small task and relies on a combination  of powerful  statistical  pro­
grams  to account  for non-genetic  differences  between  animals  in their observed  perform ­
ance (e.g., level of feeding,  age and breed  of dam) and then economic  models  to weight  
the traits based  on their contribution  to beef profit. The final end-product  is an economic  
index  (or profit  index),  that allows  farmers  establish  the increased  profit  from each breeding  
decision.  In total, 5 economic  sub-indexes  have  been identified  for beef  farmers,  covering  
each of the key breeding  decisions;  calving  performance  (dairy  & beef), breeding  calves  
for export,  breeding  calves  for slaughter  in Ireland  & breeding  maternal  replacements  
(Table  1).
Bulls  are then compared  on the basis  of their  €-value  for each sub-index.  Therefore  a bull 
that has a BPSI value  of €150 will leave  €100 more profit at slaughter  than a bull with a 
BPSI value  of €50. This represents  a difference  in final slaughter  value  of some  €0.30/kg.  
In addition  to the above  five sub-indexes,  animals  can also be compared  on the basis  of 
their  total beef  value  (or total beef  EBI). This figure  reflects  a combination  of where  an an­
imal ’s genes  may appear  within  the industry  (based  on the % of animals  that are exported,  
slaughtered  and/or  appear  as maternal  replacements).  It is anticipated  that, in the future,  
all bulls will be ranked  on the basis  of total beef EB, with farmers  then able to choose,  in­
dividual  animals  based  on their strengths  and weaknesses  for various  traits.
Do the indexes  work?
One of the key questions  asked  by beef  farmers,  is do the new indexes  work,  and as a beef 
farmer  can I use the indexes  to increase  profit?
30
Table 1. Summary  table of the five sub - indexes  linked  to profitable  beef produc ­
tion, including  the component  traits
Index Trait % Explanation
BPSI (€)Carcass  Weight (Kgs) 55%This Sutnlndex  will estimate  how  good  a bull is at producing  
progeny with high value carcases.BuIls  that are producing  cattle  
that have a high carcase weight  for age, good  conformation  at killWeantnq  Weiqht (Kgs) 20%
BeefCarcass  Conformation (Grade) 12%
Production Dry Matter  Intake (Kgs) 8%
Sub - Index Carcass  Fat (Grade) 5%out and good lifetime feed efficiency  will score  hi^y.
WCSI (€) This Sub-Index will estimate  how good  a bull is at producing  high 
value  weanlings  for sale. Suckler  farmers  vAxo are selling  theirWeaning  Weight (Kgs) 31%
Weaned  Calf Caif Quality __ 69%
Sub - Indexweanlings  should look more  closely  at bulls in this Sub Index.
BCSI (€) This Sub-Index  puls a direct  cost on calving  problems  estimated  for 
each bull when used  in a Suckler  Herd. It puts a direct  cost on 
calving  problems estimated  for each bull. It lakes  into account  
calving  difficulty,  gestation  length  and mortality.Calving  Dfficultv (%) 46%
Beef CalvingGestation  Length (Days) 28%
Calf Mortality (%1 27%
Sub - Index
DCSI (€) This Sub-Index  puts a direct  cost on calving  problems  estimated  forCalvinq  Difficulty (%) 35%
Dairy  CalvingGestation  Length (Days) 55%each bull when  used  in a Dairy Herd. It is very similar  to the beef
Calf Mortality __ 10% calving  index,  except  that the economic  impact of using  a
Sub - Index“difficult ” calving  bull on the dairy  herd  is much  higher.
MSI (€)Cow  Survival (%) 14%
This Sub-Index  is to be used where  a suckler  farmer  is choosing  a Calvinq  Interval (Days) 20%
MaternalAge at First Calving (Days) 11% bull to breed  replacements  from.  Unfortunately  information  on this
Maternai  Calvino  Difficultv  (%) 14% sub-index  is not yet complete  due to lack of ancestry  &
Maternal  Weaning  Weight  (Kgs) 39% performance  data on our national  suckler  herd.
Sub - Index Cull Cow  Carcass  Weight  (Kgs) 2%
Table 2. Comparison  of top & bottom  5 bulls  for 6 beef breeds
Index Pred.  differences Age @ rec 
BPSI Cwt Conf Wwt Cwt WwtRaw data 
Cwt Conf Wwt
Top bulls 
Bottom  bulls€94
-€528
-12.2
1.36
-17660
694235
246352
300317
250
Looking  at the performance  of the top and bottom  Al sires for each of the six main beef 
breeds  (based  on Beef Performance  Sub Index  - Table  2), indicates  that the progeny  of 
the high index  sires had higher  carcass  weights  (+52kg),  better  conformation  grades  (al­
most 1 point)  and higher  weaning  weights  (+67kg)  based  on raw data. In addition,  these  
levels of performance  were achieved  at younger  ages compared  to the lower  index  sires  
(-34 days  for carcass  weight  and -11 days  for weaning  weight).  After  accounting  for differ ­
ences  due to environment  and management,  the genetic  differences  in favour  of the high 
index bulls is +29kg  carcass  weight,  +1.1 conformation  score  and +23kg  weaning  weight,  
representing  a difference  in beef profit  of €99 per animal  slaughtered.  Similar  results  are 
available  for each of the other  sub-indexes,  and total beef EBI, indicating  that farmers  can 
have confidence  in the new indexes  to increase  profit  from breeding.
Publication  of the new indexes
Information  is already  available  on 4 of the sub-indexes  outlined  in Table  2; calving  (dairy  
& beef), export  & slaughter.  Work  on the final sub-index  (maternal)  and hence  total beef 
EBI Is continuing  and expected  ahead  of the winter  2006 season.  Farmers  can view the
31
indexes  for all relevant  traits  on the ICBF  website  (httD:// www.icbf.com t or in Al brochures  
for Al bulls. The key thing to note regarding  these  new indexes  is that there are large  dif­
ferences  within breeds  on how much profit a given bull will leave at calving,  slaughter, 
weaning  or as a maternal  replacement  compared  to another  bull. The simple  advice to beef 
farmers  is that they should  start  to use the indexes  immediately  to help improve  the profits  
from their beef enterprises.
In addition  to EBI’s for Al bulls, new Beef  EBI reports will  be posted  to herd-owners.  These  
reports  will include  for the first time, key information  on maternal  traits and total beef EBI, 
in addition  to information  on calving,  export  & slaughter.  Again,  herd-owners  should  use 
the new indexes  to identify  the cows and bulls that will leave more profit. In addition  the 
reports  will provide  summaries  by breed  and age group  to allow  herd-owners  benchmark 
the genetic  merit  of their herd, relative  to other  herds  for these  new indexes.
3. A breeding  program that ensures  the best  animals  are used  widely  throughout  the 
cattle  breeding  industry
Increasing  genetic  gain
The current  level of genetic  gain in the national  beef herd is €2/cow/year,  which  is about  
10% of what could be achieved  from an optimal  program  (€18/cow/year).  Achieving  this 
level of genetic  gain could  generate  an additional  €16 million/annum  for Irish beef  farmers  
and the beef  industry.  Achieving  this level of gain would  require  a major  up-scaling  in prog­
eny testing  efforts,  from the current  10 bulls/year  (fully  tested)  to some 100 bulls/year.  As 
a result  of these  potential  benefits  (and costs),  ICBF and DAF are currently  investigating 
options  for a new beef progeny  test program,  which  would  have a combination  of industry  
and government  support.
New beef orooenv  test program
The objective  of the beef  program  is to increase  genetic  gain, by progeny  testing  some  100 
bulls/year  (75 daughters  per bull) across  all of the main beef breeds,  with all bulls having  
full progeny  test proofs  at the end of 4 years (including  maternal  proofs). The program  
would  have 3 main elements;
Registrar  of elite cows,
Performance  & progeny  test of high index  young  bulls.
Return  of elite progeny  test bulls.
(a) Registrar  of elite cows
Each  of the main beef  breeds  would  have  a ‘registrar ’ of elite females.  This registrar  would  
initially  comprise  only a few cows (i.e., bull-mothers)  but would  build over time to contain  
some  300 cows  for the larger  beef breeds  and 100 cows  for the smaller  beef breeds,  re­
sulting  in approximately  2,000  elite cows  across  all breeds.  These  cows would  be selected  
on the basis  of; (i) overall  beef EBI, (ii) genetic  diversity  within  their population  & (iii) phys­
ical conformation.  Maintenance  of the elite female  registrar  would  be the responsibility  of 
the relevant  herd-book,  working  in consultation  with ICBF and the Al industry.  From this 
group  of 2,000  elite females,  some  300 male calves  would  be selected  each year  for per­
formance  testing  at Tully,  with the top 1/3"'^ within  each breed  then selected  for subsequent 
progeny  testing  (i.e., top 100 bulls).
32
(b) Performance  & progeny  test of high index  young  bulls
Bulls would  be performance  and progeny  tested  at the central  performance  test station  
(Tully). Given  the change  in emphasis  for bull selection  (towards  total profit as opposed  
to growth),  it is proposed  that a review  of the Tully regime  (i.e., duration  of test, diet and 
traits recorded)  be undertaken.  On completion  of the performance  test, the top 100 bulls  
(from a total of 300 bulls on performance  test) would  then undergo  a period  of semen  col­
lection  (minimum  of 1,000  doses/bull),  with 600 straws/bull  being  dispatched  to “targeted ” 
beef herds  for progeny  testing  and the remaining  being  kept in storage  for “elite” matings  
(to cover  the scenario  where  a bull does not return  to active  Al service,  due to health-  
related  problems  or injury). It is anticipated  that some  1,500  herds  will be required  for the 
progeny  test program  (testing  100 bulls). All herds  would  receive  a minimum  of 25 straws  
(5 bulls X 5 straws),  with a view  to getting  5 female  replacements/herd.  The distribution  of 
semen  to targeted  herds would be co-ordinated  centrally  by ICBF through  Al service  
providers.  Farmers  would  simply  nominate  their  Al service  provider  and semen  would  be 
dispatched  accordingly.  To ensure  a high level of uptake  for the program  amongst  com­
mercial  farmers,  there  would  be a number  of incentives  attached  to the program  including;  
An incentive  of €250 per replacement  heifer  (having  a weaned  calf);
An incentive  of €100 per male animal  slaughtered  in Irish abattoirs;
Afocused  ‘herd breeding  program ’ including;  (i) access  to regional  progeny  test co-ordina-  
tor (who would  oversee  the program),  and (ii) a range  of options  for participating  farmers  
including  access  to test bull semen,  synchronisation  drugs,  a technician  service  & a scan ­
ning service.
(c) Return  of elite progeny  test bulls
From the initial group of 100 progeny  tested bulls, it is anticipated  that some 20-25  
bulls/year  would  be returned  as ‘elite progeny  test bulls ’ (across  all of the beef breeds).  It 
is critical  that semen  from these  bulls is available  for elite matings  and that a proportion  of 
these  sires are also available  to Irish farmers  through  commercial  Al.
Elite matings.  The collection  of additional  semen  at Tully (i.e., an extra  400 straws)  will en­
sure that in all circumstances  top genetics  are available  for elite matings.
Commercial  Al. For the program  to work optimally,  a set number  of bulls (5-8 bulls/year)  
need to be returned  each year to Irish farmers  through  commercial  Al.
(d) Cost/benefits  of the program
Total income  from the program  (Tully  bull charge,  breeding  female  charge  & industry  sup­
port) is expected  to €7.16  million  (500 bulls progeny  tested  by 2013). On the negative  
side, the total cost of the program  is expected  to be €24.54  million  (principally  financial  in­
centives  for beef farmers),  leaving  an operating  shortfall  of some  €17.38  million  (or 70% 
of the total cost of the program).  When  expressed  on a per year basis,  this equates  to ap­
proximately  €2.5 million  over  the 7 years  of the program  (2007-2013),  which  is considerably  
less than the expected  benefits  from the program,  some  €18 million  for Irish beef  farmers  
and the beef industry.
At this stage,  the proposition  has received  widespread  support  from the beef industry,  the 
main benefits  being;  an opportunity  for the Irish beef  industry  (farmers,  DAF, cattle  breeding  
organisations,  meat  & milk processors)  to substantially  increase  profit  from cattle  breeding  
From the current  €1-2 million/annum  to €18 million/annum  at a relatively  low cost.
33
Conclusion
The benefits  of cattle  breeding  are permanent  (they  stay with the animal  in its lifetime),  cu­
mulative  (they pass from generation  to generation),  and are highly  cost-effective  (i.e., for 
an investment  of €2.5 million  in a new progeny  testing  program,  the Irish beef industry  
could expect  to accrue  benefits  in the region  of €18 million). However,  to achieve  these  
improvements,  cattle-breeding  must be structured,  systematic  and science-based.  ICBF  
have invested  much  time, resource  and effort  into establishing  systems  of beef recording, 
genetic  evaluation  and breed  improvement  that are world  leading.  The opportunity  now  ex­
ists to tap into these  benefits  and move  beef  cattle  breeding  onto a new level for Irish beef 
farmers  and the beef industry.  The simple  question  is can we afford  to miss the opportu ­
nity?
34
Relationship  between  Beef Carcass  
Classification  Grades  with Meat Yield and
Value
Michael  Drennan
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath
Introduction
The national  cow herd has changed  considerably  during  the last twenty  years  resulting  in 
a change  in the type of carcass  produced.  Total cow numbers  increased  from 2.08 million  
in 1984  to 2.35 million  in 2005,  with beef  cows  showing  almost  a 3 fold increase  and dairy  
cows now at only two-thirds  the 1984 level (Table  1). Associated  with this change  was an 
increase  in the proportion  of progeny  of continental  sire breeds  from 17% of the calf crop  
In 1985 to 56% In 2005. In addition  the proportion  of continental  x dams in the suckler  
herd has increased  from 29% in 1992 to 69% in 2005.
Table 1. Cow numbers  (million)
Dairy Beef Total
1984 1.64 0.44 2.08
2005 1.12 1.23 2.35
Source;  CSO (1985  and 2005)
Total cattle  disposals  are approximately  2 million  yearly  of which  1.8 million  are slaughtered  
in Ireland.  Live exports  have varied  from 134,000 to  218,000  in recent  years  (Table  2). Ap­
proximately  14% of beef output  is destined  for the home market,  with the remainder  ex­
ported. The destination  of Irish beef exports  has changed  considerably  over the last 10 
years. In the years 1996 to 2000 international  markets  accounted  for 51 to 62% of total 
exports,  but in 2001 they declined  to 15% and further  decreased  to only 8% in 2005 (Figure  
1). Although  the United  Kingdom  (UK) market  showed  the greatest  increase  in Irish beef 
exports from 2001,  exports  to continental  EU countries  have increased  gradually  in recent  
years. While  the UK market  accounted  for 53% of total beef  exports  in 2005  and continen ­
tal EU markets  accounted  for 39%, the monetary  value  of exports  was the same  for both 
markets  (Table  3).
Table 2. Irish cattle  disposals  (‘000)
2003 2004 2005
Live exports 218 134 186
Slaughtered 1,860 1,831 1,684
Source:  Bord Bia (2006a)
35
Figure  1. Destination  of Irish beef  exports  as carcass  weight  equivalent  (%)
■ UK
' Continental  EU
■ International  Market
Year
Source:  Bord Bia (2006a)
Table  3. Value  of Irish beef  exports  (excluding  offal)  2005
Million  € %
UK 629 48
Continental  EU 622 48
International 47 4
Total 1298 100
Source:  Bord Bia (pers. comm.)
A breakdown  of beef  meat  exports  in 2005  shows  that only 15% is exported  as bone-in with 
72% in boneless  form and 14% processed  (Table  4). Therefore,  with boneless  sales pre­
dominating,  meat  yield and distribution  (proportion  in higher  value  cuts) are important  de­
terminants  of carcass  value.
Table  4. Breakdown  of beef  exports  %
Bone-in
Boneless
Processed15
72
14
Source:  Bord Bia {pers. comm.)
Beef  carcasses  are graded  for conformation  (EUROP  scale  with E best for conformation)  
and fatness  (scale  1 to 5 with 5 fattest)  as part of the carcass  classification  system,  which 
also includes  category  (steer,  heifer,  young  bull, cow, bull) and carcass  weight.
Conformation  score  has a major  effect  on carcass  price. However,  there  is considerable  
variation  between  EU countries  in the price difference  between  the various  conformation  
classes  (Figure  2). The data shows  that relative  to Irish prices  (100)  for 03 steers  in 2005,  
the corresponding  steer  (or bull) relative  prices  in Great  Britain  (GB),  France  and Italy were  
103,108  and 108, respectively.  For R3s the corresponding  relative  prices  were 100,105,  
121 and 121 while  the prices  for U3s were 100, 105, 127 and 137. Similar  findings  were 
evident  for heifers  (Figure  3). Therefore,  while  the price  of 03 carcasses  in Ireland  and GB
36
were not far below  those  in continental  EU, the difference  for R3 and U3 carcasses  partic ­
ularly  when  compared  to France  and Italy were substantial.  Thus, market  outlet  is an im­
portant  determinant  of price. Such price advantages  have implications  for the future  
viability  of suckler  beef production  in Ireland,  which  is the principal  source  of animals  with 
good conformation.
If carcass  grades  are to  be used for price purposes  it is important  to know  how the grades  
relate  to meat  yield and distribution  in the carcass.  The importance  of meat  distribution  is 
evident  from the fact that following  fat removal,  the cube  roll, fillet and striploin  only account  
for 7 to 8% of carcass  weight  but about  30% of carcass  value.
The objectives of the study  were  to examine  the relationship  between  carcass  conformation  
(CS) and carcass  fat (FS) scores  with (1) carcass  meat,  fat and bone proportions,  (2) the 
proportion  of high-priced  meat  cuts in the carcass  and (3) carcass  value.
Figure  2. Steer  (bulls  in Italy, Spain  and Netherlands)  carcass  prices  for 2005 (c/kg  
excluding  VAT)
0O
S Ireland gGB
Source:  Bord Bia (2006b)R3
Carcass  Grade
3 France □ Italy @ Spain b Netherlands
37
Figure  3. Heifer  carcass  prices  for 2005 (c/kg excluding  VAT)
400
350
300
o>
250
0)o200
ft150
100
50
03
Source:  Bord Bia (2006b)R3
Carcass  Grade
^Ireland Q GB ^France Italy ^ Spain
Steer  Experiment
Materials  and Methods
A total of 134 steers  were used representing  the various  sections  of the carcass  classifi ­
cation  grid for conformation  and fatness.  Carcasses  were mechanically  graded  according  
to the EU Beef Carcass  Classification  Scheme.  Carcass  meat,  fat and bone proportions  
were obtained  by dissection  of the right side of each carcass,  which  was split into an 8 rib 
pistola  hindquarter  and the remainder  as forequarter.  The pistola  was dissected  into 12 
meat  cuts (silverside,  topside,  knuckle,  rump,  tail of rump,  fillet, striploin,  cube roll, cap of 
ribs, leg, heel and salmon).  The bones  were removed  and scraped  clean. All dissectable  
fat was removed  from each cut. The weight  of each cut and total weight  of fat trim, lean 
trim and bone were recorded  for the pistola. The forequarter  was dissected  into 11 cuts 
(front  shin, brisket,  chuck,  neck,  flat ribs (1 to 5), plate,  leg of mutton  cut, bladesteak,  brais ­
ing muscle,  chuck  tender  and clod)  and a similar  dissection  procedure  was undertaken  as 
outlined  for the pistola. For both quarters,  lean trim was added  to the meat cuts to give 
meat  yield. Total carcass  yields  of meat,  fat and bone were the combined  values  for the 
pistola  and forequarter.  Carcass  value  was taken  as twice  the sum of the commercial  val­
ues of the individual  meat  cuts and meat  trim in the half carcass  with a deduction  for bone.  
Thus,  when  estimating  carcass  value  the weight  of carcass  fat was not taken  into consid ­
eration.
Results
The slaughter  and carcass  weight  of the steers  were  619 and 319 kg, respectively.  Regres ­
sion analysis  were used to quantify  the relationship  between  carcass  conformation  and fat 
scores  with carcass  meat,  fat and bone proportions,  meat distribution  and carcass  value  
(Tables  5 and 6). A one unit increase  in carcass  conformation  score (e.g. 03 to R3) in­
creased  meat  yield by 4.2 percentage  units and decreased  fat and bone yield by 1.8 and 
2.3 percentage  units, respectively.  A one unit increase  in conformation  score also in­
creased  high-value  cuts by 0,6 percentage  units and increased  carcass  value  by 22 c/kg.
38
The effect  of a 1 unit increase  in carcass  fat score  was an increase  of 3.0 percentage  
units in fat and decreases  of 2.2 and 0.7 percentage  units in meat  and bone respectively.  
There  was also a reduction  of 0.2 percentage  units in high priced  cuts. A one-unit  increase  
in fat score  decreased  carcass  value  by 9 c/kg. Thus,  unit changes  in conformation  score  
have more  than twice  the effect  on meat  yield and carcass  value  as similar  changes  in fat 
score. In addition  there is a minimum  fat requirement  that varies  with the actual  market  
(greater  in the UK than in continental  EU) and thus, unlike  conformation,  changes  in fat 
score  do not apply  across  the entire  classification  grid.
Table  5. The effect  of a 1 unit increase  in conformation  score  in steers  (No = 134)
03 R3 Difference
Meat  (%) 66.7 70.9 +4.2
Fat (%) 11.8 10.0 -1.8
Bone  (%) 21.3 19.0 -2.3
High value  cuts (%) 6.9 7.5 +0.6
Value  (c/kg carcass) 281 303 +22
6. Effect  of a 1 unit increase  in fat score  in steers  (No = 134)
03 04 Difference
Meat  (%) 66.7 64.5 -2.2
Fat (%) 11.8 14.8 +3.0
Bone (%) 21.3 20.6 -0.7
High value  cuts (%) 6.9 6.7 -0.2
Value  (c/kg carcass) 279 270 -9
Suckler  v Holstein/Friesian  steers
Included  in the 134 steers  were 20 sucklers  which  were about  % continental  breeds  and 
65 Holstein/Friesians.  The carcass  weights  of the sucklers  and Holstein/Friesians  were  
376 and 310 kg, respectively  (Table  7). Corresponding  conformation  scores  were R* and 
0‘while both had similar  fat scores  of 3^. The sucklers  had 7.5 (72.3 v 64.8)  percentage  
units more meat, 3.1 (9.9 v 13.0) percentage  units less fat, 4.4 (17.8 v 22.2) percentage  
unit less bone, 1.1 (7.8 v. 6.7) percentage  units more high-value  cuts and were  valued  at 
44 c/kg more than the Holstein/Friesians.
Table  7. Data for Suckler  v. Holstein/Fr  steers
Sucklers Holstein/Fr
Carcass  \wt. (kg) 376 310
Carcass  grade 3^ 0 3^
Meat  (%) 72.3 64.8
Fat (%) 9.9 13.0
Bone  (%) 17.8 22.2
High value  cuts (%) 7.8 6.7
Value  (c/kg) 315 271
39
Young  bull and heifer  experiments
Carcass  dissection  studies,  using  procedures  similar  to those  outlined  for steers  were  car­
ried out using 74 young  bulls (52 sucklers  and 22 Holstein/Friesians)  slaughtered  at 14 to 
16 months  of age, and 40 heifers  (36 suckler  and 4 Continental  X Holstein/Friesians)  
slaughtered  at 20 months  of age. The effect  of carcass  conformation  score  (and fat score)  
on carcass  composition  and carcass  value  was similar  to that outlined  for the steers. The 
effect  of a one unit increase  in carcass  conformation  score  in the bulls on yield (percentage  
units)  was +3.6, -1.3, -2.3 and +0.3 for meat, fat, bone and high-value  cuts, respectively  
(Table  8). The corresponding  figure  for the heifers  was +4.5, -2.1, -2.3 and +0.6 (Table  9). 
The effect  of a unit increase  in conformation  score  on carcass  value  was +18 c/kg for the 
bulls and +25 c/kg for the heifers.
Table  8. Effect  of a 1 unit increase  in conformation  score  inbulls (No=74)
03 R3 Difference
Meat  (%) 65.7 69.2 +3.6
Fat (%) 11.6 10.3 -1.3
Bone  (%) 22.8 20.5 -2.3
High value  cuts (%) 6.7 7.0 +0.3
Value  (c/kg carcass) 278 296 + 18
Table  9. Effect  of a 1 unit increase  in conformation score  inheifers  (No = 40)
03 R3 Difference
Meat (%) 66.7 71.2 +4.5
Fat (%) 12.3 10.2 -2.1
Bone  (%) 21.1 18.8 -2.3
High value  cuts (%) 7.4 8.0 +0.6
Value  (c/kg carcass) 292 317 +25
Comparison  of meat  yield and distribution  results  with market  prices
The price advantage  between  U3 and 03 steer  or bull carcasses  in 2005  varied  from 17 
c/kg in Ireland  to 70 to 80 c/kg in France  and Italy (Table  10). With the exception  of Ireland 
and GB the advantage  in EU countries  was equal  to or considerably  greater  than the 44 
c/kg calculated  for steers  and 36 c/kg for bulls in the present  study  based  on meat  yield and 
distribution.  While  there  are no Irish or GB quotations  for heifers  grading  U for conforma ­
tion, it is noticeable  that in continental  EU markets  the effect  of conformation  on heifer  
prices  is even greater  than for steers/bulls.  It is evident  that the cattle  pricing  structure  in 
Ireland  must  be reviewed  if emphasis  in breeding  goals  are to be placed  on improving  car­
cass meat  yield and distribution  in addition  to meeting  export  market  requirements.
40
Table 10. Price difference  (c/kg)  between  carcasses  grading  R3 or U3 over 03 in 
2005
Present  study Ireland GB France Italy Spain
Steer  (bull)
R3 V. 03 +22 +10 +16 +44 (+35) (+17)
U3 V. 03 +44 +17 +23 +70 (+79) (+39)
Heifer
R3 V. 03 +25 +13 +15 +54 +145 +45
U3 V. 03 +50 - - +98 +187 +49
Beef carcass  classification
Beef  carcass  classification  data for 2005 shows  that 87% of steers  and 91 % of heifers  fall 
into the combined  conformation  classes  of O and R (Table  11). Therefore,  a better  differ ­
entiation  would  be achieved  by grading  on a 15 point scale  (eg R', R, R*) rather  than on a 
5 point  scale. For the same  reason  it would  be more  informative  to have carcass  fat class  
also graded  on a 15 point scale (Table  12). The mechanical  grading  system  currently  in 
operation  at Irish Meat processing  plants  would  facilitate  this expanded  grading  system.
Table  11. Percentage  of beef  carcasses  in the different  conformation  classes  in 2005
E U R 0 P Carcass  wt (kg)
Steers 6 46 41 7 352
Heifers 6 57 34 3 286
Cows 1 11 47 40 304
Source:  DAF (2006)
Table  12. Percentage  of beef  carcass  in the different  fat classes  in 2005
1 2 3 4L 4 4H 5
Steers  1 10 52 20 11 5 1
Heifers  2 9 41 21 14 9 4
Cows  9 11 30 16 12 10 10
Source:  DAF (2006)
It is suggested that using.this  expanded  beef  carcass  classification  system  for conformation  
and fatness  and a pricing  system  as outlined  in Table 13 would  be of benefit  to the Irish beef
industry.
Table 13. Suggested  price  differences  for carcass  classification  grades
Carcass  conformation  score
P+ 0- 0 0+ R- R R+ U- U U+
c/kg carcass -18 -12 -6 0 +6 +12 +18 +24 +30 +36
Carcass  fat score
3- 3 3+ 4- 4 4+ 5- 5 5+
c/kg carcass 0 0 0 -2.5 -5.0 -7.5 -10.0 -12.5 -15.0
41
Live Animal  Assessment
Discussion  to date has shown  effects  of carcass  conformation  and fat scores  on meat 
yield, percent  high value  cuts and carcass  value  but in cattle  improvement  programmes  it 
is also necessary  to be able to use evaluations  on the live animal.  High correlations  were 
obtained  between  visual  muscular  scores  and ultrasonically  scanned  muscle  depth  at the 
third lumbar  vertebra  with meat  yield,  the proportion  of high value  cuts and carcass  value 
(Figure  4). Although  live animal  skeletal  scores  or scanned  fat measurements  were not 
useful,  the data shows  that live animal  scores/measurements  are useful  in beef improve ­
ment programmes.
Figure  4. Correlation  of muscular  scores  and length  of back  visually  assessed  and 
scanned  fat and muscle  depth  with meat  proportion,  % high-vaiue  cuts and carcass  
vaiue
0.8 
0.6 
— 0.4
c g
3 0.2ffi
8 0 
-0.2 
-0.4m 9
Lenoth  of back 1'Mi'mk
ICBF  Muscular  
ScoreFat depth Muscle  depth
I J Meat prqxirtion Q % High  valuecuts I Carcass  value
Recommendations
Carcass  grading  for conformation  and fatness  should  be on a 15-point  scale.
A price premium  per unit improvement  in conformation  of at least 6 c/kg on a 15- point 
scale (= 18 c/kg on a 5-point  scale)  is merited  based  on the results  of the present  study.  
A deduction  in carcass  price per unit increase  in fat score  of 2.5 c/kg on a 15-point  scale 
(=7.5 c/kg on a 5-point  scale)  above  a fat score  of 9 on a 15-point  scale (3* on a 5-point  
scale).
Implications  of Using  the Suggested  System
Use of such a system  would  be of major  benefit  to the beef industry  by providing  a clear 
message  for producers  on carcass  value  and market  requirements.  This would  result  in: 
An overall  improvement  in the quality  of beef produced.
Improved  financial  viability  of suckler  units  which  are the source  of the higher  quality  beef 
carcasses.
More  animals  suitable  for the high-priced  continental  EU markets.
The provision  of clear guidelines  to those involved  in cattle genetic  improvement  pro­
grammes  such as ICBF,  Al organisations  and Breed  Societies.
The provision  of a fairer  system  for payment,  which  ensures  that payment  is based  on car­
cass value.
42
Conclusions
Increased  CS increased  carcass  meat  yield,  the proportion  of high-priced  cuts in the car­
cass and carcass  value  while  decreasing  carcass  fat and bone proportions.
Increasing  FS increased  carcass  fat proportion  and led to a decrease  in the proportions  of 
carcass  meat,  bone and high-value  cuts and carcass  value.
Muscular  scores  and scanned  muscle  depth  were  shown  to be good predictors  of the pro­
portion  of carcass  meat, bone and high value  cuts and carcass  value but were poor pre­
dictors  for carcass  fat proportion.
Skeletal  scores  showed  a poor negative  relationship  with carcass  meat  yield and value.  
Recommend  that: Grade  carcasses  on a 15-point  scale  e.g. conformation  R-, R, R*.
: Conformation  premium  of at least 6c/kg on 15 point scale  
(=18 c/kg on 5 point  scale).
: Monetary  deductions  for over-fatness.
References
Bord Bia (2006a).  Meat  and livestock  relview  and outlook  2006/07.
Bord Bia (2006b).  Market  monitor.  Dec. 23, 12 pages.
Central  Statistics  Office  (1985). Agricultural  Statistics.  Land utilisation  and numbers  of 
livestock  - regional  analysis.  Pp 3.
Central  Statistics  Office  (2005). Crops  and livestock  survey,  www.cso.ie
DAF (2006). EU classification  report  from January  1, 2005 to December  31, 2005.  
wvw.aariculture.ie  72 pages.
43
Alternative  Forages  to Grass  for Ensilage  and 
as Feeds  for Beef Cattle
Padraig  O’Kiely
Teagasc,  Grange  Beef  Research  Centre
This paper  will deal with:
Ensiiing  and feeding  alternative  forages  to grass  
Conserving  and feeding  high-moisture  grain  
Alternative  forages  to grass  for grazing
Ensiling  and feeding  alternative  forages  to grass
Grass  is the predominant  forage  ensiled  in Ireland,  and is likely  to remain  so for the fore­
seeable  future. If as is predicted,  cereal  prices  continue  to increase  in the years  to come,  
recent  downward  trends  in the attractiveness  of conserved  grass relative  to concentrate  
feedstuffs  are likely to be reversed.  It is important  to remember  that besides  providing  
winter  feed, grass  silage  also facilitates  grazing  management,  permits efficient and hygienic 
recycling  of animal  manures  and can be used to help reduce the  internal  parasite  challenge 
to grazing  cattle. High yields of quality grass ensiled with minimal  losses and 
produced/conserved/fed  with restrained  input costs  will therefore  continue  to be essential  
in order  to provide  cattle  with an economically  attractive  feedstuff  and to support  sustain ­
able systems  on most  farms.
However,  the relatively  modest  yields  achieved  in a single  harvest,  allied  to variability  in di- 
gestibiiity  and ensilability  (and thus intake  and animal  performance  response),  and the like­
lihood  of effluent  production  can create  disadvantages  for grass  silage  compared  to some 
alternative  forage  crops. Thus,  aiternative  forages  are worthy  of consideration.  However,  
it is important  to remember  that the function  of any of these  alternatives  to grass  silage  is 
to improve  farm profits  and not simply  to increase  intake  or levels  of animal  production.  
Consequently,  the role for alternative  forages  needs  to be considered  in terms  of factors  
such as relative  total costs  of production,  relative  revenues  from the sale of meat,  relative  
payments  of eligible  EU funds  and ultimately  farm profits.
Crops  for which  summaries  of Irish research  results  will be presented  in this paper  include  
forage  maize,  whole-crop  cereal  silage  (wheat,  barley  and triticale),  whole-crop  fodder  beet 
silage  and red clover.
Maize  silage
High dry matter  (DM) yields  are necessary  in order  to provide  feedstuff,  and ultimately  
meat,  at a competitive  cost. A target  of 13t DM/ha  harvested  whole-crop  forage  maize  in 
the absence  of plastic  mulch  (15.5  tDM/ha,  or higher,  where  plastic  mulch  is used)  is ap­
propriate  for crops  to compete  economically  with good grass  silage.
Excellent  quality  is essential  if there  is to be a consistent  economic  benefit  over  good  grass  
silage. Any potential  superiority  in the nutritive  quality  of maize  silage  is driven  mainly  by 
its content  of starch,  and thus of grain. Good  quality  crops  will have half of their harvested
44
DM contributed  by well-filled  cobs (i.e. grain + rachis)  with the remainder  coming  from the 
stover. Thus,  target  harvested  whole-crop  DM concentration  should  be 30% DM with a cor­
responding  starch  concentration  above  25% of the DM. The cobs themselves  should  have 
reached  50% DM. Since the  stover  accounts  for half of the harvested  DM, its quality  is also 
important.  The data in Figure  1 show  a major  decline  in stover  digestibility  (DMD)  as the 
crop matures.  Consequently,  It is important  to balance  achieving  optimal  yield and cob 
development  without  over-delaying  harvesting  to the  point  where  stover  digestibility  has de­
clined  excessively.
Conservation  losses  Include  physical  and respiration  (I.e. ‘heating ’) wastage  during  silo 
filling, losses  via effluent  or fermentation  during  ensilage,  and respiration  or physical  
wastage  again  at feedout.  The target  with maize  silage  is to restrict  these  losses  to about  
12% of the harvested  DM.
The ensiled  forage  needs  to be immediately  and perfectly  sealed  using two sheets  of 
0.125mm  black polythene  sheeting,  a complete  covering  of tyres and the edges  well 
weighted  down with silt, sandbags,  etc. Rapid  sealing  of ensiled  maize  is one important  
component  of the management  practices  that can help reduce  the risk of aerobic  deterio ­
ration (i.e. heating)  at feedout.
All silages  are inherently  unstable  when exposed  to air at feedout,  and a considerable  
range  in stability  occurs  within  silages  made  from any particular  crop species.  However, 
across  a series  of experiments  at Grange,  maize  silage  was In general  more  prone  to aer­
obic deterioration than  grass  or whole-crop  cereal  silages.  Thus,  the operator  must  demon ­
strate  excellent  management  of the maize  silage  face during  feedout  and subsequently  of 
the silage  in the feed trough.  The emphasis  must be on successfully  minimising  the dura ­
tion of exposure  of silage  to air. In most cases  good management  practices  will be ade­
quate  to limit the scale  of aerobic  deterioration,  although  in some  cases  specific  additives  
may be of assistance.
Experiments  with maize  silage  have shown  its nutritive  value  for beef cattle range  from 
being inferior  to good grass  silage  (Table  1), to being  superior  (Table  2). Thus, highly  di­
gestible  maize  silage  of high grain (i.e. starch)  content  can support  rates of carcass  gain 
by beef cattle that are superior  to what are achieved  with good grass silage,  but with a 
somewhat  lower  efficiency  of converting  ingested  forage  DM to carcass.  Similarly,  diets  
based  on ad libitum  access  to maize  silage  supplemented  with 3kg concentrates  daily  sup­
ported  live- and carcass-weight  gains  by cattle  of 84 - 86% and 83 - 91 %, respectively,  of 
diets based  on ad libitum  concentrates  (+ 1kg forage  DM daily),  and with total DM intakes  
at 94 - 97% of the high-concentrate  diet (Tables  6 and 7).
45
Figure  1. Patterns  of change  in yieid, piant  components  and plant  constituents  as 
forage  maize  matures  during  autumn  2002 (Little  et al., 2005a,c)
Cob digestibiliity (DMD;  g/kg)
31-Aug 10-Sep  20-Sep  30-Sep  10-Oct 20-Oct 30-Oct  09-Nov  19-Nov  
Harvest  date
Stover  digestibility  (DMD;  g/kg)
750 -
D 700 ' 
M
D 650 1
550 ■ 
500 -
31-Aug 10-Sep  20-Sep  30-Sep  10-Oct 20-Oct 30-Oct  09-Nov  19-Nov  
Harvest  date
Crop  digestibility  (DMD;  g/kg)
Harvest  date
There  was a slight  trend  towards  a higher  carcass  gain by cattle  offered  a mixture  of grass  
and maize  silages  compared  to the calculated  estimate  based  on their performance  when  
offered  either  silage  alone. However,  the data in Tables  1 and 2 do not indicate  that a sig­
nificant  synergistic  benefit  is necessarily  obtained  by cattle offered  a mixture  of grass + 
maize  silages  relative  to the average  of animals  offered  grass  silage  or maize  silage  alone.
46
Table 1. Intake,  performance  and feed conversion  efficiency  for maize  silage  (low 
starch  content)
% grass  silage  inmix with maize
100 67 33 0
Silage  DM intake  (kg/day) 6.1 7.2 7.1 6.1
Liveweight  gain (g/day) 1385 1384 1371 1068
Carcass  weight  gain (g/day) 870 829 745 633
Kill-out  rate (g/kg liveweight) 526 520 509 515
Kidney  & channel  fat weight  (kg)
Feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)12.2 10.8 10.7 9.7
Dietary  DM intake/livewt.  gain 6.3 7.0 7.0 8.1
Dietary  DM intake/carcass  gain 10.0 11.8 12.8 13.5
(Well preserved  unwilled  grass silage  of DMD = 74.6%;  Hf. X Fr. steers  with starting  liveweight  of 481kg  
offered  3kg concentrates  per head daily for 87 days) (O'Kiely  and Moloney,  1995b)
Table  2. Intake,  performance  and feed conversion  efficiency  for maize  silage  (high  
starch  content)
% grass  silage  in mix with maize
100 50 0
Silage  DM intake  (kg/day) 5.1 6.8 6.8
Liveweight  gain (g/day) 846 950 979
Carcass  weight  gain (g/day) 653 698 737
Kill-out  rate (g/kg liveweight) 552 548 554
Kidney  & channel  fat weight  (kg)
Feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)13.8 12.8 12.2
Dietary  DM intake/livewt.  gain 9.4 10.2 9.9
Dietary  DM intake/carcass  gain 12.0 13.6 13.0
(Well preserved  unwilted  grass silage  of DMD = 74.4%;  Char. X heifers  with starling  liveweight  of 443kg  
offered  3kg concentrates  per head daily for 170 days) (O'Kiely  and Moloney,  2000b).
Research  at Grange  indicates  that, relative  to grass  silage,  maize  silage  produced  a 
whiter  carcass  fat but a similar  colour  for lean tissue  when  both silage  types  were com­
pared under  similar  conditions.  Both silages  had similar  direct  effects  on meat  tough ­
ness when  compared  at similar  carcass  weight  (Keady,  2005; Little et al., 2005a,b,c;  
Moloney  etal., 1999,2000;  Muck  and O’Kiely, 1992; O'Kiely,  1998; O’Kiely and Moloney, 
1995b,2000a;  O’Kiely  et al., 1998; O’Kiely  and Muck, 1992; Walsh  et al., 2005a,b;  Walsh  
etal., 2006).
Whole-crop  cereal  silaoe
Issues  relating  to target  yield,  quality  and conservation  losses  for whole-crop  cereal  (small  
grain cereals  - wheat/barley/triticale)  are similar  to those  for maize  silage. Target  yields  
should  be those  relevant  to commercial  grain production  (e.g. lOt winter  wheat  grain or 7t 
spring  barley grain  per ha) with target  qualities  depending  on half of the harvested  crop DM 
being in the grain. The digestibility  of the remaining  half of the crop (straw  + chaff)  will 
clearly  influence  quality  (i.e. feed value).
Experiments  with whole-crop  cereal  silage  conserved  using  conventional  technologies  in­
dicate  that;
47
• Whole-crop  cereal  silage  is made  from autumn  or spring  sown crops  such as wheat, 
barley,  oats or triticale  (a hybrid  of wheat  and rye), and is harvested  at a more mature 
growth  stage  than arable  silage. Unlike  arable  silage,  it is not usually  undersown  with 
grass. It is grown  as for high yielding  commercial  grain production  using best tillage  
practices,  and has conventionally  been harvested  at DM concentrations  between  35 
and 60%. In different  countries,  different  practices  have developed  for how to ensile 
such crops,  and new technologies  for conserving  these  crops  are still being  developed.
The relatively  high DM concentration  ensures  that there will be no effluent  and that 
preservation  should  be straightforward.  The same requirements  for rapid filling and 
perfect  sealing  of silos hold as described  for forage  maize. Additionally,  whole-crop  
cereal  silage  needs  to be protected  from wildlife  such as birds, rodents,  etc. - this can 
sometimes  be quite a challenge.
• Harvesting  should  not take place until after the cereal  grain has progressed  beyond  
the milky-ripe  growth  stage - until it has at least reached  the soft-cheddar  consistency  
(i.e. above  35% DM) (Table  3).
• Crop  nutritive  value  is effectively  constant  from the ‘soft-cheddar ’ stage  until the cereal 
grain has reached  the hard-cheddar  consistency  (approx.  55% DM) - this is a window  
of almost  three  weeks  (Tables  4 and 5).
• No consistent  benefit  (and sometimes  disadvantages)  accrues  from treating  the crop 
with urea (i.e. using conventional  technologies).  The attractions  of urea are that it in­
creases  crop crude  protein  content,  restricts  mould  growth  at feedout  and has the po­
tential  to upgrade  fibrous  feed (alkali  effect). If used, it should  be applied  only to crops  
above  50% DM. If urea  is applied  to crops  of 40% DM, intake  and animal  performance  
may well be reduced  (possibly  severely)  (Tables  3 and 4).
Table  3. Whole-crop  barley  (WCB)  or wheat  (WCW)  silage  offered  to beef  cattle  sup­
plemented  with concentrates
Dry matter  
content  (%)Silage  DM 
intake  (kq/day)Liveweight  
gain (q/day)Carcass  
gain (q/day)
Experiment  1 (WCB)
Grain  milky ripe 26 - 617 292
Grain  mealy  ripe 35 - 869 442
Experiment  2 (WCB)
No additive 34 6.6 1166 629
Urea 36 5.8 1140 634
Experiment  3 (WCB)
No additive 46 6.8 712 374
Urea 48 7.9 783 477
Experiment  4 (WCW)
No additive 43 3.8 645 -
Urea  - low rate 39 3.2 509 -
Urea  - high rate 45 2.6 362 -
Grass  silage 22 3.7 719 -
(Exp. 1: Fr. steers  with starting  liveweight  of 502kg  offered  1.75kg  concentrate/hd/d  for 95 
days; Exp. 2: Hf. X heifers  with starting  liveweight  of 323kg  offered  2.9kg  concentrate/hd/d
48
for 101 days; Exp. 3: Hf. X heifers  with starting  liveweight  of 347kg  offered  1kg concen ­
trate/hd/d  for 84 days; Exp. 4; Char. X heifers  with starting  liveweight  of 230kg  offered  2kg 
concentrate/hd/d  for 112 days; Exp. 4; Well preserved  unwilted  grass silage  of DMD = 
74.2%;  Hf X Fr steers  with starting  liveweight  of 433kg  offered  3kg concentrate/hd/d  for 
170 days)  (O’Kiely and Moloney,  1995a).
Table 4. Intake,  performance  and feed conversion  efficiency  for whole-crop  wheat  
(modest  grain  yield)
Crop DM%  at harvestWhole-crop  wheat  silage
35% DM 50% DM Grass  silage
Additive  applied Alone Alone Urea
Silage  DM intake  (kg/day) 5.14 5.76 5.45 4.98
Liveweight  gain (g/day) 889 921 894 1051
Carcass  gain (g/day) 575 577 529 747
Kill-out  rate (g/kg liveweight) 529 524 515 552
Kidney  & channel  fat weight  (kg)
Feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)10.0 9.5 10.3 11.1
Dietary  DM intake/livewt.  gain 9.0 9.2 9.3 7.3
Dietary  DM intake/carcass  gain 13.7 14.8 15.8 10.2
(Well preserved  unwilted  grass silage  of DMD = 75.2%;  Char X heifers  with starting  liveweight  of 440kg  
offered  3kg concentrate/hd/d  for 161 days) (O'Kiely  and Moloney,  1999b).
Table 5. Intake,  performance  and feed conversion  efficiency  for whole-crop  wheat  
(good  grain  yield)
%
grass
silage% GS with whole-  
crop wheat  ensiled  
at 36%DM% GS with whole  
crop wheat  ensiled  
at 51% DM plus 
urea
100 67 33 0 67 33 0
Intake  (kg silage  DM/day) 4.81 5.35 6.27 6.33 6.26 6.01 5.96
Liveweight  gain (g/day) 866 941 1019 987 1031 968 869
Carcass  gain (g/day) 596 684 706 695 710 711 636
Kill-out  rate (g/kg liveweight) 534 539 534 534 533 542 537
Kidney  & channel  fat weight  (kg) 
Feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)11.4 9.4 10.7 9.3 8.5 9.0 10.5
Dietary  DM intake/carcass  gain 12.6 11.7 12.8 13.1 12.5 12.4 13.7
Well preserved  unwilted  grass silage  of DMD = 73.2%;  Cont. X heifers  with starting  liveweight  of 426kg
offered  3kg concentrates  per head daily for 142 days (O'Kiely  and Moloney,  2002).
• The nutritive  value  of whole-crop  cereal  silage  for beef cattle  can range  from being in­
ferior  to good grass  silage  (Table  4) to being  superior  (Table  5), with the difference  in 
nutritive  value relativity  being predominantly  determined  by the content  of developed  
grain. The digestibility  of the straw  component  of the crop is also important.  However, 
the proportion  of grain in the crop will have a major  bearing  on whole-crop  nutritive  
value,  and higher  grain yields  and/or  lower  yields  of harvested  straw  can influence  this. 
Excellent  whole-crop  cereal  can have nutritive  value very similar  to maize  silage,  but 
probably with  a somewhat  inferior  feed conversion  efficiency  (Tables  6 and 7). Further ­
more,  winter  wheat  and spring  barley,  both at approximately  50% grain in the harvested  
DM, can have a similar  (and excellent)  nutritive  value (Table  7).
49
Table  6. Feed DM intake,  growth,  kill-out  proportion  and feed conversion  efficiency  
(FCE)  for grass,  maize  and whole-crop  wheat  (WCW)  based  diets
Grass Maize Fermented Alkalage Ad lib.
silage silage WCW WCW Cones.
Forage  DM intake  (kg/d) 4.54 6.75 7.07 7.56 0.95
Total DM intake  (kg/d) 7.07 9.27 9.59 10.06 9.86
Liveweight  gain (g/d) 802 1200 1149 1132 1302
Carcass  gain (g/d) 479 776 723 686 851
Carcass  weight  (kg) 290 335 329 321 348
Kill-out  (g/kg) 523 547 539 532 551
FCE (kg DM fntake/kg  carcass  gain) 1 15.2 12.1 13.5 14.8 11.9
Unwilted  grass silage of DMD = 67.4%;  Cont. Xsteers with starting  liveweight  of 424kg offered  3kg
concentrates  per head daily for 160 days (Walsh  etal., 2005a).
Table  7. Feed DM intake,  growth,  kill-out  (KO) proportion,  carcass  and fat scores  and
feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)  for maize  and whole-crop  cereal  silages
Maize Fermented  Fermented Fermented  Fermented Ad lib.
silage WCW HCW WCB HCB Cones.
Forage  DM intake  (kg/d) 6.58 7.22 7.08 7.21 6.82 1.29
Total DM intake  (kg/d) 9.21 9.84 9.71 9.84 9.44 9.51
Liveweight  gain (g/d) 1235 1254 1237 1151 1208 1473
Carcass  gain (g/d)' 781 741 758 736 780 939
Carcass  weight  (kg) 344 338 341 337 344 366
Kill out (g/kg) 541 529 535 541 545 549
Kidney  & channel  fat (kg) 9.03 9.53 10.21 8.55 9.32 9.26
Conformation  score^ 3.27 2.80 3.00 3.00 2.93 3.30
Fat score® 3.14 3.31 3.19 3.11 3.41 3.55
FCE'' 12.0 13.5 13.1 13.6 12.4 10.3
' Assuming  an initial KO rate of 50%; ’IBased  on E;=5, U=4, R=3, 0=2, P=1; "Based  on 1=1, 2=2, 3=3,
4L=3.7,  4H=4.3,  5=5; ’Feed conversion  efficiency  expressed  as kg DM intake/kg  carcass  gain; WCW  = 
whoie-crop  wheat;  FICW = head-cut  wheat;  WCB = whoie-crop  barley;  FICB = head-cut  barley;  Cont. X 
steers  with starting  iiveweight  of 438kg  offered  3kg concentrates  per head daily for 160 days (Walsh  et 
al., 2006).
• It can be speculated  that allowing  the crop ripen so that crop DM concentrations  in­
crease  beyond  60% DM would  allow grain nutritive  value to increase.  However,  this 
would  produce  grain that if not processed,  would  be more likely  to pass  through  the an­
imal undigested  (thereby  significantly  reducing  effective  nutritive  value). Furthermore,  
the straw  component  of this more  mature  crop can be expected  to have diminished  di­
gestibility  (further  decreasing  nutritive  value). Such  a crop should  benefit  from its grain  
being  processed,  with an accompanying  urea/urease  treatment  increasing  the overall  
concentration  of crude  protein,  inhibiting  potential  mould  activity  and possibly  contribut ­
ing to upgrading  the fibre fraction  of the harvested  crop. The comparison  of 'Fermented  
WCW ’ and ‘Alkalage  WCW'  shown  in Table  6 involved  the same  crop of winter  wheat  
being  cut to the same  stubble  height  when the crop was at 40% DM and again three  
weeks  later  when  at 71% DM. The later harvested  grain was processed  at harvesting  
and the crop treated  with a urea-based  additive.  The results  in Table  6 show  a relatively  
similar  nutritive  value  for the 'Fermented  WCW ’ and the 'Alkalage  WCW ’ when  offered  
to finishing  beef steers.
50
• Raising  the cutting  height  of a crop (i.e. higher  stubble)  should  shift the balance  be­
tween  grain and straw+chaff  towards  grain, thereby  increasing  silage  nutritive  value.  
However,  in an experiment  (Table  7) where  the cutting  height  of winter  wheat  (67cm  
plant height)  was 12 (WCW)  or 29 (HCW)  cm and of spring  barley  (71 cm plant  height)  
was 13 (WCB)  or 30 (HCB)  cm, there  was no significant  impact  on animal  productivity  
of elevating  cutting  height  - presumably  in these  cases  cutting  height  needed  to be el­
evated  further  before  a significant  response  could be measured.
• Similarly,  diets based  on ad libitum  access  to fermented  whole-crop  cereal  silage  sup­
plemented  with 3kg concentrates  daily, supported  live- and carcass-weight  gains by 
cattle of 82 - 88%  and 79 - 81 %, respectively,  of diets based  on ad libitum  concentrates  
(+ 1kg forage  DM daily),  and with total DM intakes  at 97 -103% of the high-concentrate  
diet (Tables  6 and 7).
• Whole-crop  wheat  or barley  silages  should  ideally  be produced  from crops  that are be­
tween  40 - 45% DM. The target  is to have approximately  50% grain in a crop that has 
12cm stubble,  giving  starch  content  in excess  of 20% of the crop DM. Conservation  
losses  should  be limited  to a target  of 12% of harvested  DM, producing  aerobically  sta­
ble silage  with negligible  mould  presence.
• The data in Table  5 suggest  that a synergistic  benefit  can be obtained  by cattle  offered  
a mixture  of grass  + whole-crop  cereal  silages  relative  to the average  of animals  offered  
grass  silage  or whole-crop  cereal  silage  alone.
• Research  by Moloney  at Grange  indicated  that, relative  to grass or maize  silages,  
whole-crop  (small  grain)  cereal  silage  produced  a whiter  carcass  fat but a similar  colour  
for lean tissue  when all silage  types were compared  under  similar  conditions.  Each 
silage  had similar  direct  effects  on meat  toughness  when  compared  at similar  carcass  
weight (Keady,  2005; Moloney  and O’Kiely, 1994,1997;  O'Kiely and Moloney,  
1991,1995a,1999b,2000b,2002;  Walsh  etal., 2005a,b;  Walsh  et al., 2006).
Whole-crop  fodder  beet silaoe
Fodder  beet roots and leaves  have a high nutritive  value,  and data have previously  been 
published  on the nutritive  value  of each of these. Both leaves  and roots  can be ensiled  to­
gether  to produce  silage  of high nutritive  value  (Table  8). A whole-crop  fodder  beet silage  
based  diet can support  carcass  gains  that are 89% that of animals  on ad libitum  concen ­
trates  (albeit  with an 18% poorer  feed DM conversion  efficiency).  Whole-crop  fodder  beet 
can produce  large volumes  of relatively  high quality  (i.e. energy)  effluent  when  ensiled,  but 
this can be largely  retained  within  the silo by using sufficient  absorbent.  Thus,  when dry 
beet pulp nuts were  ensiled  with whole-crop  fodder  beet at 159kg/tonne,  effluent  output  de­
clined  from 419 to 1221/tonne  while  carcass  gain was not altered  (Table  9). (Moloney  and 
O'Kiely,  1999; O’Kiely  and Moloney  1999a;  O’Kiely et al., 1993).
51
Table  8. Feed DM intake,  growth,  kill-out  (KO)  proportion,  carcass  and fat scores  and 
feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)  for grass  and whole-crop  fodder  beet silages
Grass  silage WCFB  silage Ad lib. concentrates
WCFB  silage  DM intake  (kg/d) 0 8.5 0
Grass  silage  DM Intake  (kg/day) 5.6 1.2 1.3
Concentrate  DM intake  (kg/day) 3.5 0.9 8.8
Total DM Intake  (kg/d) 9.1 10.6 10.1
Liveweight  gain (g/d) 906 1084 1255
Carcass  gain (g/d) ’ 694 773 870
Carcass  weight  (kg) 306 316 326
Kill out (g/kg) 536 533 534
Kidney  & channel  fat (kg) 14.3 14.1 13.8
Conformation  score^ 2.4 2.4 2.7
Fat score ’^ 3.3 3.3 3.7
FCE" 13.1 13.7 11.6
' Assuming  an initial KO rale of 48.5%; 'Based  on E=5, U=4, R=3, 0=2, P='1; "Based  on 1=1, 2=2, 3=3,
4L=3.7,  4H=4.3,  5=5; Feed conversion  efficiency  expressed  as kg DM intake/kg  carcass  gain: WCFB  = 
whole-crop  fodder  beet; Fr. steers  with starting  liveweight  of 469kg  for a duration  of 118 days (O’Kiely and
Moloney,  1999a).
Table  9. Feed  DM intake,  growth,  kill-out  (KO)  proportion,  carcass  and fat scores  and
feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)  for whole-crop  fodder  beet silage
Untreated  
WCFB  ^ 
silageAbsorbent-treated  WCFB Ad lib.
silage concentrates
Unsupplemented  3 kg meals
WCFB  silage  DM intake  (kg/d) 6.20 9.22 6.70 0
Grass  silage  DM intake  (kg/day) 1.18 1.18 1.18 1.24
Concentrate  DM intake  (kg/day) 2.62 0 2.62 9.54
Total DM intake  (kg/d) 10.0 10.4 10.5 10.8
Liveweight  gain (g/d) 1062 1219 1286 1327
Carcass  gain (g/d) ’ 818 830 916 983
Carcass  weight  (kg) 375 374 384 390
Kill-out  (g/kg) 569 557 565 571
Kidney  & channel  fat (kg) 15.9 16.2 17.4 15.4
FCE^ 12.2 12.5 11.1 11.0
Assuming  an initial KO rate of 53%: Feed conversion  efficiency  expressed  as kg DM intake/kg  carcass  
gain; WCFB  = whole-crop  fodder  beet; Fr. steers  with starting  liveweight  of 554kg  for a duration  of 99 
days (O'Kiely  etal., 1993).
Red clover
Red clover  is considered  a short-lived  perennial  herbage  legume  that can be highly  pro­
ductive  for two to three  years,  and whose  upright  growth  habit makes  it particularly  suited 
for hay and silage  making.  Since  permanent  grassland  dominates  most  ruminant  systems  
in Ireland,  the important  target  for red clover  Is to greatly  improve  its persistence  and thus 
its potential  contribution  to feed supply.  An ongoing  experiment  is quantifying  the impacts  
of cultivar,  companion  grass,  harvest  schedule  and nitrogen  (N) fertiliser  on crop yield and 
digestibility  over several  years.
52
Two cultivars  (Merviot  and Ruttinova)  were  sown  in monoculture  (15kg  seed/ha)  or in a bi­
nary mixture  with perennial  ryegrass  (cv. Greengold)  (10kg  red clover  + 10kg perennial  rye­
grass seed/ha)  in August  2001. They received  0 or 50kg inorganic  N fertiliser/ha  each 
March  and had a first-cut  harvest  date of late May or mid-June.  Sequential  harvests  fol­
lowed  each  first cut, with a total of four harvests  per system  completed  by early  December.  
Simultaneously,  monoculture  plots of perennial  ryegrass  (cv. Greengold;  30kg seed/ha)  
received  0, 50, 100 or 150kg  inorganic  N/ha in mid-March  and immediately  after the first 
three harvests,  with simiiar  harvest  dates  to the red clover.
Towards  the end of the fifth season  since  reseeding,  red clover  still dominates  some  treat ­
ments  while in others  it has long disappeared.  Factors  favouring  the persistence  of red 
clover  include  no application  of inorganic  N in March  and a first-cut  harvest  date in late May 
rather  than mid-June.  Furthermore,  the binary  mixture  with grass  resulted  in an improved  
annual  yield and digestibility  compared  to sowing  red clover  as a monoculture.  In the first 
year after reseeding,  the red clover  + grass  swards  that received  no inorganic  N fertiliser  
and had a first-cut  harvest  date in late May, had an annual  DM yield (13.2 t/ha) that was 
136 and 86% of perennial  ryegrass  monocultures  that received  an annual  input  of inorganic  
N fertiliser  of 0 and 360kg  N/ha, respectively.  The corresponding  values  in the third year 
(16.4  tonnes  DM/ha)  were 167 and 95% (O’Kiely et al., 2006).
Conserving  and feeding  high-moisture  grain
Cereal  grains  of less than 14% moisture  can be safely  stored  for an extended  duration.  As 
grain moisture  content  rises  the duration  of safe storage  becomes  shorter  and the require ­
ment  for aeration  initially  and then for drying  or other  preservation  treatment  progressively  
increases.  Alternative  technologies  used in recent  years  facilitate  systems  of successfully  
conserving  grain harvested  at up to greater  than 40% moisture.
Balance  of yield & quality
One important  issue when considering  the different  options  for conserving  grain is how 
does  the stage  of ripening  at harvest  influence  grain  yield and quality.  During  two seasons,  
crops  of winter  wheat,  barley  and triticale  were grown  and harvested  at a series  of stages  
from above  40% to under  20% moisture.  The results  are summarised  in Figures  2 - 4. 
For each cereal,  the fresh  yield of grain declined  with advancing  ripening,  reflecting  the dis­
appearance  of water  from the mature  grain  as it dried. However,  if the grain yield at each 
stage of ripening  is expressed  with its water  content  excluded,  then the resultant  yield of 
grain dry matter  (DM) was constant.  Physiological  maturity  is the point at which grains  
reach  their maximum  dry weight,  so clearly  each of the crops  summarised  in Figures  2-4 
had reached  physiological  maturity  prior  to the commencement  of the study. Consequently, 
it is important  to recognise  that the yield of fresh grain is not a helpful  indicator  of the 
amount of feedstuff  produced,  whereas  the yield of harvested  grain DM is very important.
53
Figures  2-4. Changes  in grain yield and quality  as cereals  ripen (Stacey  et al., 
2002,  2003)
The ripening  process  from above  40% to below  20% moisture  took from 10 to 22 days,  de­
pending  on the crop and on prevailing  weather  conditions.  Thus,  daily  drying  rates ranged  
between  a decrease  of 0.9 to 2.9 percentage  units of moisture  per day. In addition,  grain  
drying  rates also varied  within individual  days. This means  that frequent  monitoring  of 
grain moisture  content  is required  if farmers  wish to harvest  at a target  moisture  content,  
and the duration  for which  this target  moisture  content  is maintained  can be relatively  short.
In general,  measurements  of grain nutritive  value  such as digestibility  (organic  matter  di­
gestibility  - OMD),  starch,  protein  and ash were relatively  constant  during  the ripening 
process  from above  40% to below  20% moisture.  The values  for OMD and starch  can be 
seen in Figs. 2 - 4. Measurements  of ensilability,  including  sugar  content  and buffering  ca­
pacity,  indicated  that the various  moist  grains  investigated  were  likely  to preserve  satisfac ­
torily  were they to be ensiled  (e.g. crimped  grain).
Only in the case of barley  when it reached  14-17%  moisture  was there any apparent  loss
54
of grain prior to harvesting.  Once  the settings  on the combine  harvester  and its forward  
speed  are set appropriately,  grain losses  during  harvesting  of each of the cereals  should  
be similar  to the values  achieved  when harvesting  conventionally  dry grain. Thus;
• Under  the prevailing  conditions,  wheat,  barley  and triticale  probably  reached  physiolog ­
ical maturity  when  their grains  are somewhere  around  40-50%  moisture  content.
• Beyond  this point  DM yields  and grain  nutritive  value  are usually  constant,  at least  until 
the ripening  grain become  very dry.
• There  is a 1 -3 week  time interval  between  around  40% and 20% moisture,  during  which  
farmers  can select  from among  alternative  grain conservation  strategies  in the knowl ­
edge that grain DM yield and quality  are not changing.
• However,  since  the rate of drying  can vary both across  days and within  days,  frequent  
monitoring  and timely  harvesting  are required  if crops  are to be harvested  at a target  
moisture  content.  This can have implications  for the grain conservation  strategy  cho­
sen, as individual  conservation  systems  have preferred  moisture  contents  at which  
they are operated
Finishing  beef cattle
Farmers  thinking  of using alternative  techniques  for preserving  and processing  cereal  
grains  destined  for feeding  to beef  cattle  need  to know  how  the feeding  value  of such grains  
compare  with grains  conserved  using  more  conventional  techniques.  To answer  this ques ­
tion, finishing  continental  crossbred  steers  were offered  a low digestibility  grass  silage  
alone  or with wheat-based  concentrates  at the equivalent  (standardised  for moisture  con­
tent) of 3 (low) or 6 (high)  kg/head/day,  or ad libitum,  for 144 days. Wheat  had been ei­
ther:
harvested  at 30%  moisture,  crimped  (i.e. rolled),  treated  with a mixture  of organic  acids  and 
ensiled  (‘Crimped  & ensiled ’).
harvested  at 26% moisture,  treated  with urea solution  and stored  under  plastic  sheeting.  
This was offered  whole  (i.e. unrolled)  (‘Urea-whole ’).
harvested  at 16% moisture,  treated  with propionic  acid and rolled before  feeding.  This 
was considered  the ‘Conventional ’ or reference  treatment.
The ‘Crimped  & ensiled ’, ‘Urea-whole ’ and ‘Conventional ’ wheat  had pH values  4.3, 9.3 and 
4.8, respectively,  and corresponding  crude  protein  values  of 11.6, 14.5 and 11.1%  of the 
DM.
The results  are summarised  in Table 10.
55
Table 10. Feed intake,  growth  rate and faecal  starch  for steers  offered  alternative  
forms  of conserved  wheat  grain
Diet
Grass
silageCrimped  & 
ensiledUrea-whole Conventional
Wheat  level 0 Low MedAd
lib.Low MedAd
lib.Low MedAd
lib.
Dry matter  intake
Silage  (kg/ day) 7.4 5.3 3.7 1.3 5.9 4.6 1.5 5.8 3.9 1.2
Wheat  (kg/day) 0 2.5 4.9 7.8 2.4 4.8 8.3 2.4 4.9 8.2
Liveweight  gain 
(g/day)
Kill-out  (g/kg)101 684 887 983 612 724 843 650 868104
3
484 503 502 516 495 502 501 493 511 520
Carcass  gain 
rn/rlav164 421 517 629 351 433 491 362 545 676
Faeces
Starch,  % DM <1 1 1.5 3.1 5.1 9.9 11.8 1 1.4 2.0
A/ell preserved,  unwilted  stemmy  (67.9%  DMD) silage; Fr. Steers  with mean starting  
iveweight  of 518kg,  offered  diets over duration  of 144 days (Stacey  etal., 2005).
Cattle  offered  grass silage  without  supplementation  had the highest  intake  of silage 
DM but the lowest  live- and carcass-weight  gains.
Increasing  levels of wheat  consumption  progressively  reduced  silage  DM intake,  but in­
creased  both live- and carcass-weight  gains.
• Cattle  offered  ‘Crimped  & ensiled'  and ‘Conventional'  wheat  had similar  silage  intakes,  
live- and carcass-weight  gains.
• Cattle  offered  ‘Crimped  & ensiled ’ and ‘Conventional ’ wheat  consumed  less grass silage  
than cattle  offered  ‘Urea-whole ’ wheat,  but had higher  live- and carcass-weight  gains.
For steers offered  wheat  ad libitum,  grain DM intake  was lower  with ‘Crimped  & ensiled ’ 
wheat  than with ‘Conventional ’ or ‘Urea-whole ’ wheat.
• Cattle  offered  ‘Urea-whole ’ grain had the highest  amount  of starch  in their faeces,  in­
dicating  considerable  loss of undigested  grains.
Muscle  redness  was similar  for cattle  offered  each of the three  forms  of wheat.
• Fat was more  yellow  when  cattle were  offered  ‘Urea-whole ’ compared  to ‘Crimped  & en­
siled ’ wheat.
Thus:
‘Crimped  & ensiled ’ could replace  ‘Conventional ’ grain in the ration of finishing  cattle  
without  compromising  performance  or meat colour,  provided  conservation  losses  for 
both forms  of wheat  were properly  restricted.
56
• The large faecal  losses  of undigested  grains  resulted  in lower  growth  rates  by cattle  of­
fered 'Urea-whole'  wheat,  and this loss in gain got bigger  as its inclusion  rate in the 
diet increased  (Keady  etal., 2005; Stacey  etal., 2002, 2003a,b, 2005).
Alternative  forages  to grass  for grazing
The primary  emphasis  when  feeding  cattle  in most  Irish beef  production  systems  is to max­
imise  the quantity  of grazed  grass  that can be sensibly  consumed  within  sustainable  sys­
tems. However,  grass  growth  is seasonal,  with relatively  little growth  occurring  at soil 
temperatures  below  6°C. In contrast,  some  brassicas  and forage  cereals  can grow  at lower  
temperatures  than this, and produce  relatively  high yields  during  the winter  period.
Whilst  there  has been no recent  Irish research  on alternative  crops  as winter-feed  for graz­
ing beef  cattle,  ongoing  work  at Teagasc  Moorepark  is evaluating  rape, stubble  turnips  and 
forage  oats within dairy systems.  Researchers  sowed  forage  rape (cv. Stego;  6.5kg  
seed/ha)  on 3 sowing  dates  (1,15  and 31 August)  and on each occasion  applied  4 rates  
of inorganic  N fertiliser  (0, 40, 80 and 120kg  N/ha). A second  forage  rape (cv. Swift)  was 
sown at 6.5kg seed/ha  on the 15 August  with an application  of 80kg N/ha. Stubble  turnip  
cultivars  (Delilah,  Barkant,  Samson  and Tyfon)  were  sown (6.5kg  seed/ha)  on two sowing  
dates  (1 and 15 August)  with 80kg N/ha. On the 15 August,  two forage  oat cultivars  (Stam ­
pede and Hokonui)  were sown at a seeding  rate of lOOkg/ha,  with 80kg N/ha applied.  
Each forage  was harvested  either  on 1 December  2005 or 1 February  2006.
To date, Keogh  et al., (2006)  have shown  (Table  11 and Figure  5):
• Winter  harvestable yields of 2.8 to 4.9 tonnes  DM/ha  were  achieved.  Differences  in har- 
vestable  DM yield occurred  between  forages,  and between  cultivars  within  forages.  
The authors  concluded  that the yields  achieved  were adequate  to support  In situ graz­
ing during  the winter.
• The relativities  of the differences  between  forages  and cultivars  changed  considerably  
between  1 December  and 1 February.  Thus,  some  forages  or cultivars  appeared  more  
suited  than others  for providing  forage  early or alternatively  late in the winter.
• An interaction  was found between  N level and sowing  date of forage  rape (Stego)  - 
there  was an increase  of 17.3 and 10.4kg  DM/ha/day  for every 1kg increase  in N ap­
plied at the  sowing  dates  of 1 or 15 August,  respectively.  However,  no benefit  accrued  
from N applied  to crops  sown  on 31 August  (a reduction  of 1.5kg DM/ha/day  for every  
1kg increase  in N applied  was recorded).
• Sowing  date had more of an effect  on DM yield/ha  of forage  rape than N level, with a 
delay  in sowing  date beyond  the 1 August  resulting  in a reduction  of 735kg  DM/ha/week  
delay
57
Table 11. The effect  of variety  and harvest  date on total DM yield (kgDM/ha)  and 
morphological  components  of forages  sown  on the 15 Aug at 80kg N/ha
Forage CultivarHarvest
DateTotal DM 
yieldLeaf (g/g)Stem
(g/g)Dead
(g/g)
Rape Stego 1 Dec 3663 0.72 0.17 0.11
1 Feb 3295 0.67 0.21 0.12
Swift 1 Dec 3457 0.60 0.24 0.16
1 Feb 3931 0.59 0.27 0.13
Stubble  turnips Delilah 1 Dec 4930 0.27 0.68 0.04
1 Feb 4372 0.14 0.78 0.07
Barkant 1 Dec 4168 0.28 0.56 0.14
1 Feb 3628 0.20 0.60 0.18
Samson 1 Dec 3245 0.23 0.55 0.22
1 Feb 3972 0.16 0.71 0.12
Tyfon 1 Dec 3248 0.63 0.20 0.16
1 Feb 2226 0.23 0.54 0.23
Forage  oats Hokonui 1 Dec 2815 0.43 0.37 0.18
1 Feb 2827 0.31 0.37 0.31
Stampede 1 Dec 3213 0.37 0.51 0.11
1 Feb 3693 0.15 0.59 0.25
Source:  Keogh  etal.,  2006
Figure  5. Effect  of nitrogen  (N) level and sowing  date on the DM yieid  of forage  rape  
(cv. Stego)  (Keogh  et al., 2006)
6000  
5500  
5000  
4500  
4000  
M/ 3500  
ha 3000  
2500  
2000  
1500 
1000-01-Aug • 15-Aug^5^31-Aug
40 80
N Level (Kg/ha)120
In further  work, the same researchers  offered  dry spring-calving  dairy cows kale (8kg 
DM/day),  swedes  (8kg DM/day)  or grass  (12kg DM/day),  each supplemented  with 4kg 
grass  silage  DM/day,  from 1 December  until calving  (mean  of 20 February).  The grazing  
cows  utilised  approximately  84, 75 and 65% of the kale, swedes and  grass on offer, respec ­
tively. It took the cows  offered  Swedes  a considerable  period  before  they started  consum-
58
ing them (almost  3 weeks). However  once they became  adapted,  they progressed  very 
well. A fourth group  of similar  cows were accommodated  indoors  and offered  excellent  
quality  grass silage ad libitum  (approximately  77% DMD; no supplement  fed). Mean  
changes  in body  condition  score  were +0.17,  +0.16-0.23 and +0.50  for the cows  consum ­
ing kale, swedes,  grass  and silage,  respectively.  There  were no significant  carryover  ef­
fects to the subsequent  lactation  (i.e. subsequent  milk yields  did not differ).
Further  research  still needs  to be conducted  on producing  and grazing  forages  during  the 
winter,  with emphasis  on the yields  and quality  produced,  the level of intake  and perform ­
ance achieved  under  different  management  regimes,  and the implications  for farm labour, 
animal  welfare,  the environment  and compliance  with various  governmental  schemes  
(Keogh  ef a/., 2006).  ''
References
Keady,  T.W.J.  (2005).  Ensiled  maize  and whole  crop wheat  forages  for beef  and dairy  cat­
tle: effects  on animal  performance.  In: Silage  production  and utilisation  - Proceedings  of 
the XIV International  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. Park & M.D. Stronge),  July 2005,  
Belfast.  Wageningen  Academic  Publishers,  p 65 - 82.
Keady,  T.W.J. , Lively,  F.O. and Kilpatrick,  D.J. (2005). An evaluation  of grain processing  
and storage  method,  and feed level,  on the performance  and meat  quality  of beef  cattle  of­
fered two contrasting  grass  silages.  In: Silage  production  and utilisation  - Proceedings  of 
the XIV International  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. Park & M.D. Stronge),  July 2005,  
Belfast.  Wageningen  Academic  Publishers,  p 153.
Keogh,  B., French,  P, McGrath,  T. and Storey,  T. (2006).  Forages  for winter  grazing;  effect  
of N level and sowing  date. Proceedings  of the British  Grassland  Society Research  
Conference,  Royal Agricultural  College,  Cirencester,  4-6 September,  2006, p7 - 9.
Little, E.M., O'Kiely,  P, Crowley,  J.C. and Keane,  G.P (2005a).  Yield and composition  of 
forage  maize:  interaction  of harvest  date, cultivar  and plastic  mulch. Proceedings  of the 
XIV International  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. Park and M.D. Stronge),  Belfast,  3 to 6 
July 2005.  Wageningen  Academic  Publishers,  pi76.
Little, E.M., O'Kiely,  P, Crowley,  J.C. and Keane,  G.P. (2005b).  Cob development  in forage  
maize;  influence  of harvest  date, cultivar  and plastic  mulch. Proceedings  of the XIV Inter­
national  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. Park and M.D. Stronge),  Belfast,  3 to 6 July 2005. 
Wageningen  Academic  Publishers,  pi 75.
Little, E.M., O'Kiely,  R, Crowley,  J.C. and Keane,  G.P. (2005c).  Composition  of maize  
stover;  interaction  of harvest  date, plastic  mulch  and cultivar.  Proceedings  of the Agricul ­
tural Research  Forum,  Tullamore,  14 & 15 March,  2005, p76.
Moloney,  A.P, French,  R, O'Kiely,  P. and O'Riordan,  E.G. (2000). Fatty acid composition  
from beef cattle  fed pre-slaughter  rations  based  on grass  silage  or maize  silage. Journal  
of  Animal  Science,  78 (suppl.  1 )IJournai  of Dairy  Science,  83 (suppl.  1; abstract  664), pi 56.
Moloney,  A.P, Mooney,  M.T., O’Kiely, P. and Troy, D.J. (1999). Fat colour  and the quality  
of meat  from beef  cattle  offered  grass  silage  or maize  silage-based  diets. Proceedings  of 
Twelfth  International  Silage  Conference  (edited  by T. Pauly)  held at Swedish  University  of 
Agricultural  Sciences,  Uppsala,  Sweden  on 5-7 July, 309-310.
59
Moloney,  A.P. and O’Kiely, P. (1994). Influence  of growth  stage and alkali-treatment  on 
the nutritive  value  of whole  crop cereal  silage  for beef  cattle. Proceedings  of the National  
Conference  on Forage  Quality,  Evaluation  and Utilisation,  Lincoln,  Nebraska,  USA, April 
13-15,  p79.
Moloney,  A.P. and O’Kiely, P. (1997). Digestibility,  nitrogen  retention  and plasma  metabolite 
concentrations  in steers  offered  whole  crop wheat  silage-based  rations. Irish Journal  of 
Agricultural  and Food  Research,  36: 135-144.
Moloney,  A.P. and O’Kiely, P. (1999).  Rumen  and blood  variables  in steers  fed grass  silage 
or whole  crop fodder  beet silage. Animal  Feed  Science  and Technology,  18: 221-225.
Muck,  R.E. and O’Kiely, P, (1992).  Aerobic  deterioration  of lucerne  (Medicago  saliva)  and 
maize  (Zea mays)  silages  - effects  of fermentation  products.  Journal  of the Science  of 
Food  and  Agriculture,  59: 217-226.
O’Kiely, P. (1998).  A note on the conservation  characteristics  of physiologically  immature  
forage  maize  ensiled  with different  additives.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  and Food Re­
search,  37: 237-242.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney,  A.P. (1991).  Live and carcass  weight  gains  of cattle  offered  whole-  
crop barley  silage  at an immature  growth  stage. Animal  Production,  52: 605-606.  (abstract)  
[also Proceedings  of Winter  Meeting,  British  Society  of Animal  Production,  paper  149].
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney  A.P. (1995). Performance  of cattle offered  whole-crop  barley  or 
wheat  silage. Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research,  34: 13-24.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney,  A.P. (1995). Performance  of beef cattle  offered  differing  ratios  of 
grass  and maize  silage. Irish Journal  of  Agricultural  and Food  Research,  34: 76 (abstract)  
[also Proceedings  of 21st IGAPA  Research  Meeting,  p 11-12).
O’Kiely, R, and Moloney,  A.P. (1999a).  Conservation  characteristics  of ensiled  whole  crop 
fodder  beet and its nutritive  value  for beef  cattle. Irish Journal  of  Agricultural  and Food  Re­
search,  38: 25-41.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney, A.P. (1999b).  Whole  crop wheat  silage  for finishing  beef heifers. 
Abstract  in Irish Journal  of Agricultural  and Food  Research,  38: 296 [also in Proceedings  
of Agricultural  Research  Forum,  UCD Belfield,  25 and 26 March,  1999, p 243-244.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney,  A.P. (2000).  Maize  and grass  silage  for beef heifers  when  offered  
alone  or in mixtures.  Beef  from Grass  and Forage.  Proceedings  of British  Grassland  So­
ciety Conference  held atTillington  Hall, Stafford  on 21 and 22 November,  (Ed. D. Pullar), 
P117-122.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney,  A.P. (2000). Nutritive value  of whole  crop wheat  silage  for finishing  
beef heifers.  Beef  from Grass  and Forage.  Proceedings  of British  Grassland  Society  Con­
ference  held atTillington  Hall, Stafford,  21 and 22 November,  (Ed. D. Puller),  p141-145.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney,  A.P. (2002). Growth  and feed efficiency  of beef cattle offered  
whole  crop wheat  or grass  silages  alone  or in mixtures.  Proceedings  of 13'^ International  
Silage  Conference,  Scottish  Agricultural  College,  Auchincruive,  Scotland,  11 to 13 Sep­
tember,  2002, P316-317.
O’Kiely, P, Moloney,  A.P, O’Grady,  J. and Keating,  T. (1998). Comparison  of laboratory
60
methods for estimating  DMD of immature  forage  maize.  Alternative  Forages  for Ruminants  
(Ed. G.P.F.  Lane and J.M. Wilkinson),  Chalcombe  Publications,  115-118.
O’Kiely, P., Moloney,  A.P. and Rogers,  P.A.M.  (1993).  The influence  of the addition  of sug- 
arbeet  pulp as an absorbent  at ensiling  on the nutritive  value of whole-crop  fodder  beet 
silage. Proceedings  of fOth International  Silage  Conference,  Dublin  City Universitv  D 147- 
148.
O'Kiely,  P. and Muck,  R.E. (1992).  Aerobic  deterioration  of lucerne  (Medicago  sativa)  and 
maize  (Zea mays)  silages  - effects  of yeasts.  Journal  of the Science  of Food  and  Agricul ­
ture, 59: 21t-2t6.
O'Kiely,  R, O’Riordan,  E.G. and Black,  A.D. (2006). Red clover  for silage:  management  
impacts  on yield and digestibility  during  the season  after sowing. In: J.LIoveras,  A. Gon-  
zalez-Rodriquez,  O. Vazquez-Yanez,  J. Pineiro,  O. Santamaria,  L. Olea and M.J. Pobla-  
ciones  (eds) Sustainable  grassland  productivity-Proceedings  of the 2P‘ general  meeting  
of the European  Grassland  Federation,  Badajoz,  Spain.  3-6 April, 2006.  p243-245.
Stacey,  R, O’Kiely, R, Hackett,  R., Rice, B. and O’Mara F.P. (2002). Identification  of the 
optimal  harvest  stage  for cereal  grains  in order  to achieve  the best balance  between  yield 
and composition.  Proceedings  of IT International  Silage  Conference,  Scottish  Agricultural  
College,  Auchincruive,  Scotland,  11 to 13 September,  2002, p392-393.
Stacey,  R, O’Kiely, R, Moloney,  A.P. and O’Mara, FR (2005). Nutritive  value  for finishing  
beef steers  of wheat  grain conserved  by different  techniques.  Proceedings  of the 14"’ In­
ternational  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. Rark and M.D. Stronge),  Belfast,  3 to 6 July 2005  
Wageningen  Academic  Rublishers,  pi 54.
Stacey,  R, O Kiely, R, Rice, B., Hackett,  R. and O’Mara, F. (2003). Changes  in yield and 
composition  of wheat,  barley  and triticale  grains  with advancing  maturity.  Proceedings  of 
the Agricultural  Research  Forum,  Tullamore,  3-4 March,  pi 28.
Stacey,  R, O Kiely, R, Rice, B. and O’Mara,  FR. (2003).  A note on the on-farm  moist  grain  
storage  and feeding  practices  in Ireland.  Irish Journal  of  Agricultural  and Food  Research  
42:131-136.
Walsh,  K., O’Kiely, R, Moloney,  A.P. and O’Mara, FR (2005b).  Conserved  whole-crop  
wheat  and forage  maize  feeding  value  relative  to grass  silage  and ad libitum  concenrates  
for beef  cattle. Journal  of  Animal  Science,  83 (suppl. 1 ):274-275  and Journal  of Dairy  Sci­
ence, 88: 274-275.
Walsh,  K., O’Kiely, R, Moloney,  A.P. and O’Mara, FR (2005c).  The feeding  value  of con­
served whole-crop  wheat  and forage  maize  relative  to grass  silage  and ad-libitum  concen ­
trates  for beef cattle. Proceedings  of the 14'^ International  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. 
Park and M.D. Stronge),  Belfast,  3 to 6 July 2005. Wageningen  Academic  Publishers
p166.
Walsh,  K., O’Kiely, P. and O’Mara, FR (2006). Intake  and performance  of beef cattle  of­
fered conserved  whole-crop  wheat  and barley  harvested  at two cutting  heights  relative  to 
maize silage and ad-libitum  concentrates.  Proceedings  of the Agricultural  Research  
Forum,  Tullamore,  15 & 16 March,  2006, p52.
61
Irish Grassland  Association  1946-2006  - 
Delivering  the Benefits  from Grassland
Sean Flanagan
Introduction
The Irish Grassland  Association  (IGA)  is Ireland ’s leading forum  for discussing  the science  
of grass  and animai  production,  and the economics  and finances  of dairy, beef cattle  and 
sheep  production  systems.  Membership  is 800 and is a lively mix of progressive  farmers  
(70%),  research  scientists,  advisers  and agribusiness  personnel.  The IGA is a member  of 
the European  Grassland  Federation  and has close working  relationships  with the Ulster  
Grassland  Society,  Fermanagh  Grassland  Club and the British  Grassland  Society.
This paper  contains  a summary  of the Association's  objectives,  its activities  and technology  
interactions  over the decades,  and includes  the developments  described  previously  by 
O’Keeffe  (1996). It will be shown  that: (a) Research  and Development  have always  been 
core components  of IGA meetings  and, (b) the IGA has  been a significant  driving  force in 
the use of knowledge  by dairy, beef  cattle  and sheep  producers  for exploiting  grazed  grass 
as the cheapest  form of feed for ruminant  production.  In particular,  the IGA draws  heavily  
on the skills and knowledge  of scientists  at the Teagasc  research  centres,  ARINI  at Hills­
borough,  and the Plant  Testing  Station  at Crossnacreevy.
The formative  years
Following  six years  of impoverished  farming  during  World  War 2, lack of Inputs  and knowl ­
edge  were Identified  as major  constraints  limiting  successful  grassland  farming.  Basic  in­
formation  on soil fertiliser  requirements,  grass  varieties,  reseeding  and animal  nutrition  
was non-existent.  The New  Zealand  consultant,  George  Holmes,  brought  In by the Minister  
for Agriculture  James  Dillon,  concluded  that Irish grassland  in the post-war  years  was pro­
ducing  significantly  less than its potential.  However,  some  pioneering  farmers  were  gath­
ering information  to show  that Irish grassland  was capable  of producing  significantly  more  
than the limited  5 to 6 months  grazing  that was customary  at the time.
It was against  this background  that a group  of enthusiasts  held two meetings  in Dublin  in 
1946; in 84 Merrion  Square,  Dublin  on May 29 and at the Horse  Show  on July 7, and 
formed  the Irish Grassland  Association.  The group  included  progressive  farmers.  The 
O’Morchoe,  R. McCulloch  (Ballyboughal,  Dublin),  W. Bland (Laois),  H.M. Fitzpatrick,  - 
Leonard,  J. Litton,  W. Bryan  and Capt. Redmond  together  with Professors  P.J. Caffrey,  M. 
Gorman,  E.J. Sheehy  (University  College  Dublin),  and Harry  Spain  (Department  of Agricul ­
ture).
Objectives  were clearly  set:
To identify  all available  information  on grass  farming  and to help in its application  in farm 
practice.
To advance  and spread  the knowledge  of grassland  and animal  production  methods  which  
can increase  farm profits.
To provide  opportunities  for farmers,  research  workers  and advisers  to discuss  worthwhile  
developments  in research  and farm practice.
62
To publish  original  articles  or literature  on progressive  ideas for the advancement  of the 
agricultural  industry.
The founders  quickly  established  a pattern  of strong  relationships  and interactions  between  
farmers  and research  workers.  It was accepted  at the outset  that both were inter-depen ­
dant and that each  thrived  on the others ’ ability  to mutual  advantage.  This pattern  of inter­
dependence  has been a feature  of the Association ’s progress  over the decades  and 
continues  to flourish  today.
In the early years  the Association  was dependent  on research  information  from outside  
the jurisdiction.  Useful  relationships  were  established  with  Aberystwyth  (Wales),  the Grass ­
land Research  Institute  (UK), and with pioneering  work  already  underway  in Northern  Ire­
land, notably  by John Lowe. The IGA invited  leading  researchers  from these  sources  to 
its meetings.  Progress  was made by identifying  areas  of weakness  and arranging  visits  
to the limited  research  facilities  and progressive  farms. Existing  information  was of a very 
fundamental  nature. Factors  affecting  soil fertility  were scarcely  understood  and repre ­
sented  the greatest  limitation  to grass  growth.  Lime was applied  infrequently,  and clinical  
phosphate  deficiency  in cattle  existed.
Johnstown  Castle
Matters  improved  in the early 1950s  after the Department  of Agriculture  acquired  John ­
stown  Castle  In Co. Wexford.  A research  programme  was established  with objectives  cen­
tred on defining  optimum  levels of lime and fertilisers  for Irish grassland.  Production  targets  
for Irish grassland  based  on measurement  were identified  for the first time. However,  
today ’s view of grassland  being  fully integrated  in a farming  system  scarcely  existed. In 
those  early years  of the Association  there  was a tendency  to regard  good green  grass  as 
an end in itself. However,  this attitude  did not prevail  for long.
Evolution  of policy  and interests
The President  in 1952 (Edward  Richards  Orpen),  instigated  change  by developing  a new 
policy,  - that better  farming  must be measured  by the trend in net profit  on a whole-farm  
basis. Yields  per acre or per animal  were  of little interest  unless  accompanied  by improved  
net profits. In the evolution  of this policy  IGA interests  became  centred  on the inter-rela ­
tionships  of animal  and pasture  on livestock  performance.
Responding  to the change  in emphasis,  the Council  invited  authoritative  speakers  from 
overseas  institutions  to discuss  specialised  livestock  topics  - especially  dairying.  Chief  
amongst  these  were Mac Cooper  (then at Wye College  and later at Newcastle  University)  
who became  very much  part of the IGA platform;  McMeekan  from New Zealand  discussed  
low cost performance  and whole-farm  output  without  expensive  frills, and Alan Stewart  
from the Milk Marketing  Board  in England.  Stewart  told the IGA members  that looking  at 
yields of cows was not good enough  and that if progress  in A.I. breeding  was to be 
achieved,  careful  assessments  and selection  of bulls from performance  measurements  on 
their daughters  were required.  Although  the IGA had significant  impact  during  the 1950s  
in providing  knowledge  and encouragement,  it had no impact  on animal  breeding.
Uncertainties  surrounding  the conservation  of winter-feed  presented  another  bottleneck  
that bedevilled  successful  farming.  Hay making  in Irish weather  was always  unpredictable.  
Insufficient  winter  feed resulted  in animal  stress  in a bad year and produced  emaciated
63
cows on dairy farms. At an IGA meeting  Henry  Kennedy  described  the condition  as sci­
entific  starvation ’. The IGA saw the need for more and better  silage  and organised  visits 
to the early silage  making  farms  of Rob McCulloch,  Sean  O’Neill (Lurgan)  and elsewhere.  
Uptake  was hampered  by confusion  on additives  and conservation  techniques.  This situ­
ation was soon  to change,  not alone  In silage  making  but across  all sectors  of grass  farm ­
ing.
An Foras  Taluntais
Following  the establishment  of An Foras  Taluntais  (AFT)  in 1958 (for which  the IGA was a 
nominating  body),  its research  programme  under  Director  Tom Walsh  gave  a new impetus  
to Irish agriculture  that continued  into the following  decades.  The pursuit  of knowledge  
and pushing  forward  the horizons  on all sectors  of grass  farming  and ruminant  production  
was a central  feature  of the AFT programme.  For the first time, grass-based  livestock  pro­
duction  systems  were developed  based  on sound  scientific  principles  and the application  
of measures  of efficiency  under  Irish climatic  conditions.
One of the most  significant  research  outcomes  related  to maximising  the level of N fertiliser  
use for Irish grassland,  and to increasing  stocking  rates sufficient  to consume  all grass  
grown. Research  conducted  at Moorepark,  Grange  and Creagh  identified  the commercial  
levels  of N fertiliser  for the appropriate  stocking  rate in dairy, beef and sheep  enterprises.  
Timing  and rates  of N applications  for grass  growth  were  established  at Johnstown  Castle, 
including  urea and the role of sulphur.  The forage  harvester  replaced  the buckrake.  Stud ­
ies on silage  conservation  at Grange  clarified  the factors  affecting  digestibility,  preservation  
and animal  performance,  resulting  in a consistent  and reliable  winter-feed.
The development  of creamery  milk production,  beef  cattle  and sheep  output  was now un­
derpinned  by research  and measurement  back-up.
EU Entry  1973
In a keynote  paper  presented  at the 1971 Winter  Meeting  in Cahir,  Past-President  Michael  
Walshe  described  how the current  output  of Irish agriculture  could  be trebled,  and he quan ­
tified the inputs  required,  including  labour,  credit  and finance.  As ever, the IGA platform  pro­
voked  some straight  talking. Weaknesses  in Irish agriculture  and lack of Government  
commitment  to the development  of the very industry  that hoped  to benefit  most from EU 
entry in 1973 were exposed.
It is of interest  to recall  35 years  on, that land structure  and the exodus  from the land were  
talking  points  in general  circulation  then as now. This was evident  in the discussion  follow ­
ing the address  by Dr. Sicco  Mansholt,  President  of the EU Commission  at the 25*^ Anniver ­
sary Conference  held in Dublin in 1971. The debate  was neatly summed  up by 
Past-President  Joe Bruton:  “We have Michael  Walshe  telling  us about  the potential  of our 
grassland,  Dr. McMeekan  (then  with the International  Bank for Reconstruction  and Devel ­
opment,  Washington  DC) telling  us where  the money  could  come  from and now Dr. Man­
sholt  telling  us of the product  market  potential.  I don’t know  what  more  we want  offered  to 
us by way of encouragement,  but what  we do want is national  courage  in this country ’’.
Down  on the farm,  there  was an accelerated  uptake  of AFT information  for maximising  the 
opportunities  created  by EU entry. Capital  investment  in farm modernisation  was huge,  ro­
tary parlours  were installed  for the efficiency  of labour,  slatted  sheds  erected  and beef
64
cattle feedlots  established.  Land prices  soared,  credit  was readily  available  and costs  
were not a main concern  in the context  of unlimited  markets  and high prices.  The thirst  for 
R&D information  and innovative  ideas  was clearly  evident  when over 400 Grassland  en­
thusiasts  turned  up for the 1973 Summer  Tour to Grange/Meath/Louth  organised  jointly  
with the Ulster  Grassland  Society. Sheep  production  did not develop  as an important  
money  making  enterprise  for another  decade  due to restrictions  in the French  market  and 
associated  economic  factors.
Blueprint  for milk production
The following  decade  was characterised  by massive  technological  change  with grassland  
management  improving  to the extent  that good farmers  required  only a third of a hectare  
of land to carry one cow per year. Research  at Moorepark  developed  the following  blue­
print for milk production:  5150 kg milk output/cow,  stocking  rate 0.34 ha/cow  (1100  gal on 
0.85 acres/cow),  1.3 t silage  DM/cow,  3.5 t grazed  grass/cow,  400 kg N/cow  and 650 kg 
concentrates/cow  (P. Dillon  pers. comm.).
Achieving  high dry matter  intake
Following  the introduction  of milk quotas,  maximising  output  from grazed  grass  became  a 
priority due to the shift in emphasis  to maximising  profit  per gallon  with quota  being  the lim­
iting factor. Constraints  to DM intake  at pasture,  e.g. quality,  pre- and post-grazing  height  
and grass  allowance  became  crucial. Research  at Moorepark  over the last 10 years  has 
developed  grazing  strategies  for increasing  the proportion  of grazed  grass in the cow’s 
diet to 75%, reducing  grass  silage  to less than 20% and concentrate  input to 5%. These  
changes  in the feed budget  have  potential  to reduce  feed costs  by 0.8 cent/litre.  Measure ­
ment  of farm grass  cover  is a key requirement  for implementing  these  guidelines  and the 
relevant  grass  cover  targets  for spring-calving  systems  have been established.  The sig­
nificance  of high DM intake  is vividly  illustrated  in Figure  1. (Dillon  et al., 2005).
Figure  1. Relationship  between  total costs  of production  and proportion  of grazed  
pasture  in cows  ration  (Dillon  et al., 2005)
y =-0.271  lx+ 39.341  
R=’ = 0.7804
.10 40 -10 ftO 70
Proportion  of grass  In diet (%)80
65
For the future,  due to increased  emphasis  on product  quality  and issues  associated  with 
nitrogen  leaching,  soil compaction,  gas emissions  and animal  welfare,  higher  productivity  
per animal  will be required.  Daily  grass  intake  will be maximised  by adhering  to important  
sward  characteristics  such  as maintaining  a high proportion  of green  leaf within  the grazing 
horizon  while allocating  an adequate  daily herbage  allowance.  Increasing  the green  leaf 
proportion  at the base of the sward  may play an important  role in increasing  herbage  intake 
and making  grazing  management  easier.
Progress  in grass  breeding  has been less than might  be expected.  Current  grass  selection  
and evaluation  systems  target  improved  grass DM yields  under  cutting  systems  of man­
agement  rather  than animal  performance.  Although  grass breeders  have improved  DM 
yields  by 0.5%  per annum  between  1965 and 1990,  there  is a requirement  for an increased  
grass  selection  programme  focussed  on characteristics  that influence  animal  performance,  
i.e. herbage  intake.
Grass  breeding  in the future  will be assisted  greatly  by new technologies  involving  gene  
manipulation,  the identification  of quantitative  loci (QTL)  and the use of/n situ hybridisation  
to differentially  label chromosomes.  Careful  choice  of QTL in market-assisted  selection  
should  minimise  undesirable  correlated  responses  to selection  such as tendency  for early  
spring  growth  to be associated  with early heading  and stem development.  Use of tech­
niques  to genetically  modify  plants  will facilitate  the development  of plants  with elevated  
concentration  of ruminal  undegradable  dietary  protein  and high-energy  yielding  compounds  
such as starch  or triacylglycerides.  These  are some  of the possibilities  for future  production  
systems
Grass-based  beef systems
Beef  cattle  enterprises  are relatively  inefficient  when  compared  with dairying  due to lower  
conversion  rates of feed into output  and income.  At Teagasc  Grange,  Eddie  O’Riordan,  
Padraig  O’Kiely and colleagues  tackled  the priorities  for more efficient  measures  in beef 
cattle production,  feed cost and in animal  breeding.  During  the period  1980 to 1995 the 
targets  set for suckler  calf to beef were advanced  progressively  from a carcass  weight  of 
340 to  395kg for steers,  and from a carcass  output/ha  of 410 to 500kg/year.  Progress  was 
accelerated  by innovative  farmers  who joined  the IGA platform  and reported  on their ex­
periences  in commercial  practice,  including  weaknesses,  likely solutions  and ideas  that 
created  valuable  feedback  to researchers.
Critical  reappraisal  of the cattle diet generated  a new focus  on grassland  management  
strategies.  The national  balance  sheet  for the proportions  of grazed  grass,  conserved  
grass  and concentrates,  expressed  as DM intake was:  grazed  grass  57%, conserved  grass 
29%, concentrates  14% (McLoughlin,  1991). Costs  attributable  to the conserved  grass  
plus concentrate  components  amounted  to 70% of total feed costs. It was evident  that the 
economic  viability  of cattle  enterprises  is dependent  on developing  the competitive  advan ­
tages  of grazed  grass. As a priority,  more  flexible  grazing  procedures  were developed  to 
allow  for the ever-present  fluctuations  in grass  growth  while at the same  time utilising  the 
sward  in favour  of higher  animal  intake. Measurement  of grass  supply  week-to-week  has 
been adopted  as a key requirement  for utilising  grass  to best advantage  on the cattle  farm.  
Details  on the use of sward  height  measurements  for estimating  grass  supply  and the as­
sociated  benefits  for production  efficiency  were described  in detail  at the 50’^ Anniversary  
Beef Conference  in 1996 (O’Riordan  and O’Kiely, 1996),  and at the ‘Grass  Ireland  2000 ’
66
meeting  in Navan  (O’Riordan,  et al., 2000).
The current  targets  for suckler  beef systems  are:-
Standard  - 510kg  carcass  output/ha  ©stocking  rate 0.8 ha/cow  beef unit and  200kg  N/ha. 
REPS  - 410kg  carcass  output/ha  ©stocking  rate 1.0 ha/cow  beef unit and 100kg N/ha 
(Drennan  et al., 2004)
Other  advances  in grassland  science  include  the use of white clover-based  swards  for 
achieving  high output  of beef and palatability  evaluations  of perennial  ryegrass  cultivars.  
Strategic  management  in spring  and autumn  has increased  the grazing  season  by 4-5 
weeks. High performance  from maize  and whole-crop  cereal  silages  has been quantified  
and the appropriate  technologies  identified.  Technologies  now being  developed  to deliver  
the benefits from  grassland  include:  optimising  intake  of grazed  grass/legume  mix over an 
extended  grazing  season;  quantifying  the nutritive  value  of ryegrasses  on the DAF recom ­
mended  list; improved  legume  breeding  to produce  high DM yield and enhanced  N fixing  
abilities.
Outdoor  pads for wintering  cattle  were designed  and evaluated  successfully  to offer a ca­
pability  for lifting cattle  enterprise  competitiveness.  Their  adoption  in practice  around  the 
country  represents  present  day technology  uptake.
Challenges  to the sheep  sector
In the 1970s  the national  ewe flock plummeted  to less than two million  ewes. This was due 
to limited  market  access  and inferior  financial  returns  compared  with dairying  or beef. 
Sheep  farming  remained  in the doldrums  until the 1980s  when the Common  Policy  for 
sheep was implemented.  The Sheep  CAP heralded  a new era, and unprecedented  expan ­
sion in sheep  numbers  followed.  Profits  were second  only to dairying.
The delivery of AFT R&D information  facilitated  growth  in output  and wealth  creation  for the 
sheep  sector. AFT Council  member  and IGA Past-President  John Orpen  was a prime  
mover  in pushing  research  on specialised  sheep  systems  as a matter  of policy. It was the 
development  of silage-based  in-wintering  systems  that offered  farmers  a new strategy  for 
rationalising  their grass resources  with significant  knock-on  effects:  resting  of pastures,  
fertiliser  N applications  for higher  stocking  rates  and adoption  of paddock  grazing,  resulted  
in a big lift to the carrying  capacity  of Irish pasture,  up to 15 ewes per ha. Whole-farm  
grazing  systems  were  set up at Blindwell  and Knockbeg  to illustrate  the principles,  I.e. pro­
ductive  pastures  well stocked  with prolific  ewes  (litter  size 1.9) producing  an output  of over 
400kg  of carcass  lamb per ha.
However,  serious  gaps in know-how  prevailed,  e.g. skills in day-to-day  management  of 
large  flocks,  lamb survival  and disease  control.  IGA initiatives  included  the annual  Sheep  
Conference  first held in 1983. Outside  speakers  were brought  in, notably  Bill Fell from 
Yorkshire,  Karl Linklater,  VIC, St.Boswells  and John Read, a UK Shepherd  of the Year.  
Farm  Study  Tours  to Britain  were undertaken  with the help of MLC: 1980 Midlands/Lincoln,  
1984 Hereford/Chilbolton,  1985 Somerset/Devon,  1986 Cumbria,  1987 Mid-Wales.  Uptake 
of know-how  was extensive;  the number  of flock owners  expanded  to almost  50,000  and 
ewe numbers  to 5 million.
67
Changes  in CAP in the 90s altered  the income  relativities  of livestock  enterprises  putting  
sheep  at a disadvantage.  The lamb price/feed  cost ratio disimproved,  decline  w/as trig­
gered and there was a huge cull of nearly  400,000  ewes in 1999 alone. These  factors  
stimulated  a new focus  on the role of grazed  grass  for achieving:  (a) bottom  line production  
costs  and, (b) labour-saving  practices.  Research  at Knockbeg  showed  that by using  grass  
budgeting  principles  at stocking  rates  similar  to REPS,  extended  grazing  as a substitute  for 
silage  and housing  can cut costs  per ewe by over 20%. Man hours  per day were reduced  
by two-thirds.  Extended  grazing  is now being  practised  on a number  of commercial  farms.  
Winter  housing  will continue  to be a central  component  of the intensively  stocked  system.  
In tackling  the labour  issue,  a good example  of how  top farmers  have  stimulated  new ideas 
was seen at the IGA visit to George  Stanley ’s 800 ewe flock in Laois  in 2003. The use of 
equipment  modified  for speeding  up feeding  and day-to-day  housing  jobs marked  new ad­
vances  in short-circuiting  competing  demands  for time and labour.
Following  the 2004 CAP Reforms  and decoupling,  the IGA linked  up with Alistair  Carson  
and his colleagues  in Northern  Ireland  to decide  on appropriate  response.  Jointly  with 
DARDNI, ARINI,  UGS and BGS,  the IGA organised  a 2-day  Conference  at Greenmount  in 
May 2005 on the theme  ‘Profit From Your Labour ’. Keynote  speakers  and facilitators  in­
cluding  top sheep  breeders  Lesley  Stubbings  (Northants),  Murray  Rohloff  (NZ)  Alistair  Car- 
son, Seamus  Hanrahan  and John Shirley,  outlined  their vision for the sustainable  
development  of Ireland ’s sheep  industry.  Over 100 IGA delegates  participated  and de­
parted  with positive  messages  on measures  of efficiency  for cutting  costs  and maximising  
labour  returns.  One of Rohloff ’s recommendations  has been acted  on, i.e. the establish ­
ment  of the Sheep  Strategy  Group. Chairman  John Malone  presented  his first report  at the 
IGA 2006 Sheep  Conference,  pointing  out that: (a) Irish processors  have capacity  to 
process  a higher  output  into a market  that is only 80% self-sufficient  and, (b) one-third  of 
producers  do not cover  the costs  of production.  Of the various  measures  outlined  there  
was little mention  of our greatest  resource,  i.e. grass.
The future? The only sheep  R&D station  in the east of Ireland  has been closed. In its 
place  Teagasc  is undertaking  technology  transfer  initiatives  onto commercial  farms,  moves  
that hold promise.  The evidence  for maximising  grazed  grass  in the diet of the ewe is sig­
nificant,  yet expensive  creep  feeding  continues.  Why? The gains in profit from finishing  
lambs  on grass  alone  were  evident  at the IGA  visit to Andrew  Moloney ’s farm In Edenderry  
in 2006. What  effort is being made  to develop  and foster  skills for estimating  how much 
grass  DM is on the sheep  farm week-to-week?  Can we develop  ‘easy  care ’ sheep with  dis­
ease resistant  traits? Research  at Athenry  has identified  breed  differences  for resistance  
to worm parasites.  The use of molecular  genetics  in breeding  for resistance  to footrot  
offers possibilities  (Conington  et al., 2006). Can a footrot-DNA  test appropriate  for our 
breeds  be developed?  More immediately,  the Sheep  Strategy  Group  will be expected  to 
activate  measures  for increasing  the earning  power  of the 35,000  producers  who remain  
dependent  on sheep  for income.
Submissions  on agriculturai  policy
Responding  to changes  in current  agricultural  policy  as they take shape,  the IGA has en­
gaged  in discussion  with the policy  makers  of the day in government  and submitted  its 
proposals  in the interests  of a vibrant  and sustainable  Irish agriculture.  Submissions  in­
cluded:
68
In 1987, 1999 and 2003;  cutbacks  in Teagasc  Research  
In 1999;  Agric-Food  2010 Committee  
In 2001,2004  and 2006; Nitrates  Directive
In 2001,  then President  Noei Culleton  forewarned  the IGA  on the damaging  effects  to Irish 
agriculture  of the Nitrates  Directive.
In 2003; Milk Quotas
Strategic  reviews
With on-going  changes  in EU policies  and in the national  economy,  the IGA has conducted  
periodic  reviews  of its aims and vision,  its organisation,  and responses  to new opportuni ­
ties, led by the President  of the day, notably  Padraig  O’Kiely, Matt Dempsey,  Pat McFeely, 
Con Hurley  and John O’Brien. Issues  subjected  to scrutiny  include:
How best to address  the needs  of the membership  as changes  occur  in the national  econ ­
omy.
Review  of the IGA platform  as a debating  forum  especially  with policy  makers.
Planning  for future  initiatives  to provide  leadership  to the industry.
Improving  the presentation  and delivery  of the papers  presented  at its conferences.  
Increasing  the membership  including  corporate  membership.
Fundamental  questions
In keeping  with its role for vigorous  dialogue,  some  stark messages  have been delivered  
from the IGA platform  in recent  years. In particular,  at the 2000 September  meeting,  
Michael  Murphy  argued  that the agricultural  industry  had no clear  vision  for the future. He 
was strongly  critical  of the performance  of the institutions  and farm service  agencies  sur­
rounding  Irish agriculture,  the rigidity  of the milk quota regulations  and lack of innovation  
in milk processing  and marketing.  His message  was that “nine out of ten farmers  will either  
be out of business  or living in poverty  within 10 years ’’ and asked  “Where  are the people  
to plan and implement  constructive  change ’’? He urged all segments  of the industry  to 
come  together  and agree  a vision  to secure  the future,  develop  a vibrant  industry,  provide  
opportunity  for new entrants  and prosperity  and a future  for Irish farmers.  “I wish in 10 
years  time to be part of a positive,  dynamic,  growing  industry,  which  is highly  competitive  
internationally  and giving  good incomes  and careers  to people  at all levels  of the industry ”.
The debate  continues  with significant  contributions  from Mike Magan  on priorities  for turn­
ing around  the steady  erosion  of profit margin  on-farm.
International  Grassland  Congress
The world ’s grazing  lands  consist  of 3,000  million  ha of grassland,  most  of which  is utilised  
by livestock  for feeding  the world ’s populations.  The IGC is the premier  world event  for 
grassland  R&D, a forum  for authoritative  analyses  on world food production  and on new 
technologies  for utilising  grasslands  for the benefit  of mankind.  It is held every  four years.
With the build up of R&D information  in Ireland  and associated  grassland  impetus  in the 
70s, the Council  recognised  the potential  benefits  of bringing  the Congress  to Ireland.  At 
the XII Congress  in Moscow  in 1973,  the IGA submitted  a bid that had world-wide  support,  
but in the event  lost out to Leipzig  in East Germany  for 1977. The IGA then took the op­
portunity  to activate  a follow-on  event  to the Leipzig  Congress,  namely,  an International  
Meeting  on the theme  ‘Animal  Production  from Temperate  Grassland ’. President  Jim
69
O’Grady  in association  with Aidan Conway  and AFT headed  up the organisation  of this 
event  held in the RDS, Dublin,  June  5-12,1977.  Twenty-one  leading  researchers  were  se­
lected  to present  plenary  papers  focussed  on temperate  grass  growing  conditions,  with 53 
offered  papers  and study  tours. 365 delegates  from all temperate  zones  including  those  
in South  America  participated.
In 1997  at the XVIIIIGC in Canada,  BGS and IGA delegates  Roger  Wilkins  and the author  
agreed  to explore  the feasibility  of making  a joint UK/Irish  bid to host the XX IGC in 2005. 
The bid, compiled  by Dr John Walsh  for IGA with the theme  ‘Grassland  - A Global  Re­
source ’, was successful.  The management  of the Congress  was delegated  to a special  Or­
ganising  Committee  anchored  by Dr Frank  O’Mara (UCD)  and included  representatives  
from IGA, BGS,  Teagasc,  DAFF,  DARDNI  and UCD. The core programme  as held in UCD 
Belfield  on June  26 - July 1 2005 including  the Jan Crichton  Producer  Forum  that featured  
a paper  by IGA Past President  Jim Dwyer. Satellite  Workshops  were held as an integral  
part of the Congress  at Aberystwyth,  Belfast,  Cork, Glasgow  and Oxford.  The Congress  
attracted  over 1100 delegates  worldwide  including  95 from Ireland.
European  Grassland  Federation
The EGF facilitates  close contacts  between  European  Grassland  Organisations  by initiating 
symposia,  etc. and promoting  interchange  of scientific  ideas  and results.  Currently,  Eddie 
O’Riordan  at Grange  is IGA  representative.  A 4-day  general  scientific  meeting  is held every 
two years. Following  an invitation  by Aidan  Conway,  then President  of EGF, the IGA hosted 
the 12*^ General  Meeting  of the European  Grassland  Federation  in UCD Belfield  on July 
4-7 1988. Ten Plenary  papers  together  with 76 Offered  papers  were presented.  223 del­
egates  from 22 European  countries  including  46 from Ireland  participated.
British  Grassland  Society
The Summer  Meeting  of the BGS is regarded  by many  as its main event. It consists  of 
three  full days of farm study  visits  and AGM. The Meeting  has been hosted  by the IGA on 
two occasions,  in 1964 in Meath/Kildare/Cork  and in 1992 in Cork, led by Eamonn  White  
and Con Hurley  as Host  Vice-Presidents,  respectively.  The theme  in 1992 was ‘The Cork 
Grass  Mixture:  Research  + Practice  + Profit. Study  visits  to Moorepark  and to grass  farm 
enterprises  specially  selected  for innovative  and profitable  systems  were arranged.  199 
BGS members  participated.
Joint  meetings  - Grass  Ireland  2000
To mark  the new millennium,  the IGA in association  with the UGS, Fermanagh  Grassland  
Club and South  Armagh  Grassland  Club organised  two Meetings  in Tullamore  and Navan 
to gather  and update  the membership  on: (1) the latest R&D grass-related  information  
north and south;  (2) EU Policy  and, (3) producing  cattle for Europe. Franz Fischler,  EU 
Commissioner  for Agriculture,  was the keynote  speaker  in Tullamore.
Administration
Working  at the heart  of the Association,  the administrative,  secretarial  and financial  ex­
pertise  of Madeleine  Flanagan  and Grainne  Dwyer  have been  essential  components for the 
IGA’S progress.  This review  would not be complete  without  expressing  due recognition  
and tributes.  Quite apart  from the smooth  running  of the substantial  calendar  of events,  
dealing  with day-to-day  queries  and promoting  IGA interests,  the financial  health  of the 
Association  has been largely  due to their stewardship.
70
Donegal  Organising  Committee
In an area noted for its progressive  farming,  a number  of grassland  enthusiasts  in east 
Donegal  led by Neville  Chance  asked  for approval  from the IGA Council  in the 60s to form 
a sub-committee  for the purpose  of arranging  Grassland  meetings  locally. Distance  plus 
the difficulties  of getting  away  for two days  or so to participate  at meetings  in the south  were  
cited as reasons.  The Council  agreed  and also that all participants  be fully paid-up  mem ­
bers. The committee  with Neville  Chance  in particular  was very active  and successful.  
Two meetings  were held annually  in Raphoe  and there  was a close  affinity  with Northern  
Ireland  interests.  The committee  hosted  the IGA Summer  Meeting  on a number  of occa ­
sions, notably  in Derry  and east Donegal  in 1970, against  the backdrop  of the Troubles.  
Members  got a front-seat  view of the problems  when the bus driver  took a wrong  turn in 
Derry  city. Neville  passed  away  in 1994 and committee  interest  was overtaken  by newly  
formed  discussion  groups  and agri-business  meetings.
Association  Journal
The IGA’s Journal  was launched  during  the 60s principally  through  the efforts  of Vivian  
Vial, senior  AFT researcher  and IGA Council  member,  who recognised  more than most  
the importance of publishing the  papers  that contributed  to the development  of IGA  thinking.  
He saw the annual  proceedings  as a medium  for the dissemination  of authorative  and en­
lightened  ideas. He was succeeded  from 1973  to 2000 by the author  who collated  and ed­
ited all suitable  papers. David  McGilloway  has taken  over the editorial  work since  2000.  
Requests from overseas  libraries  indicate  awareness  of research  developments  and pro­
gressive  farming  in Ireland  and recognition  of the role of the IGA in reporting  this progress.  
It also provides  a permanent  record  of useful  reference  material  for farmers  and students.
Agricultural  Research  Forum
In 1970, to provide  opportunities  for scientists  to read short technical  papers  and to ex­
change  ideas,  the IGA initiated  a one-day  seminar  held twice annually  in Dublin. It was 
organised  by Sean  Crowley  initially,  followed  by Jim  O’Grady  and later by Padraig  O’Kiely.  
It was expanded  to two days in 1994 and jointly  with the Irish Tillage  and Land Use Society, 
Soil Science Society and the Agricultural  Economics  Society,  it operates  under  the umbrella  
‘Agricultural  Research  Forum'.  The number  of papers  including  posters  has grown  to 135 
in 2006 presented  in three  simultaneous  sessions.  Micheal  Diskin  has chaired  the Organ ­
ising Committee  since  2001. Ann Gilsenan  at Grange  provides  the highly  valued  admin ­
istrative  back-up. Held in Tullamore,  the Forum has become  a core event in the 
researcher ’s annual  calendar.
Summary
The IGA has provided  an independent  forum  for discussing  new information,  technologies,  
farm practices  and policies  and for stimulating  new ideas.
Members are  provided  with opportunities  to discuss  the latest  cutting  edge information  and 
ideas  that can increase  farm profits.
Grass  will continue  to be Ireland ’s main competitive  advantage  for ruminant  production.
71
References
Conington,  J., Bunger,  L. and Hosie,  B. (2006).  Breeding  for resistance  to footrot  in sheep. 
Proceedings  of IGA Sheep  Conference,  May 18.
Dillon,  P. (2006). Personal  communication.
Dillon,  R, Berry, D.B., Evans,  R.D., Buckley,  F. and Horan,  B. (2005). Consequences  of 
genetic  selection  for increased  milk production  in European  seasonal  pasture-based  sys­
tems of milk production.  Livestock  Science  (In press).
Drennan,  M.J., Fallon,  R.J. and Davis,  B. (2004). Quality  suckler  beef from low and high 
input  grassland  management  systems.  Teagasc,  Beef Production  Series.  No.48. End of 
Project  Report,  15pp.
Flanagan,  S. (2201). Maximising  grazed  grass  in the diet of the ewe for mid season  lamb 
production.  End of Project  Report,  Sheep  Series  No 15, Teagasc  Research  Centre,  
Athenry,  Co. Galway.
McLoughlin,  M. (1991). Feed balance  sheets  for Ireland  1983/84  to 1988/89;  supply,  de­
mand  and allocation.  Agricultural  Economics  Society  of Ireland,  December.
O’Keeffe,  P. (1996).  The Irish Grassland  Association  1946-96:  Perspective  and prospec ­
tive. Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  Journal,  30: 4-7.
O’Riordan,  E., McGilloway,  D. and French,  P. (2000).  Beef  from grass-based  system.  Irish 
Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  J. 34: 105-111.
O Riordan,  E.J. and O’Kiely, P. (1996). Potential  of beef production  systems  based  on 
grass. Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  Journal.  30: 185-217.
Sheep  Conference  “Profit  From  Your  Labour ”. CAFRE,  Greenmount  Campus  Antrim May 
6-7 2005.
72
Irish Grassland  
Association  Journal
2006  VOLUME  40
IRISH  GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  
CORPORATE  MEMBERS  2006
ACCBank  
AIB Bank  
AIBP  
Alltech
Bank of Ireland  
Conroy  Recycling  Limited  
Bord Bia 
Dairygold
Dairymaster  Limited  
Dawn  Group  
Delaval  Limited  
FBD Insurances  
Germinal  Ireland  Ltd 
Glanbia
Goldcrop  Limited  
Grassland  Fertilizers  Limited
I.A.W.S  Group  pic
Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation  Society  Limited  
Irish Country  Meats  
Irish Dairy Board  
IFAC  Accountants  
Irish Farmers ’ Journal  
Irish Farmers ’ Monthly  
Janssen-Cilag  Limited  
Richard  Keenan  & Co. Ltd 
Kerry  Agribusiness  
Kingswood  Computing  Limited  
Lakeland  Dairies  
LELY Ireland  Limited  
McQuinn  Consulting  
Monsanto  Ireland  Limited  
Mullinahone  Co-op  
Osmonds
New Zealand  Genetics  (Ireland)  Limited  
Timac  Agri Business  Limited  
Ulster  Bank  
Volac
Wexford  Milk Producers
TEAGASC  EDUCATION  AND  ADVISORY  SERVICES
Cork East 
Cork West  
Laois  
Limerick
Regional  Advisory  & Training  Services,  Kildalton  
Tipperary  North  
Tipperary  South  
Wexford
Irish Grassland  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 40 2006
Edited  by 
David  McGilloway
ISSN 0332-0588
Printed  by Walsh,  Printer,  Roscrea
J. Conington,  
L. Bunger  
B. HosieCONTENTS
Breeding  for Resistance  to Footrot  in SheepPAGE
J.P. Hanrahan Observations  on Variation  in Weight  and Classification  
of Carcasses  fro Irish Lambs
T. Keady  
J.P. Hanrahan Efficient  Sheep  Production  in a Subsidy  Free 
Environment  - Research  from Athenry 15
A. Cromie Breeding  Quality  Cattle 28
M. Drennan Relationship  between  Beef Carcass  Classification  
Grades  with Meat  Yield and Value 35
P. O’Kiely Alternatives  Forages  to Grass  for Ensilage  and as 
Feeds  for Beef Cattle 44
S. Flanagan Irish Grassland  Association  1946-2006  ■ 
Delivering  the Benefits  from Grassland 62
COUNCIL  2006  - 2007
President  
Vice-President  
Past-President  
Generai  SecretaryJohn Donworth  
William  Kingston  
Jan Frederiks  
Grainne  Dwyer
Brendan  Barnes,  Kevin  Commins,  Andrew  Cromie,  Michael  Doran,
Jim Dwyer,  Edward  Egan,  Sean Flanagan,  John Fitzgerald,  Padraig  French,  
Brendan  Horan,  Pearse  Kelly,  Jack Kennedy,  Andrew  Moloney,  Pat McFeely,  
Mark McGee,  Nicholas  McGill,  David  McGilloway,  John O’Brien,
Philip  Donohoe,  Tony Pettit,  Robin  Talbot,  Peter  Young.
Irish Grassland  Association,  Moneymore,  Borris  in Ossory,  Co. Laois  
Phone/Fax  0505  41025 Email: grainne@irishgrassland.com
IV
Breeding  for Resistance  to Footrot  in Sheep
Joanne  Conington,  Lutz Bunger  and Brian Hosie  
SAC, West  Mains  Road,  Edinburgh  EH9 3JG
Introduction
Breeding  for resistance  to disease  is not a new concept  - farmers  and sheep  breeders  
have been doing  it for centuries.  However,  the more  recent  use of estimated  breeding  val­
ues (EBVs)  and new technologies  such as DMA  genotyping  are essential  tools in the cur­
rent era of animal  breeding,  which  have the potential  to be used for breeding  for resistance  
to footrot.
Footrot  in sheep  is a major  welfare  problem.  It is the main cause  of lameness,  and is es­
timated  to cost the UK sheep  industry  around  £24M per annum  (Nieuwhof  and Bishop,  
2005). Footrot-affected  sheep  frequently  experience  pain, discomfort  and have reduced  
mobility  that affects  their ability  to compete  for feed (Abbot  and Lewis,  2004). Affected  
sheep  are also more susceptible  to other  diseases  because  of their weakened  condition.  
The causative  organism  is Dicheiobacter  (Bacteroides)  nodosus  (D. nodosus),  which is 
highly  contagious,  being easily  transmitted  from sheep  to sheep  via pasture,  bedding  or 
handling  pens. Considerable  effort is expended  to manage  footrot  in such a way as to 
minimise  its impact  on the productivity  of sheep  flocks,  such as footbathing  with formalin  
or zinc sulphate,  the use of antibiotic  sprays,  vaccination  and foot trimming.  However,  
these treatments  are generally  labour-intensive  and are costly  both in economic  and en­
vironmental  terms. Initial research  at SAC has shown  that there  is a wide variation  in the 
prevalence  of footrot  between  offspring  of different  sires, with some  having  up to 25% of 
offspring  affected,  and others  having  none. This shows  that the exploitation  of the genetic  
basis  for footrot  resistance  is likely  to offer a long-term  and sustainable  solution  to breeding  
healthier  sheep.
Prevalence  of footrot  in UK sheep  flocks
At a recent  SAC footrot  workshop  (Hosie,  2004),  footrot  was identified  as being  a serious  
welfare  problem  that has major  implications  for flock productivity.  In a recent  survey  of 
farmers'  practices  and attitudes  towards  footrot  (Wassink  and Green,  2001; Hosie,  2003),  
more  than 90% of sheep  farmers  had seen footrot  in their sheep  in the past year and 31 % 
considered  that 6% or more of their flock were affected  with footrot. In these  surveys,  
which rely on farmers ’ diagnoses,  the prevalence  of footrot  could be overstated  because  
farmers  may not distinguish  footrot  from other  causes  of foot lameness  (such  as scald  and 
Contagious  Ovine  Digital  Dermatitis,  CODD).  It can also be argued  that these  estimates  
may be understated  because  of failure  to diagnose  early  predisposing  foot conditions,  e.g. 
‘scald ’, where there  are signs  of Inflammation  of the interdigital  skin. This can only be seen 
if individual  feet are inspected,  as this condition  is not always  accompanied  by lameness.  
Also, recent  results  from research  that Is currently  underway  in the UK have shown  that 
the prevalence  of footrot  is much  higher  than in the other  studies  cited in the questionnaires  
reported  above. In 2005,  3,852  Scottish  Blackface  and Mule sheep  located  on experimen ­
tal flocks  in Scotland,  England  and Wales  had each foot inspected  and scored  for foot le­
sions individually.  The results  from these inspections  show that overall,  16% of all feet
were affected,  which  equates  to 44% of all sheep  being  affected.  There  were large differ ­
ences  between flocks,  with 25% of Blackface  sheep and 56% of mule sheep  being  affected. 
However,  it is important  to note that these  figures  cannot  be used as a breed  comparison,  
because  none of the flocks  scored  had both breeds  running  together  as one flock. Figure  
1 shows  the prevalence  of the footrot  and other  foot conditions,  with scores  1 -4 represent ­
ing different  severities  of footrot  (1 = inflammation  of the interdigital  skin and score  4 = se­
vere under-running  of the hoof).
Figure  1. Prevalence  of footrot  in Scottish  Blackface  (SBF)  and Mule sheep
□ SBF 
■ Mule
F/rot1 = footrot  scoret , F/rot2=footrot  score  2. F/rot3=footrot  score  3, F/rot  4=footrot  score 
4, o’grown=overgrown,  mis-shape=mis-shapen,  shelly = shelly hoof, WLA=White  line 
abcess
Genetic  variation  in resistance  to footrot
The exploitation  of inherent,  or natural  resistance  to footrot  to implement  genetic  selection  
to reduce  footrot  incidence  has been undertaken  since the 1980's  in Australia.  Using 
Merino  sheep,  a footrot  lesion  scoring  method  was developed,  with severity  scored  on a 
scale  of 0 to 4 (Egerton  and Roberts,  1971). Successful  breeding  for enhanced  footrot  re­
sistance  in Merinos  has been described  using this approach  (Patterson  and Patterson,  
1989),  and an evaluation  of lines of Corriedale  ewes  selected  for enhanced  footrot  resist ­
ance, in New Zealand,  has been reported  (Skerman  and Moorhouse,  1987). The scoring 
system  was further  developed  with sub-classes  that separated  clinical  signs into 8 cate­
gories  (Raadsma,  2000). An application  of this 8-point  scoring  system  in a genetic  study  
following  challenge  and subsequent  vaccination  concluded  that there  is substantial  genetic  
variation  in resistance  to challenge  with virulent  isolates  of D. nodosus  (Raadsma  et a!., 
1994). Heritability  estimates  of between  0.09 and 0.4 for several  different  immune  re­
sponse  parameters  were reported.  It is likely  that conventional  breeding  for resistance  to 
footrot  can be formalised  into EBVs  for resistance  to footrot,  so that appropriate  weighting 
can be attributed  to it, in relation  to other  breeding  goals  such  as growth  rate. Indeed,  cur­
rent research  in the UK aims  to quantify  genetic  variation  in footrot  in the Texel  and Scottish  
Blackface  breeds  initially,  and investigate  the rates of response  to selection  from the use 
of EBVs  for footrot  as part of multi-trait  breeding  programmes  in these  breeds.
Research  at SAC using Scottish  Blackface  sheep  reared  on two contrasting  hill environ ­
ments has developed  breeding  indices  for hill breeds  combining  carcass  and maternal  
characteristics  (Conington  et al., 2001, 2004, 2006). As part of that research,  health  
records  on animals  kept in the flocks  have  been maintained  so that the effects  of selection  
on the long-term  health  of different  genetic  lines can be determined.  These  data were  
used to look at whether  or not differences  exist in footrot  between  lambs  from different  
sires. Figure  2 shows  the results  for 17 out of a total of 33 sires used across  the two SAC  
hill flocks. Each bar of the graph  represents  the percentage  of lambs  that were  treated  for 
footrot  according  to individual  sires. Each sire had an average  of 44 progeny,  and the 
other 16 sires (not shown  on the graph)  had no progeny  that were  treated  for footrot.  The 
results  show clearly  that there is a large difference  between  sires in the percentage  of 
progeny  treated  for footrot.
Figure  2. Sire differences  in % progeny  affected  by footrot  
25
%
offspring
affected20
15
10
5
0,11 ■ ,■ ■ ,1 ,1 ,1 ,1 ,1 ,
o'P ^ oVT?(iS
Sire id
The use of Molecular  genetics  in breeding  for resistance  to footrot
Although  conventional  methods  of selection  for footrot  resistance  have been proven  to be 
successful,  the development  and additional  use of a molecular  genetic  test for footrot  re­
sistance  potentially  has enormous  advantages.  This is because  of the practical  difficulty  
of objectively  scoring  feet lesions,  and of classifying  them objectively  and repeatably.  In 
addition,  with genetic  markers,  animals  that are candidates  for selection  do not have  to be 
exposed  to infection  to determine  whether  they are genetically  susceptible  or not. Addi ­
tionally,  this method  can shorten  the generation  interval  and hence  accelerate  responses  
to selection  for-resistance.  Therefore,  genetic  markers  potentially  offer  a practical  alterna ­
tive to laborious  scoring,  and protocols  that require  exposure  to infection.  The exploitation  
of genotype  information  via the use of genetic  markers associated  with resistance to  footrot,  
potentially  allows  breeders  to select  sheep  to breed  for increased  footrot  resistance.  A 
group  of genes  important  for controlling  immune  response  lies within  the Major  Histocom ­
patibility  Complex  (MHC)  on chromosome  20 in sheep. These  genes  show  great  genetic  
diversity  between  individuals,  and it is thought  that some  alleles  are more efficient  at initi­
ating an immune  response  to specific  pathogens  than others. Data exist, which  suggest  
an association  between  genetic  polymorphisms  within  the MHC Class II region  and re­
sponse  to footrot  infection  (Litchfield  etal., 1993;  Escayg  etal., 1997). Indeed,  genetic  vari­
ation within  the ovine MHC loci in the class II region,  specifically  at the DQA2  gene, has 
subsequently  been used by Lincoln  University,  New  Zealand  (NZ)  to develop  genetic  mark ­
ers for footrot  resistance  (Hickford  et al., 2004).
Molecular  testing  for footrot  resistance
A footrot  test, based  on the association  of different  DQA2  alleles  and footrot  resistance  in 
sheep  breeds  in NZ is now commercially  available  to the NZ sheep  industry  to select  more  
tolerant  or resistant  animals,  without  having  to expose  the animals  to infection  (Hickford,  
2000). The NZ test categorises  animals  according  to their risk of contracting  footrot,  fol­
lowing  a severe  footrot  challenge.  Figure  3 shows the  categories,  with the best groups  pre­
dicted  to have between  7 and 19% of offspring  affected  following  a severe  challenge,  and 
the least resistant  category  to have between  22 and 83% of offspring  affected.  More  than 
28,000  sheep  have now been genotyped  in NZ for 258 ram breeder  clients  and it is esti­
mated  that over 1 million  sheep  have already  been born to rams  that have been screened  
using the ‘NZ footrot  DNA  test'. The results  of a recent  report  on the use of footrot-gene  
tested  sheep  show a reduction  in production  losses  attributable  to footrot  of between  60 
and 80% which,  over a ten-year  period,  is estimated  to be worth between  $NZ 3M and 
$NZ 6M per annum  (Greer,  2004). While  it is possible  that the NZ information  will be rel­
evant  to sheep  populations  in the UK, it is not appropriate  or advisable  to use the NZ test 
on UK sheep  breeds  under  local  conditions  without  prior  testing.  This is because  it is pos­
sible that UK breeds  have unknown  and different  haplotypes  in the DNA region  tested,  or 
the genetic  background  interacts  with the underlying  genes  differently,  or simply,  that the 
associations  between  resistance  and susceptibility,  and genotype  categories  are different  
(Such  validation  processes  are also required  for gene tests for other traits and in other  
livestock  species  that have been developed  in different  breeds  and different  countries).
Figure  3. New  Zealand  footrot  gene  test categories
90
80
% progeny 70
affected 60
(following 50
a severe 40
challenge) 30
20
10
Note: Different  colours  show  that (e.g.)  between  7 and 19% of sheep  with gene  test cate­
gory 1 will show  footrot  symptoms  following  a severe  footrot  challenge  
(J. Hickford,  pers. comm.)
New footrot  research  - combining  conventional  breeding  with molecular  testing  
A new LINK-funded  research  project  led by SAC started  in 2005, builds  on the research  
undertaken  in NZ on footrot  resistance.
The aims of the project  are.
To test and further  develop  a robust  scoring  procedure  to enable  studies  of the genetic  
control  of footrot  resistance;
To estimate  heritabilities  for footrot  resistance  using the information  generated  from the 
footrot  scores  and to explore  the relationships  (genetic  correlations)  between  footrot  resist ­
ance and other  traits  of economic  importance  such as lamb  weights  and maternal  charac ­
teristics;
To investigate  associations  between  footrot  resistance  and (a) polymorphisms  at the DQA2  
gene (the ‘NZ footrot  DNA test’), and (b) other genetic  markers  within  and close to the 
MHC region;
To predict  the genetic,  epidemiological  and total financial  benefits  from breeding  for footrot  
resistance,  This project  will provide  options  to enable  breeders  to select  animals  for en­
hanced  resistance  to footrot  combining  both phenotypic  information  and molecular  genetic  
information.
Even in the event  that the genetic  markers  are not sufficiently  strongly  associated  with 
footrot  resistance  in UK breeds  under  local  environments,  or that they prove to be not eco­
nomically viable,  breeders will still have the option  of using  Best Linear  Unbiased  Prediction  
(BLUP)-based  selection  to maximise  the utility  of phenotypic  information.
The project  is testing  flocks  of Texel,  Blackface  and Mule sheep  across  the UK and taking  
blood  samples  to be used for DNA  analyses.  To date, 3,853  animals  have been scored  at 
least once on experimental  flocks  at SAC, IRS and ADAS.
Benefits  of footrot-resistant  breeding  stock
There  are four main categories  of benefit  from having  more  footrot-resistant  breeding  stock, 
all of which  should  lead to improvements  in the sustainability  of sheep  farming  in the UK. 
These  are; i) animal  welfare  benefits,  as fewer  animals  are likely  to be affected  by, and In­
voluntarily  culled  for, footrot  with every  successive  generation,  ii) economic  benefits,  as it 
is anticipated  that the current  estimated  cost of footrot  of £24M  will be reduced  by lower  
need for handling  and treatments,  iii) environmental  benefits,  as the use of formalin,  zinc 
sulphate  and antibiotics  will be reduced  in animal  populations  that are more resistant  to 
footrot;  and iv) improved  societal  acceptance,  as the successful  breeding  for enhanced  
resistance  will lead to fewer  lame  sheep  In our landscape,  which  will improve  public  accept ­
ability  of sheep  farming.  This is an issue of growing  importance  as public  access  to the 
countryside  widens.
Conclusions  and future  prospects
It Is clear  that the problem  of footrot  in sheep  can be alleviated  through  the use of breeding  
strategies  to select footrot-resistant  breeding  stock. The use of sustainable  breeding  so­
lutions  has been demonstrated  to be effective  in sheep  populations  in other parts of the 
world,  and it is likely  that they will be also be used in the UK in the near  future. Recent  re­
search  underway  in the UK has shown  that within-breed  genetic  variation  exists  in the ex­
pression  of footrot,  which is a cornerstone  in the tool pack of sheep  breeders  that are 
breeding  footrot-resistant  sheep. The UK-wide  footrot  research  consortium  uses the ex­
pertise  of international  scientists,  and evidence  from flocks  across  Britain. It aims to use 
state-of-the-art  genomic  information  in tandem  with foot scores  from several  thousand  an­
imals so that the 'best' way to breed  footrot-resistant  sheep  can be determined,  and taken  
up by the UK sheep  industry.
References
Abbot,  K.A. and Lewis,  C.J. (2004). Current  approaches  to the management  of ovine  
footrot. Veterinary  Journal,  169:28-41.
Conington,  J., Bishop,  S.C., Lambe,  N., Bunger  L. and Simm,  G. (2006).  Testing  new se­
lection  indices  for sustainable  hill sheep  production  - lamb  growth  and carcass  traits. An­
imal Science,  {In press).
Conington,  J., Bishop,  S.C., Waterhouse,  A. and Simm,  G. (2004). A bio-economic  ap­
proach  to derive  economic  values  for pasture-based  sheep  genetic  improvement  pro­
grammes.  Journal  of Animal  Science,  82: 1290-1304.
Conington,  J., Bishop,  S.C., Grundy,  B., Waterhouse,  A. and Simm,  G (2001).  Sustainable,  
multi-trait  selection  indexes  for UK hill sheep. Animal  Science,  73 (3) 413-424.
Egerton,  J.R. and Roberts,  D.S. (1971).  Vaccination  against  ovine  footrot.  J. Comparative  
Pathology,  81: 179-370.
Escayg,  A.R, Hickford,  J.G.H.  and Bullock,  D.W. (1997).  Association  between  alleles of the 
ovine major  histocompatibility  complex  and resistance  to footrot. Research  In Veterinary  
Science,  63 (3): 283-287,
Greer,  G. (2004). The costs  of footrot  and the impact  of the Footrot  Gene-Marker  Test in 
New Zealand.  Research  report  274, Agribusiness  and Economics  Research  Unit, Lincoln  
University,  NZ. IBSN 0-909042-57-8.
Hickford,  J. (2000). Development  of a sustainable  method  of natural  footrot  control.  Report  
to the NZ Meat Research  and Development  Council.  Lincoln  University.
Hickford,  J.G.H.,  Zhou, H., Slow, S., and Fang, Q. (2004). Diversity  of the ovine DQA2 
gene. Journal  of Animal  Science,  82 (6): 1553-1563.
Hosie,  B. (2003).  Ovine  footrot:  A Scottish  perspective.  Sheep  Veterinary  Society  autumn  
meeting,  Bath. September  2003.
Hosie,  B. (2004). Footrot  and Lameness  in sheep. Veterinary  Record,  154, 37-38
Litchfield,  A.M., Raadsma,  H.W., Hulme,  D.J., Brown,  S.C., Nicholas,  F.W. and Egerton,  
J.R. (1993). Disease  resistance  in Merino  sheep.  II. RFLPs  in Class  2 MHC and their as­
sociation  with footrot. Journal  of Animal  Breeding  and Genetics,  110 (5): 321-334.
Nieuwhof,  G.J. and Bishop,  S.C. (2005). Costs  of the major  endemic  diseases  of sheep  
in Great  Britain  and the potential  benefits  of reduction  in disease  impact.  Animal  Science,  
81: 23-29
Patterson,  R.G. and Patterson,  H.M. (1989).  A practical  approach  to breeding  for footrot  
resistant  Merinos.  Journal  of the New  Zealand  Mountain  Lands  Institute,  pp64-75.
Raadsma,  H.W., Egerton,  J.R., Wood,  D., Kristo,  C. and Nicholas,  F.W. (1994). Disease  
resistance  in Merino  sheep.  III. Genetic  variation  in resistance  following  challenge  and sub­
sequent  vaccination  with an homologous  rDNA  pilus vaccine.  Journal  of Animal  Breeding  
and Genetics,  111 (5-6): 367-390.
Raadsma  ,H.W. (2000). Genetic  aspects  of resistance  to ovine  footrot. In ‘Breeding  for 
disease  resistance  in Farm  Animals ’pp219-214.  Eds. R.Axford,  S. Bishop,  F. Nicholas and 
J. Owen.  CABI.
Skerman,  T.M. and Moorhouse,  S.R. (1987). Broomfield  Corriedales:  a strain of sheep  
selectively  bred for resistance  to footrot. New  Zealand  Veterinary  Journal,  35: 101-106.
Wassink,  G.J. and Green,  L.E. (2001). Farmers'  practices  and attitudes  towards  footrot  in 
sheep. Veterinary  Record,  149: 489-490.
Acknowledgements
Some  of the work and data cited in this paper  has been obtained  as part of a collaborative  
LINK - funded  research  programme.  The funders  of this project  are Defra, SEERAD,  
QMS, EBLEX  and HCC. Partners  in this work include  IRS (Aberystwyth),  ADAS,  MLC, 
Roslin Institute,  Blackface  Elite, the Texel Sheep  Society,  Innovis,  the University  of Mel­
bourne,  Australia  and the University  of Lincoln,  New Zealand.  We are very grateful  to tech­
nical staff Maureen  Steel,  Ann McLaren,  Laura  Nicoll,  Claire  Brockie  (SAC),  Maddy  Lewis  
(IRS) and Karen  Wheeler  (ADAS)  for data handling.
Observations  on Variation  in Weight  and 
Classification  of Carcasses  from Irish Lambs
J.P. Hanrahan
Animal  Production  Research  Centre,  Teagasc,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Introduction
Lamb carcasses  are the key output  from the sheep  enterprise  and should  be the unit 
around  which information  on market  requirements  is focussed.  Ultimately  the consumer  
of meat  is the constituency  that places  a value  on this primary  product  and therefore  pro­
ducers  deserve  clear information  about  consumer  requirements.  There  is a general  con­
sensus  that consumers  do not want to buy fat, and that excessive  amounts  of fat is a 
problem  for sheep  meat. This information  can only flow via the chain from consumer  to re­
tailer  to processor  (abattoir)  and the latter should  be able to reflect  this intelligence  in the 
value placed  on a particular  carcass.  There  is certainly  a case to be made  that this ide­
alised  flow of information  is not effective  at present  and thus not serving  the long-term  in­
terests  of the sheep  sector. This is perhaps  best exemplified  by the scope  for producers  
to simply  increase  carcass  weight  to maximise  returns  per carcass.  This has clear impli ­
cations  for the quality  of the ‘meat ’ produced  -it will contain  significantly  more  fat- and the 
size of the joints  offered  to consumers.  Is this what  the consumer  is willing  to spend  money  
on or is it undermining  the future  of the market?
This paper  will present  observations  on the nature  and composition  of the product  as an 
aid to constructive  dialogue  about  industry  objectives.
Basic  principles  of carcass  composition
The information  summarised  in Figure  1 provides a description  of how carcass  composition  
changes  as lambs  grow and carcass  weight  increases.  As carcass  weight  increases  the 
proportion  of subcutaneous  fat (i.e. fat on the surface  of the carcass)  increases steadily  and 
the proportion  of bone decreases.  While  consumers  eat muscle  plus some  of the visible  
fat (subcutaneous  and intermuscular)  depending  on their individual  tastes,  the term meat  
(i.e. the carcass  minus  the bone and subcutaneous  fat) will be used as a reasonable  ap­
proximation  for what is consumed.  The proportion  of (chemical)  fat in the meat also in­
creases  steadily  as the carcass  gets heavier,  to the extent  that as carcass  weight  increases  
from about  16kg to 22kg,  the proportion  of fat in the meat  goes  from 15g per lOOg to 22g 
per lOOg - an increase  of 50% in the proportion  of fat in the meat.
While it is possible  to nutritionally  manipulate  the fat content,  the consequences  of in­
creased  carcass  weight  are inevitable,  and everybody  with an interest  in maintaining  the 
place  of lamb in the basket  of meat purchased  by the consumer  needs  to recognise  that 
people  do not want  to eat fat - what is required  is just enough  fat to ensure  a good eating  
experience  (tenderness  and flavour).  If it is agreed  that this basic  premise  is correct  then 
the producer  deserves  to have  clear  signals  from the market  that reflect  this proposition  or 
else it must be asked  whether  this premise  is wrong!
Figure  1. Shows  the relationship  between  carcass  weight  and the proportion  of sur­
face fat on the carcass  {= subcutaneous  fat), bone  and meat  (= carcass  (bone  + sub­
cutaneous  fat))
(S
<u
Carcass  weight  (kg)
Carcass  classification
Carcass  classification  refers to  the description  of carcass  in terms  of conformation  (shape)  
and fat cover  (including  internal  fat on the carcass  in the kidney  and pelvic  areas).  It is im­
portant  to appreciate  that classification  does not inherently  address  the issue  of carcass  
' value. The basis  for the sheep  carcass  classification  is set out in EU Regulation  2137/92  
and its objective  was to improve  market  transparency.  It was designed  to provide  informa ­
tion on the carcass  attributes  that allow  the market  valuation  to be reflected  back  to the pro­
ducer. This regulation  has been implemented  by export  abattoirs  and is monitored  by the  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food.
The classification  profile of more than 250,000  lamb carcasses  classified  by one Irish abat­
toir between  April and December  2004 is summarised  in Table 1. The lambs  were from 
lowland  flocks. This shows  that the vast majority  of lambs  from lowland  flocks  are in three  
categories  and the evidence  suggests  that very few carcasses  are over  fat, i.e. fat class  4 
or 5. However,  this is probably  an overly  optimistic  interpretation,  and it is suggest  that the 
classification  applied  is not very severe  on fat cover  and that many  class  3 carcasses  are 
in fact over  fat. The basis  for this interpretation  is that carcass  weight  has increased  by at 
least 1kg since  the mid 1990s,  and when  Teagasc  staff classified  around  6000 carcasses  
from commercial  flocks  during that period  our classification  yielded  around  30 to 40% in the 
over-fat  categories  (Hanrahan,  1999). The evidence  is summarised  in Table  2, which  also 
includes  classification  results for lamb classified  at British  abattoirs  in 2000  and 2001 (MLC, 
2002 )
Table  1. Summary  of carcass  classification  data for lambs  at export  abattoir  in 2004
Conformation Fat
Class Percent Class Percent
E 0.3 2 11.4
U 33.2 3 82.4
R 63.8 4 6.2
0 2.4 5 <0.1
P 0.3
Most  carcasses  were either  R3 (51.5%)  or U3 (29.5%)
Table  2. Carcass  fat class  from observations  on Irish and British  lambs
These  findings  reflect  the inherent  problem  in comparing  classification  results  - the stan-
Fat class Source
IRL 93/96 IRL 97/00 IRL 04 Britain  00/01
2 10.3 6.7 11.4 18.6
3 58.3 51.4 82.4 71.9
4 25.1 33.5 6.2 5.1
5 5.5 8.4 <0.1 2.4
Average  carcass  weight 18.8 19.6 20.0 -
dards  used must  be equivalent  and this takes  considerable  effort. Obviously  an objective  
(machine  based)  system  is highly  desirable.  In the next section  results  from recent  and on­
going  research  on carcass  composition  is summarised  to indicate the association  between  
classification  and composition.
Classification  and composition
The relationship  between fat classification  and the percent  fat in the soft tissue  (i.e. carcass  
minus  bone)  from two recent  studies  in Teagasc  is summarised  in Tables  3 and 4. In both 
studies,  the percent  fat increased  substantially  as fat class  increased  from 2 to 3 to 4. The 
values  in Table  3 are for carcasses  classified  by the Teagasc  staff (using  MLC standards)  
whereas  the results  in Table  4 are for lambs  classified  by staff at an export  abattoir.  The 
comparison  of the carcass  weight  and percent  fat strongly  support  the earlier  proposition  
that the apparently  satisfactory  overall  classification  results  for Irish lamb (Table  1) is too 
lenient  in terms  of fat percentage  and should  not be used to conclude  that all is OK with 
the quality  of Irish lamb at the point  of slaughter.
Table  3. Results  from chemical  analysis  of soft tissue  (carcass  minus  bone)  from  
171 lambs  classified  using MLC standards  (from study  described  by Hanrahan,  
1999).
Fat class Carcass  weight  (kg) Percent  fat
2 16.9 11
3 19.0 15
4 23.0 23
10
Table 4. Results  of chemical  analysis  of soft tissue  (carcass  minus  bone)  from  
lambs  based  on abattoir  ciassification  (n = 56), (Hanrahan  and Allen,  unpublished  
data).
Fat class Carcass  weight Percent  fat
2 17.3 16.7
3 21.5 23.5
4 23.9 31.2
A similar  association  exists  between  conformation  and fat percentage.  Thus,  as conforma ­
tion goes  from an 'O’ to an 'R' the percent  fat goes  from about  17% to 30%; going  from ‘R’ 
to ‘U’ is associated  with another  jump of about  8 percentage  points.
Carcass  weioht
This attribute  of the carcass  can be objectively  measured  and, as shown  in Figure  1 is 
clearly  related  to carcass composition  and can thus provide  objective  information  about  the 
product.  If the old, and very apt adage,  that “a lamb  is only fit for slaughter  once  in its life” 
is taken as a starting  point, then given  the relationship  in Figure  1, it is necessary  to look 
at variability  in carcass  weight.  The variation  in carcass  weight  at export  plants  is shown  
in Figure  2.
Close inspection  of this evidence  reveals  that it takes a spread  of 7kg to accommodate  
90% of the carcasses.  This is an enormous  range! Data from research  flocks,  where  
lambs are drafted  for sale using weight,  and an assessment  of finish - with the objective  
of avoiding  over  fat carcasses  and getting  an average  carcass  weight  of about  18.5kg,  the 
range in carcass  weight  is no more  that 4 kg.
Figure  2. The distribution  of carcasses  by weight;  the red bars mark  the points  be­
tween  which  90% of ail carcasses  are found
Processors  frequently  express  the view that carcass  'quality'  is great in spring  but deteri ­
orates  as the season  progresses.  This 'fact' is not clearly  reflected  in classification  results  
as indicated  in Figure  3. Yes, the proportion  of U3 carcases  declines  from April to June, 
with a corresponding  increase  in proportion  of R3, but the classification  profile then  remains  
essentially  steady  right through  until December.  However,  there is another  pattern  that is
11
evident  over  the season  and this is sho\A/n  in Figure  4. This shows  the variability  in carcass  
weight  and how it changes  over the season.  In May and June the variability  (measured  
here by the standard  deviation  within batches  of iambs  from a given supplier  on a given 
day) is about 1.6kg, this increases  steadily  over the year; 1.8kg in Juiy/September  and 
around  2.0kg  in October/November.  It gets even worse  in the December  to February  pe-^ 
hod.
Figure  3. The change  in carcass  classification  between  April and December  (Over  
fat = Fat classes  4 and 5 combined)
0)>
O
Figure  4. Variability  (measured  by the standard  deviation  of carcass  weight),  on the 
basis  of lambs  at the abattoir  on a given  day, among  lambs  from a given  supplier  
(S.D. (within))  and among  all lambs  (S.D. (tot)).
3.00
3
0)•<c_c
3C_
C> w o z ac (D o o <D(Q ■o < O
Translating  these  statistics  into the profile  of carcass  weight  shows  that the spread  in car­
cass  weight  for a given  supplier  increases  from ~5kg in May/June  to ~6kg in July/Septem ­
ber to ~7kg in October/November.  It must  be emphasised  that this spread  represents  whai
12
the average  supplier  is sending  on a given day! Factor  in the variation  among  suppliers  
to get a picture  of the carcass  profile  that must be marketed  from a given  abattoir  on any 
given day... - examples  of the spread  in carcass  weight  within  an abattoir  on a given day 
are as follows:
7kg in May,
7.5kg in August  
8.5kg in October  
Over  9kg in December
This makes  effective  marketing  of the product  very difficult  (imagine  the resulting  variability  
in the size of joints  and cuts)  and processors  need  to address  this issue  or else make  clear  
that it has no relevance  to the price that they can obtain  for the product  and hence  the 
price offered  to the producer.
One factor  that contributes  to the increased  variability  is the pattern  of lamb drafting  for 
slaughter.  The evidence  for this is summarised  in Table  5 and shows  that in the early part 
of the season  the interval  between  lamb drafts  is around  10 days;  this increases  to over 3 
weeks in June/July,  4 weeks in August/September  and hits around 5 weeks in 
November/December.
Table 5. The number  of days between  drafting  lambs  from an average  flock as the 
season  progresses  and the mean  number  of lambs  per batch  (based  on over  250,000  
records  from one export  abattoir  in 2004)
Month No. of days Lambs  per batch
April 9 15
May 12 20
June 16 22
July 19 25
August 25 29
September 28 28
October 28 29
November 35 28
Carcass  weight  and classification
Even allowing  for the above  concerns  about  the precise  interpretation  of classification,  it 
is instructive  to look at what  happens  as carcass  weight  increases.  Evidence  is presented  
in Table  6, which  groups  Fat classes  4 & 5 together  as definitely  over  fat. Included  also are 
the small number  of "E' carcasses  with the 'Ll' category.
Table 6. Association  between  carcass  weight  and classification
Carcass  weight  range  (kg) Over fat Conformation  class U
14.0 to 16.9 0.2% 3.0%
17.0 to 19.9 1.5% 25.1%
20.0 to 22.9 6.5% 52.8%
23.00 to 25.9 15.5% 71.7%
13
The expected  pattern  is evident  - as weight  goes up the incidence  of over-fat  carcasses  
goes  up and  so does 'good'  conformation.  This reflects  a well established  aspect  of sheep  
carcass  classification  systems  - good conformation  is associated  with increased  fatness.
Conclusions
The evidence  presented  in this paper  shows  the following:
As carcass  weight  increases  the fatness  of the product  increases.  An increase  of one unit 
in fat class is associated  with an increase  in chemical  fat by 1.5 times (e.g. from 11% to 
15%).
The same  relationship  holds  for conformation  changes  and the percent  of subcutaneous  
fat.
The variability  in carcass  weight  is excessive.  The industry  as a whole  needs  to reflect  or 
this issue,  and clear  evidence  is needed  on whether  solving  this problem  can deliver  better  
returns  to the serious  producer.
Unfortunately,  at the present  time there is a grossly  inadequate  specification  of what  the 
market  requires  and thus an absence  of consistent  and clear  signals  to the producer  (and 
researcher!).  While  this deficiency  will require  considerable  effort  to resolve,  and the res­
olution  will have to involve  both producers  and processors,  the hope is that the evidence  
summarised  in this paper  will contribute  to an informed  debate  on the issue.
References
Meat and Livestock  Commission  (2002). Sheep  Yearbook  2002, page 73.
Hanrahan,  J. P. (1999).  Genetic  and non-genetic  factors  affecting  lamb growth  and carcass  
quality. End of Project  Reports:  Sheep  Series  No. 8, Teagasc,  ISBN 1 84170  062 2
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1999).  Carcass  composition  of Suffolk  and Texel  lambs. Research  report  
1999,  Athenry  Research  Centre,  Teagasc.  Page 20.
14
Efficient  Sheep  Production  in a Subsidy  Free 
Environment  - Research  from Athenry
Tim Keady  and Seamus  Hanrahan  
Teagasc,  Animal  Production  Research  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway
Introduction
Ireland  has 4.26 million  sheep  (the fifth largest  flock in the EU 25), accounting  for approx ­
imately  5% of the total  ewe number.  In 2005  the output  from sheep  production  was equiv ­
alent to €192 million,  which was 3.9% of the Gross  Agricultural  Output. Since the 
implementation  of the Mid Term Review  (MTR)  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy  (CAP)  
sheep production  is in the process  of transition  from an environment  in which  decisions  
were often subsidy  driven  to a market  orientated,  subsidy  free system.  With the decoupling  
of subsidy  from farm production  and the proposed  reduction  of tariffs  in World  trade, it is 
predicted  that the Irish ewe flock will decline  by up to 24%. Since  the implementation  of 
the MTR of the CAP on January  1 2005,  ewe numbers  have  declined  by 7.5%. Sixty  eight  
per cent of flocks  have less than 100 ewes with only 11% of flocks  having  greater  than 
200 ewes.
Prior to December  31 2004 (in subsidy  driven  systems  of sheep  production),  the subsidy  
received  equated  to €1.43/kg  carcass  produced.  To achieve  a viable  income  from sheep  
production  in the future,  producers  will have to increase  flock size, increase  output  per 
labour  unit, and improve  production  efficiency  whilst  at the same  time obtaining  a higher  
return  from the market  place  to offset  the loss of the €1.43/kg  carcass  in subsidy  forgone.  
The aim of this paper  is to highlight  the potential  savings,  which  can be made  in the cost 
of sheep  production  based  primarily  on research  studies  undertaken  at Teagasc  Athenry.
What is the current  output  of lamb,  and what  is achievable?
Weight  of lamb carcass  output  per ewe put to the ram but ultimately  per hectare  are the 
major factors  affecting  margins  from sheep  production.  Recent  studies  undertaken  at 
Athenry  and Knockbeg  have reported  annual  lamb  carcass  output  of up to 500kg/ha  (Table  
1). These  high carcass  outputs  were achieved  from a combination  of high stocking  rate 
and high weaning  rate. Currently  a large proportion  of flock  owners  are participants  in the 
Rural Environment  Protection  Scheme  (REPS),  which  limits  potential  stocking  rate. Stud ­
ies at Athenry  involving  outdoor  year round  grazing  compatible  with REPS,  have shown  
that an output  of 344kg  lamb carcass  per hectare  is achievable  (Table  1). Data from the 
National  Farm Survey  (Table  1) indicates  that the national  average  output  of lamb  carcass  
on lowland  farms  is only about  197kg/ha,  which  is due to a low stocking  rate combined  with 
low number  of lambs  reared  per ewe put to the ram. The output  of lamb  carcass  achieved  
in research  flocks  in conventional  and REPS  compatible  grass  based  systems  were 150%  
and 80% greater  than the national  average.
15
Table  1. Achieved  lamb output  at Athenry  and the national  average  output
Athenry National
Conventional Conventional REPS Average
Ewes/ha 16.5 14 10 8.3
Lambs  reared/ewe 1.70 1.86 1.78 1.25
Lamb  carcass  output  
kg/ewe 31.3 35.3 34.4 23.8
kg/ha 494 494 344 197
(Nolan  and 
McNamara,  
2002)(Flanagan,
2000)(Flanagan,
2000)(Kinsella,
2005)
Improving  Efficiency
Improvement  in efficiency  on farms  is possible  by exploiting  changes  in genetics,  nutrition  j 
and management  of the ewe flock.  j
I
Improvements  in genetics
Whilst  improvements  in efficiency  of sheep  production  due to breeding  are slow, the 
changes  are cumulative  and permanent.  Improvements  in genetics  are achievable  through 
the ewe and the sire.
Ewe genotype
Weight  of lamb sold per ewe joined  to the ram is the major  factor  affecting  profitability  at 
farm level. Changing  genetics  is the cheapest  and often the only method  available  to im­
prove  lamb  output  per ewe. A major  study  involving  2000  ewes  was undertaken  at Athenry  
to evaluate  the impact  of ewe genotype  on lamb output. Eight  sire breeds  were mated  to 
Scottish  Blackface  ewes and the female  progeny  were evaluated  to determine  the effect  
of ewe genotype  on fertility,  litter size and weaning  rate (lambs  reared  per ewe joined  to 
the ram). The results  are presented  in Table  2. Fertility  is the proportion  of sheep  let to 
the ram that produce  lambs. The Belclare  X, Border  Leicester  X, and Scottish  Blackface 
had the highest  fertility  whilst  the Cheviot  X and Galway  X had the lowest.  The Belclare  X 
produced  the highest  litter size being  0.41 greater  than Scottish  Blackface  and 0.18 greater 
than the Bluefaced  Leicester  X (Mule).  The number  of lambs  reared  per ewe put to the ram 
(weaning  rate) provides  an overall  index of reproductive  performance.  Choice  of ewe 
genotype  altered  weaning  rate by 0.36 lambs/ewe  and the value  of lamb sales  by €22/ewe  
put to  the ram (based  on 2005 lamb price). The Belclare  X produced  the highest  weaning 
rate, being  0.16 greater  than the mule (€10/ewe),  and 0.34 (€22/ewe)  greater  than the Suf­
folk X. Currently  the national  flock consists  of 45% Suffolk  and Suffolk  crosses.
The data presented  in Table  2 clearly  illustrate that  total weaning  rate can be increased  dra­
matically  by changing  the ewe genotype.  Use of Belclare  in the first cross with  the Scottish  
Blackface  resulted  in an extra 36 and 21 lambs  being weaned  per 100 ewes put to the 
ram relative  to the purebred  Scottish  Blackface  and Suffolk  X, respectively.  Furthermore  
increasing  the proportion  of Belclare  genes  in the ewe will increase  the weaning  rate fur­
ther. Recent  data from  Athenry  show  that a weaning  rate of 1.95 lambs  per ewe put to the 
ram is achievable  when  using  purebred  Belclare  ewes. As the litter size increases  the pro­
portion  of ewes in the flock producing  triplets  increases.  Some  producers  wish to avoid
16
triplets,  as they believe  that they are difficult  to finish. Recent  data from this Research  
Centre  have shown  that lambs  reared  as triplets,  using  appropriate  management,  only re­
quire an additional  14 days to achieve  similar  carcass  weights  as lambs  reared  as twins.
Table  2. Effect  of ewe genotype  on reproductive  performance
Ewe genotype Fertility Litter  size Weaning  rate
Belclare  x S. Blackface 0.94 1.89 1.54
Blue Leicester  x S. Blackface 0.91 1.71 1.38
Border  Leicester  x S. Blackface 0.94 1.60 1.36
Suffolk  x S. Blackface 0.91 1.65 1.33
Texel x S. Blackface 0.93 1.58 1.33
Galway  x S. Blackface 0.83 1.63 1.20
S. Blackface 0.94 1.48 1.18
Cheviot  x S. Blackface 0.86 1.51 1.11
(Hanrahan,  1994a)
More recent  studies  (Table  3) have shown  that Belclare  x Cheviot  ewes  have increased  the 
number  of lambs  weaned  by 15 and 20 per 100 ewes  put to the ram relative to  Blue Leices ­
ter X Cheviot  and Suffolk  x Cheviot  ewes respectively.  The Technology  Evaluation  and 
Transfer  (TET)  project  which  was initiated  in 2001 by Teagasc on 40 sheep  units throughout  
Ireland  for a three  year period  clearly  illustrates  that flocks  which  comprised  predominantly  
(but not solely)  Belclare  X ewes had higher  weaning  rates of 0.08 and 0.24 relative  to 
flocks  which  were either  Mules  or Suffolk  X.
In recent  years there  has been interest  in the use of the Vendeen  breed.  A major  study  was 
undertaken  on a large commercial  farm (1140  ewes)  by Teagasc to  evaluate  the effects  of 
Vendeen  X and Belclare  X ewes  on prolificacy.  The ewes had been bred on the farm as 
flock replacements  and performance  was recorded  over a three year period. The data 
from the study showed  that the Belclare  X ewes produced  larger  litters and number  of 
lambs  born alive per litter. For the Belclare  X and Vendeen  X ewes  litter size was 2.15 and 
1.95 lambs/ewe  and number  of lambs  born alive were 2.00 and 1.81 lambs/ewe  respec ­
tively. Therefore  the major  effects  of ewe genotype  on weaning  rate observed  in many  
studies  at Athenry  have been confirmed  at farm level.
Table 3. Effect  of ewe genotype  on reproductive  performance
Ewe genotype Litter  size Weaning  rate
Belclare  x Cheviot 1.87 1.62
Blue Leicester  x Cheviot 1.78 1.47
Suffolk  X Cheviot 1.72 1.42
(Hanrahan,  1997)
Terminal  sire breed
Using  the payment  schemes  currently  in use by the majority  of export  meat  plants,  growth  
rate is the most important  characteristic  when choosing  a terminal  sire breed. Increased  
growth  rate enables  lamb to be finished  earlier,  reducing  feed costs whilst  at the same  
time avoiding  lower  prices  as the season  progresses.
17
Most processors  offer bonuses  of 6c/kg for U grades.  Assuming  a 20kg  carcass,  the bonus 
of 6c/kg  is worth  €1.20,  which  is equivalent  to either  0.36kg  carcass  or the additional  weight  
gain achieved  by keeping  the lambs  approximately  4 days longer  on your holding  prior  to 
slaughter.  However  selecting  sire breeds  for improved  conformation  is unlikely  to increase  
the proportion  of U grades  by as much  as 20%, an increase of this magnitude  is equivalent  
to 1.2c/kg  carcass  of all lambs  marketed.  Furthermore  it should  be noted  that breeds  with 
improved  conformation  characteristics  tend to have lower  growth  rates, therefore  being 
older  at the point  of marketing.  Consequently  increased  feed costs  will accrue  whilst  at the 
same  time lamb price is likely  to decline  as the season  progresses.  Therefore  whilst  con­
formation  is a frequently  discussed  topic in the industry,  the reward  is relatively  small.
A major  study  at Athenry  has evaluated  the effect  of nine sire breeds  on progeny  perform ­
ance (Table  4). Choice  of sire breed  altered  weaning  weight  by up to 2.5kg and days to 
slaughter  by up to 20 days. The progeny  of Suffolk  rams were heaviest  at weaning  and 
earliest  to reach slaughter.  Relative  to the Suffolk,  the Charollais  and Texel progeny  re­
quired  an additional  5 and 9 days to  reach  slaughter  weight  respectively.  Progeny  from the 
other  sire breeds,  required  between  12 and 20 days relative  to progeny  from the Suffolk  to 
reach  slaughter.  The Beltex  produced  progeny  with the best conformation  followed  closely  
by lie de France,  Suffolk,  Charollais,  Texel and Vendeen.  Beltex  had the highest  kill out 
proportion  followed  closely  by He de France,  Charollais  and Texel.
Due to interest  within  the industry  in the Vendeen  as a terminal  sire, a further  evaluation  
of the breed,  in direct  comparison  with the Belclare,  was undertaken  on a large  commercial  
farm (1140  ewes). At weaning,  lambs  sired by Vendeen  and Belclare  rams  weighed  31.9 
and 31.0 kg respectively,  similar  to the differences  observed  in the large breed  study un­
dertaken  at Athenry,  which  concluded  that lambs  sired by Vendeen  and Belclare  rams pro­
duce carcasses  of similar  characteristics  at the same  age.
Table  4. Effect  of terminal  sire breed  on progeny  performance
Extra  days  to Carcass
Sire breedwt. (kg)finish relative  to 
the Suffolk(g/kg) Conformation^ Fat^
Suffolk 31.8 - 438 3.3 3.3
Charollais 31.0 5 449 3.3 3.2
Texel 30.6 9 446 3.3 3.2
Beltex 30.5 16 446 3.5 3.3
He de France 30.2 20 452 3.4 3.4
Rouge  de I'Quest 30.2 12 438 3.2 3.2
Vendeen 30.0 14 445 3.3 3.2
Bleu du Maine 29.4 18 435 3.2 3.1
Belclare 29.3 15 442 3.1 3.3
EUROP  scale  where  E=5, U=4, R=3, 0=2, P=1 . 
^1 = leanest;  5 = fattest
(Hanrahan,  1999)
18
Recently  the Suffolk,  Texel and Beltex  terminal  sire breeds  have been evaluated  in North ­
ern Ireland  (Table  5). Similar  to previous  work at Athenry,  the data from Northern  Ireland  
confirm  that relative  to the Suffolk,  progeny  from Texel sires take slightly  longer  to finish  
whilst  progeny  from the Beltex  require  an additional  22 days to achieve  similar  finish  and 
carcass  weight. However Beltex  progeny  had improved  conformation  and increased  kill out 
proportion  in agreement  with Teagasc  data.
Table 5. Effect  of terminal  sire breed  on carcass  characteristics  of lambs  slaugh ­
tered at Fat class  3
Sire Breed
Suffolk Texel Beltex
Weaning  weight  (kg) 37.5 36.6 34.7
Age at slaughter  (days) 156 159 177
Kill out (g/kg) 434 456 459
Carcass  characteristics
Weight  (kg) 19.2 19.5 19.4
Conformation^ 3.0 3.3 3.5
'EUROP  scale  where  E=5, U=4, R=3, 0=2, P==1
(Carson  etal.,  2004)
Currently  Suffolk  and Suffolk  X account  for approximately  45% of the national  ewe flock.  
Data from Athenry  has concluded  (Table  6) that when choosing  a terminal  sire breed  for 
Suffolk  X ewes, use of Texel and Charollais  rams tends to produce  heavier  progeny  at 
weaning,  which  finish  earlier  relative  to progeny  from Suffolk  rams. This is probably  due 
to reduced  hybrid  vigour  when Suffolk  rams are used on Suffolk  X ewes.
Table 6. Effect  of sire breed  on the performance  of progeny  from Suffolk  X ewes
Sire breed
Suffolk Texel
Weaning  weight  (kg) 33.8 34.2
(Hanrahan,  1994b)
The data from these  studies  clearly  illustrate  that when choosing  a terminal  sire, the only 
breeds  which  merit  serious  consideration  are the Suffolk,  Charollais  and Texel. The other  
breeds  produce  progeny  which  take considerably  longer  to reach  market  and with little or 
no benefit  in carcass  characteristics.  Furthermore,  it is of interest  to note, that the Belclare  
breed  which was developed  for its maternal  characteristics  resulted  in carcasses  of similar  
characteristics  to the other breeds  and take only 15 days longer  to finish relative  to the 
Suffolk,  similar  to the results  of the five of the other  eight  breeds evaluated.  In terms  of cost 
of lamb production,  terminal  sire breed  has a small  impact  on production  efficiency  altering  
the cost of production  by about  7c/kg  carcass  produced,  or €1.40/Iamb.
Nutrition  of the ewe and her oroaenv
Plane  of nutrition  can be altered  at any stage  during  the annual  cycle  of the ewe or during  
the life-time  of the progeny  and will have an immediate  effect  on performance.
19
Nutrition  in late pregnancy
The nutrient  requirement  of the ewe increases  dramatically  in late pregnancy  due to the 
rapidly  growing  foetuses.  The weight  of the foetus  increases  by 85, 50 and 25% respec­
tively  during the last 8,4 and 2 weeks  of pregnancy.  During  the last six weeks  of pregnancy  
the energy  requirements  of ewes carrying  singles,  twins and triplets  increases  by 40, 60 
and 70% respectively.  Currently  in Ireland  a large proportion  of ewes are housed  in late 
pregnancy  and offered  either  grass  silage  or hay ad-libitum  as the sole forage.  Concentrate  
supplementation  is required  in late pregnancy  to meet the rapidly  increasing  nutrient  re­
quirements  whilst  at the same  time food intake  capacity  is declining.  The decline  in food 
intake  is due to the  rapidly  growing  foetuses  reducing  available  space within  the abdominal  
cavity  for the digestive  system  and its contents.  The level of concentrate  supplementation  
required  depends  on the forage  feed value  and the expected  litter size.
Forage  feed value
The major  factors  affecting  the feed value of grass silage  for sheep  are digestibility  and 
chop length. The effects  of silage  chop length  on the performance  of finishing  lambs  are 
presented  in Table  7. Reducing  the chop length  dramatically  increased  silage  intake  re­
sulting  in improved  animal  performance  as measured  by daily liveweight  gain and final 
carcass  weight.  These  data clearly  illustrate  that chop length  has a major  effect  and that 
the shorter  the chop length  the higher  the silage  intake.
Table  7. The effect  of silage  chop length  on the performance  of finishing  lambs
Harvester  type
Single Double Precision
Chop Chop Long  Short
Liveweight  gain (g/d) 40 53 85 151
Carcass  weight  (kg) 16.6 18.5 20.0  22.7
(Fitzgerald,  1996)
Digestibility  (DMD)  is the most important  factor  affecting  silage  feed value  as it impacts on 
both the metabolisable  energy  concentration  of the forage  and also on its intake  charac­
teristics.  Increasing  silage  digestibility  increases  feed value  and reduces  the level of con­
centrate  supplementation  required  during  late pregnancy.  The impact  of silage  digestibility  
and chop length  on concentrate  requirement  of twin bearing  ewes during  late pregnancy  
are illustrated  in Table  8. Increasing  levels of concentrate  are required  as silage  digestibility  
declines  and also as the chop length  increases.  It can be assumed  that the intake  char­
acteristics  of single  chop and big bale silages  are similar  if ensiled  under  identical  condi ­
tions. The data clearly  illustrate  that silage  digestibility  and chop length  can impact  on the 
quantity  of concentrate  required  during  late pregnancy  by up to 400%. Each 5 unit increase  
in silage  digestibility  offered  during  a standard  winter  housing  period  improves  efficiency  
of lamb production  by 16c/kg  carcass  through  a combination  of reduced  concentrate  re­
quirement  in late pregnancy  and better  nutrition  in mid pregnancy  which increases  lamb 
birth weight  and subsequent  performance  (heavier  weaning  weight  and earlier  sale date).
20
Table 8. Effect  of silage  chop length  and digestibility  on concentrate  requirements  
of twin bearing  ewes  in late pregnancy  (kg/ewe)
. ^ . Silage  DMD (%)ndivcait?!  1 ypc79 72 64
Precision 8 12 20
Single  chop  / big bale 12 20 30
Utter  size
Litter size has a major  influence  on the level of concentrate  required  in late pregnancy.  As 
litter size increases  concentrate  input must increase  to meet additional  nutrient  require ­
ments. For the 72 and  64 DMD  silages  in Table 8, concentrate  feed levels  can be reduced  
by 11 kg/ewe  for single  bearing  ewes  and should  be increased  by 7 kg/ewe  for triplet  bear ­
ing ewes during  the last 6 weeks  of pregnancy.
Protein  requirements  increase  dramatically  during  the last 4 weeks  of pregnancy.  Conse ­
quently,  during  this period  the crude protein  level in the concentrate  should  be 18% for 
ewes offered  moderate  to high feed-value  silages. However,  for ewes offered  low feed-  
value grass  silage  or hay the protein  level of the concentrate  should  be increased  to 20%.
Concentrate  price
Concentrate  price can vary dramatically.  High quality  concentrate  can be produced  cost 
effectively  by mixing  a blend  of straights  together  with a proprietary  sheep  mineral  and vi­
tamin mixture  and offered  as a course  ration. Examples  of cost effective  high quality  con­
centrate  mixtures  are presented  in Table  9. In late pregnancy  good  quality  protein  sources  
are desirable.  Soyabean  is a high quality  protein  source  and should  be included  in all sup­
plements  offered  to sheep  in late pregnancy.  Replacing  5% of barley  in these  mixes  with 
5% soyabean  meal  alters  the crude  protein  concentration  by 2%. Concentrate  price is fre­
quently  discussed  in the sheep  industry.  However,  changing  the price of concentrate  by 
€30/tonne  only alters  efficiency  of lamb production  by 2c/kg  lamb carcass  produced.
Table  9. Simple  concentrate  mixes  for sheep
(1)
(2)40% barley,  35% beet pulp, 25% soyabean  meal + 25 kg mineral/vitamins  
{Crude  protein  = 18%)
30% barley,  30% citrus  pulp, 10% maize  gluten,  10% distillers,  20%  
soyabean  + 25 kg mineral/vitamins  {Crude  protein  = 18%)
Grassland  management
When  all the costs  of production  and utilisation  rate are considered,  grazed  grass  is not a 
cheap  feed to produce.  Recent  costings  (Table  10) demonstrate  that whilst  grass is the 
cheapest  forage  to produce,  it is only 6 to 31 % cheaper  than ensiled  forages.  For example,  
maize  when  grown  under  the complete-cover  plastic  mulch  system  can now be produced  
and fed to farm animals at a similar  cost to grazed  grass. Furthermore,  three  cut silage  only  
costs 16% more  than grazed  grass.
21
Table 10. The relative  costs  of forage  production  (all production  costs  including  
land charge)
Forage Cost (€/t DM consumed) Relative  Cost
Grazed  grass 104 100
3-cut  silage 121 116
4-cut  silage 136 131
Fermented  whole  crop 126 121
Maize - no plastic 134 129
- plastic 110 106
(after  Keady  et al, 2002)
Forage Cost (€/t DM consumed)  Relative  Cost Grazed  grass 104 100 3-cut silage  121 
116 4-cut silage 136 131 Fermented  whole  crop 126 121 Maize - no plastic  134 129 
- plastic  110 106 (after  Keady  etal, 2002)
In mid season  fat lamb production,  the forage  component  of the diet consists  primarily  of 
grazed  grass. Additional  feeds  offered  if required,  are likely  to be concentrate  (€260-350/t 
dry matter),  which  is 300%  or 690%  more  costly  than grazed  grass  when  all grass  produc­
tion costs  or cash costs  are included  respectively.  Consequently  it is essential  to increase  
daily performance  from  grazed  grass  to reduce  production  costs  and enable  lambs to finish  
earlier  whilst  avoiding  price  falls in the market  due to late finishing.  Many studies atAthenry 
have been undertaken  to determine  the optimum  level of performance  from mid season  
flocks  at pasture.  During  the grass  growing  season  daily grass  growth  rates vary dramat­
ically,  e.g. 10,40,  90, 50, 60, 30 and  20kg DM/hectare/day  for March,  April,  May, June,  July, 
September  and October  respectively.  At the same  time the demand  of the flock varies  as 
the lamb grows  pre weaning,  whilst  post weaning  ewe requirements  decline.  AtAthenry,  
sward  height  has been used to manage  grassland.  The impact  of sward  height  on lamb 
performance  pre weaning  and post weaning  are presented  in Tables  11 and 12 respec ­
tively. Increasing  sward  height  to 6cm during  the pre-weaning  period  increased  animal  
performance.  However  increasing  sward  height  had no further  beneficial  effects on animal  
performance.  However  lax grazing  pre weaning  resulted  in swards  that had stemmy,  low- 
digestibility  herbage  later in the season  and consequently  poor lamb performance  post 
weaning.  Increasing  sward  height  to 9cm in the post weaning  period  increased  animal  
performance.  From numerous  studies,  the target  sward-height  to achieve  optimum  levels  
of performance  are 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9cm in the months  of April, May, June, July, August  and 
September  respectively.  Also to maintain  good performance  at pasture  it is essential  to 
practice  an effective  parasite  control  regime.
Table  11. Effect  of sward  height  on lamb performance  in May and June
Sward  height  (cm) Liveweight  gain (g/d)
4 267
6 306
9 315
(Grennan  and O’Riordan,  1996)
22
Table 12. Effect  of sward  height  on lamb performance  post weaning
Sward  height  (cm) Liveweight  gain (g/d)
5 115
7 141
9 162
(Grennan  and O’Riordan,  1996)
Creep  feeding
There is a lot of interest  in creep  feeding  lambs  presumably  with the intention  of finishing  
lambs earlier. The response  to creep  feeding  depends  on grass  availability.  The results  
of a number  of studies  at Athenry  undertaken  to evaluate  creep  feeding  are summarised  
in Table 13. Creep  feeding  increased  weaning  weight  regardless  of sward  height. How­
ever, it should  be noted  that creep  feeding  300g concentrate/lamb/day  on the low swards  
resulted  in the same  level of performance  as lambs  grazing  the high swards  with no creep  
feed. Therefore  creep feeding  replaced  good grassland  management.  Lambs  offered  300 
and 600g creep/day  consumed  30 and 50kg concentrate  respectively.  For lambs  offered  
creep feed, 14kg concentrate  was required  to produce  each additional  1kg of carcass  
weight,  which  is a poor  food conversion  ratio. Creep  feeding  reduced  age to slaughter  by 
28 days. However  increasing  grass  height  from 5 to 6cm reduced  age at slaughter  by 13 
days, half the effects  of feeding  32.5kg  creep/iamb.
Table 13. Effect  of creep  feeding  and sward  height  on lamb  weaning  weight  (kg)
Creep  feed (g/lamb  per day)
Low sward  height High sward  height
0 300 600 0 300 600
Weaning  weight  (kg) 31.4 34.3 36.9 33.7 36.7 37.5
Drafted  at weaning  (%) 7.3 20.7 42.8 20.4 41.2 53.7
Age at sale (days) 167 140 125 154 126 118
Creep  intake  (kg) 0 32.5 52.9 0 27.5 46.0
(Grennan  and McNamara,  2005)
Although  creep  feeding  enables  animals  to be drafted  at a younger  age (and most likely  
at a higher  price),  the question  often asked  is ‘‘does it pay”? Assuming  market  price con­
ditions  that prevailed  in 2004 and 2005, lamb price declined  from €3.54 in early July to 
€3.10/kg  carcass  in late October,  the period  when the majority  of mid season  fat lamb is 
marketed.  The effect  of creep  feeding  on carcass  value  of the March  born lambs  relative  
to the carcass  value  of lambs  receiving  no creep (using  the prevailing  market  prices  of 
2004 and 2005),  and allowing  for the cost of creep  consumed  by the lambs  at concentrate  
prices  ranging  from  €150  to €325/t  is presented  in Table  14. The data  clearly  illustrates  that 
regardless  of grass  height,  offering  creep  to lambs,  which  enabled  slaughter  at a younger  
age did not cover  the cost of the creep  within a concentrate  price range  from €150 to 
€325/t. It is also observed  that increasing  sward  height  from 5 to 6cm increased  carcass  
value by €2.50/head.  Whilst  no allowance  has been made  for the additional  grass  required  
to feed the lambs  without  creep feed,  the grass  cost will have little impact  on the economics  
of production.  Many  sheep  farms  in Ireland  are moderately  stocked  which  enables  greater  
production  of grass  at little extra cost. Prior to slaughter,  40kg lambs  consume  approxi ­
23
mately  1kg grass  DM/head/day,  requiring  an additional  27kg DM to finish. Whilst  the total 
cost of grass  production  is€104/tDM  (Table  10) the cash  cost is €44/t  DM. Consequently, 
the additional  grass  required  without  creep  feeding  would  cost €1.18. Even allowing  for 
grass  cost, creep  feeding  concentrate  at a cost greater  than €175 does not break  even.  
Furthermore  the producer  requires  additional  returns to cover  the cost of purchase  of feed­
ers, concentrate  storage  and labour.  Also if lambs  are fed creep  to finish  early,  the producer 
must  establish  what, if any, is the opportunity  cost of the grass  remaining?  It is concluded  
that creep  feeding  mid season  lamb does not give an economic  return.
Table  14. Effect  of creep  feeding  on carcass  value  (€) of March  born lambs,  after  cost 
of creep,  assuming  market  conditions  of 2004/05  relative  to lambs  receiving  no creep  
at two sward  grazing  heights  (€/carcass)
Creep  feed level (g/day)Sward  height  (cm)
5 6
300 600 300 600
Concentrate  price (€/t)
150 -0.56 -0.55 -0.45 -2.15
175 -1.37 -1.87 -1.14 -3.30
200 -2.19 -3.19 -1.83 -4.45
225 -3.00 -4.51 -2.51 -5.60
250 -3.81 -5.84 -3.20 -6.75
275 -4.62 -7.16 -3.89 -7.90
300 -5.44 -8.48 -4.58 -9.05
325 -6.25 -9.80 -5.26 -10.20
Management  practices
Changes  in some  farm management  practices  can increase  efficiency  of lamb  production  
at no extra cost.
Finishing  male lambs  as rams
Traditionally  male lambs  were castrated  to facilitate  management  post weaning  when 
lambs  are reaching  sexual  maturity. However  there is plenty  of evidence  from other  
species,  e.g. beef  cattle,  that finishing  the male  progeny  entire  increases  growth  rate, food 
conversion  efficiency  and produces  leaner  carcasses.  A major  study  was completed  at 
Athenry  to evaluate  the effect  of finishing  male lambs  entire  (as rams)  on animal  perform ­
ance. The results  are presented  in Table  15. Lambs  finished  entire  were 1.8kg heavier  at 
weaning,  produced  leaner  carcasses  and were slaughtered  16 days earlier  than lambs 
which  were castrated  shortly  after birth. The data clearly  show  that finishing  male lambs  
entire  increases  performance.  Finishing  lambs  entire,  improved  efficiency  by 13c/kg  for 
male  lambs  or by 7c/kg  if all progeny  from the flock  are slaughtered,  similar  to the response 
obtained  from choice  of terminal  sire breed. However  it should  be noted  that post  weaning, 
ram lambs  should  be managed  separately  from ewe lambs,  otherwise,  the potential  ben­
efits in growth  rate will be foregone  as young  rams will be very active  in the presence  of 
females.  Furthermore  if the current  production  system  is not capable  of delivering  the ma­
jority  of lambs  to slaughter  by late August,  then the potential  advantages  of leaving  lambs 
entire  is reduced  and product  quality  may be compromised.
24
Table 15. Effects  of finishing  male lambs  entire  on animal  performance
Treatment
Castrated Entire
Weaning  weight  (kg) 29.9 31.7
Carcass  weight  (kg) 18.2 18.1
Kill out (%) 44 43
Fat score' 3.1 2.9
Sale date 24 August 8 August
Fat score 1 to 5
(Hanrahan,  1999)
Winter  shearing
All sheep  must  be shorn  once  per year. At current  wool price  and shearing  cost, the value  
of the fleece  does not cover  the expense  of shearing.  A recent  study at this Research  
Centre  has evaluated  the impact  of shearing  housed  ewes  in mid pregnancy  or grazing  out 
doors  all winter  and lambing  at pasture  on subsequent  lamb  performance.  Ewes that were  
shorn had their  fleeces  removed  in mid December.  All sheep  lambed  in early March.  The 
effects  on lamb performance  are presented  in Table 16. Shearing  housed  ewes had the 
same impact  on lamb birth weight  and subsequent  performance  as outwintering  on grass  
and lambing  outdoors.  Shearing  increased  lamb birth weight  by 0.6  kg/lamb  and weaning  
weight  by 2.4kg  relative  to lambs  from ewes  that were housed  but not shorn. The data  from 
this study  illustrate,  that shearing  housed  ewes  increases  subsequent  lamb performance  
such that they are fit for slaughter  two weeks  earlier  than lambs  from housed  ewes  that 
were unshorn.  The increased  weaning  weight  due to winter  shearing  improves  efficiency  
of lamb production  by 15c/kg  carcass.  Furthermore  shearing  facilitates  management  and 
reduces  fixed costs  as space  requirements  at the trough  and in the house  are reduced.
Table  16. The effects  of shearing  housed  ewes  and outdoor  lambing  on subsequent  
lamb performance
Ewe treatment
Indoors
unshornIndoors  shornOutdoors
Unshorn
Lamb  birth weight  (kg) 4.2 4.8 4.9
Liveweight  gain (g/d)
(birth  - weaning)288 307 312
Weaning  weight  (kg) 32.4 34.8 35.2
(Keady  et al, 2006)
Condition  score
Condition  score  is a method  of accessing  the fatness  or condition  of animals.  It is assessed  
by handling  the ewe over and round  the backbone,  in the area of the loin behind  the last 
rib. Condition  score  is based  on a scale  from one to five where  one and five represent  ex­
tremely  thin and fat ewes  respectively.  In dairying  and suckler  cow production,  condition  
score is a management  tool used in late lactation,  at calving  and during  the breeding  sea­
son to monitor  cow condition  score  change.  In sheep  production  the most  important  time 
to have the ewes  in the optimum  condition  is at the time of joining  the rams  with the flock.
25
Teagasc  has studied  the effects  of condition  score of the ewes at the beginning  of the 
breeding  season  on subsequent  flock productivity.  Work undertaken  on 40 commercial  
farms  as part of the TET project  concluded  that each one unit increase  in condition  score  
within the range  of 2.5 to 4.5 increases  ewe liveweight  by 12kg and lambs  weaned  per 
ewe joined  by 0.10.
Is there  a viable  future  for sheep  production?
Many  different  aspects  of mid season  fat lamb production  has been discussed  in the cur­
rent paper. ‘Maximum  potential ’ improvements  in efficiency  on Irish sheep  farms,  and 
those  ‘achievable  in practice ’ are presented  in Table 17. The data demonstrate  that if all 
the individual  potential  improvements  in efficiency  for genetics,  nutrition  and management  
of the ewe and lamb were achieved,  the cost of production  could be reduced  by up to 
132c/kg  carcass.  However,  whilst  all of the individual  improvements  are possible,  they are 
not all cumulative  and consequently  are not possible for every  lamb finished.  Nonetheless, 
on most farms  it should  be possible  to achieve  half of the ‘potential  in practice  improve ­
ments ’ in efficiency.  Therefore  improvements  in efficiency  could  reduce the  cost of produc ­
tion by up to 66c/kg  carcass.  Average  lamb price for 2004 was €3.66/kg carcass.  In 
addition  €1.43  was received  in subsidy  per kg of lamb carcass  produced.  Consequently, 
even allowing  for an improvement  in efficiency  of 66c/kg  lamb carcass  produced,  the pro­
ducer  would  require  €4.43/kg  carcass  to maintain  the income  received  in 2004 prior  to im­
plementation  of the Mid Term Review  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy.
Table  17. Opportunities  to improve  efficiency  and profitability  in sheep  production
Maximum
Potential€ / head
Potential  in 
PracticeCarcass  (c/kg)
Ewe genotype 22 13 48
Grassland 10 5.0 26
Silage 7.5 3.20 16
Winter  shearing 2.9 2.9 15
Condition  score 6 3 11
Entire  progeny 2.5 1.3 7
Terminal  sire breed 3.0 1.4 7
Concentrate 0.6 0.4 2
It is of interest  to note from Table 17, that two of the most  discussed  topics  by sheep  pro­
ducers,  namely  terminal  sire breed  and concentrate  price,  have  the smallest  impact  on im­
proving  efficiency.  The factors  that have the greatest  impact  on efficiency  are ewe 
genotype,  grassland  management,  winter-shearing  and high quality  grass  silage.
Conclusions
It is concluded  that: -
Improvements  in efficiency  pre farm gate of up to 66c/kg  carcass  are possible.
The major  factors,  in order  of importance,  to improve  efficiency  pre farm gate are as fol­
lows
Increasing  litter size. Use Belclare  or a breed  with similar  genetic  merit.
- Good  grassland  management.  Use sward  height  as a management  tool.
- Winter  shearing  of housed  ewes  to reduce  age at slaughter  of the progeny.
26
- Produce  high quality  grass  silage  (greater  than 75%DMD)  for feeding  housed  ewes  in 
mid and late pregnancy.
- Finish  male lambs  entire  provided  they are offered  a good plane  of nutrition.
- Use a mixture  of straights  as supplements  to reduce  concentrate  cost.
- Choice  of terminal  sire breed. Suffolk,  Charollais,  Texel and Belclare  are probably  the 
only breeds  that merit  serious  consideration.
- Creep  feeding  does not provide  a return  to the producer  of mid season  fat lamb, even  
allowing  for earlier  drafting  and assuming  market  price changes  during  2004  and 2005.
References
Carson,  A.F. and Dawson,  L.E.R.  (2004). Developing  easy care lambing  systems.  Tech­
nical Report  present  to Agri  Search,  Northern  Ireland.
Flanagan,  S. (2000). Maximising  grazed  grass  in the diet of the ewe for mid-season  lamb 
production.  Teagasc,  Athenry  Research  Centre  Research  Reports  pp. 4-7.
Fitzgerald,  J.J. (1996).  Grass silage as a basic  feed for store  lambs. 2. Effect  of harvesting  
systems  and chop length  of grass  silage  on silage  intake  and performance  of store lambs.  
Grass  and Forage  Science  51, 378-388.
Grennan,  E.J. and O’Riordan,  E.J. (1996).  Efficient  use of grass  for mid-season  lamb pro­
duction. Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  Journal  30, 119-128.
Grennan,  E.J. and McNamara,  N. (2005). Finishing  lambs  on summer  pasture  and re­
sponse  to creep  feeding.  End of Project  Reports:  Sheep  Series  No 23: p. 21. Teagasc, 
Animal  Research  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1994a).  Evaluation  of crossbred  ewe types;  ovulation  rate and prolificacy.  
Proceedings  of the Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  Scientific  Meeting
pp. 21-22.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1994b).  Evaluation  of breeds  as terminal  sires. Teagasc,  Belclare  Re­
search  Centre  Research  Report,  pp. 27-28.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1997). Exploiting  genetic  resources  to enhance  the competitiveness  of 
lowland  sheep  systems.  Proceedings  of the Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Asso ­
ciation  Journal  pp. 106-115.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1999).  Genetic  and non-genetic  factors  affecting  lamb growth  and carcass  
quality. End of Project  Reports:  Sheep  Series  No. 8, p. 35. Teagasc  Animal  Research  
Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Keady,  T.W.J.,  Hanrahan,  J.P. and Flanagan,  S. (2006).  The effects  of flock management  
during  mid and late pregnancy  on lamb birth weight  and subsequent  performance.  Pro­
ceedings  of the Agricultural  Research  Forum p. 58.
Keady,  T.W.J.,  Kilpatrick,  C.M., Cushnahan,  A. and Murphy,  J.A. (2002).  The cost of pro­
ducing  and feeding  forages.  Proceedings  of the XIII"' International  Silage  Conference,  
Auchencruive,  Scotland,  pp. 322-323.
Nolan,  T. and McNamara,  N. (2002). High output  mid-season  lamb meat  systems.  End of 
Project  Reports:  Sheep  Series  No. 20. p. 42. Teagasc,  Animal  Research  Centre, Athenry,  
Co. Galway.
Kinsella,  A. (2005). National  Farm Survey  Teagasc.
27
Breeding  Quality  Cattle
Andrew  Cromie
Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation,  Highfield  House,  Bandon,  Co. Cork
Introduction
Breeding  is one of the most  effective  means  of increasing  the profitability  of beef  farming.  
However,  in order  to increase  profit  from beef breeding,  structures  and systems  must be 
put in place  to that will allow;
The accurate  collection  of relevant  beef cattle  breeding  data;
The calculation  of genetic  indexes  that will allow  the best animals  be selected  for breed ­
ing;
A breeding  program  that ensures  the best animals  are used throughout  the cattle  breeding  
industry.
These  areas  have  been  the major  focus  of the Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federations  work  over 
the past 3 years,  from the launching  of Animal  Events  In beef herds  (January  2004)  to the 
imminent  release  of the new Total Beef Indexes  and new breeding  programs  for Irish beef 
farmers.  This paper  is a summary  of work  over the past 3 years.
1. Accurate  collection  of relevant  beef cattle  breeding  data
Quality  & Profit
According  to the Cambridge  English  dictionary  the definition  of quality  & profit are as fol­
lows:
• Quality  - how good or bad something  is, a high standard.
• Profit  - money  that is earned  in trade  or business,  especially  after paying  the costs  of 
producing  and selling  goods  and services.
Profit is the ‘all-encompassing ’ word reflecting  the essential  deliverables  for Irish beef  farm­
ers. However,  if we think of quality  in the context  of ‘quality  maternal  replacements ’ as 
well as ‘quality  weanlings ’ then ‘quality  & profit ’ are linked. In establishing  the Irish Cattle  
Breeding  Federation  database,  ICBF have been  focused  on collecting  relevant  data  on all 
of the traits  linked  to profitable  beef  production,  that is, traits  associated  with calving,  wean ­
ing, slaughter  & maternal.
The ICBF cattle breeding  database
The cattle breeding  database  was first launched  on beef farms In January  2004. Since  
then it has grown  steadily,  with some 15,000  suckler  beef & 15,000  dairy herds  now con­
tributing  to the database,  totalling  about  1 million  calf births  (Figure  1).
28
Figure  1. Overview  of the ICBF  cattle  breeding  database
Farmers  involved  in the cattle  breeding  database  record  their birth records  through  Animal  
Events,  a simple  and easy  to use system  that allows  farmers  record  all of the data required  
for EU passport  application,  as well as pedigree  registration  and genetic  evaluations.  In 
addition,  to having  a simple  system  for recording  data on-farms,  the database  is also linked  
to the many  other industry  systems  that are also collecting  beef cattle data, e.g., factory  
and mart data. ICBF has an excellent  relationship  with these  various  organisations,  en­
suring  that valuable  cattle breeding  data (e.g., weights,  conformation  & price/kg)  is col­
lected at minimal  cost and hassle  for farmers  and the industry.
Figure  2. Increase  in number  of calving  performance  records  (1999-2005)
4000001  
350000  
300000  
250000  
200000  
150000  
100000  
50000  
0
1999 2000 2001 2003 2004 2005
29
These  initiatives  have  resulted  in a major  increase  in the quantity  and quality  of data avail-)  
able for beef  cattle  breeding.  For example,  the number  of records  available  for the genetic|  
evaluation  of calving  difficulty  has increased  from 12,000/year  in 2000  to some  380,000  col­
lected/year  in 2005  (Figure  2). Similar  Improvements  are apparent  for other  traits  such  as 
carcass  weight,  conformation  and fat score,  where  the number  of records  available  for ge-' 
netic evaluation  has increased  from 15,000  in 2002 to almost  440,000  in 2006.
Whilst  there  have been notable  improvements  in traits such as calving  and carcass,  prob­
lems still exist  with traits  linked  closely  to the  sucker  herd, i.e., maternal  traits. For example,  
a recent  analysis  of % bred suckler  cows  involved  in the cattle  breeding  database  has in­
dicated  that of the 240,000  cows  involved  in the database  only 29% have a known  sire, and 
only 60% of these  (i.e., 46,000  cows)  are Al bred. This low level of cow ancestry  recording  
(29%),  coupled  with the small  average  herd-size  in Ireland  (15 cows)  and the low heritabilily  
of these  traits  (generally  about  5%) makes the  job of evaluating  maternal traits very  difficult  
Given  the importance  of suckler  herd improvement  to our National  beef  industry,  it is critical  
that we give increased  focus  to improved  data recording  in our national  suckler  herd. The 
launch  of the new suckler  cow  scheme  for beef  farmers  by DAF  Is a welcome  step forward  
In this regard.
2. Calculation  of genetic  indexes  that aliow  identification  of the best animais  for. 
breeding
Data and genetic  indexes
The second  stage  in a beef  improvement  program  is to ensure  that the data is summarised|  
in a simple  way that will easily  allow  farmers  use the information to select  animals  for breed-|  
ing (e.g.,  Al bulls, stock bulls and cows for breeding  replacement).  Given  the number  of, 
traits  for which  data is now collected  (some  60 across  calving,  slaughter,  Tully, linear  typel 
& maternal),  this is no small task and relies on a combination  of powerful  statistical  pro­
grams  to account  for non-genetic  differences  between  animals  in their observed  perform ­
ance (e.g., level of feeding,  age and breed  of dam) and then economic  models  to weight  
the traits based  on their contribution  to beef profit. The final end-product  is an economic  
index  (or profit  index),  that allows  farmers  establish  the increased  profit  from each breeding  
decision.  In total, 5 economic  sub-indexes  have  been identified  for beef  farmers,  covering  
each of the key breeding  decisions;  calving  performance  (dairy  & beef), breeding  calves  
for export,  breeding  calves  for slaughter  in Ireland  & breeding  maternal  replacements  
(Table  1).
Bulls  are then compared  on the basis  of their  €-value  for each sub-index.  Therefore  a bull 
that has a BPSI value  of €150 will leave  €100 more profit at slaughter  than a bull with a 
BPSI value  of €50. This represents  a difference  in final slaughter  value  of some  €0.30/kg.  
In addition  to the above  five sub-indexes,  animals  can also be compared  on the basis  of 
their  total beef  value  (or total beef  EBI). This figure  reflects  a combination  of where  an an­
imal ’s genes  may appear  within  the industry  (based  on the % of animals  that are exported,  
slaughtered  and/or  appear  as maternal  replacements).  It is anticipated  that, in the future,  
all bulls will be ranked  on the basis  of total beef EB, with farmers  then able to choose,  in­
dividual  animals  based  on their strengths  and weaknesses  for various  traits.
Do the indexes  work?
One of the key questions  asked  by beef  farmers,  is do the new indexes  work,  and as a beef 
farmer  can I use the indexes  to increase  profit?
30
Table 1. Summary  table of the five sub - indexes  linked  to profitable  beef produc ­
tion, including  the component  traits
Index Trait % Explanation
BPSI (€)Carcass  Weight (Kgs) 55%This Sutnlndex  will estimate  how  good  a bull is at producing  
progeny with high value carcases.BuIls  that are producing  cattle  
that have a high carcase weight  for age, good  conformation  at killWeantnq  Weiqht (Kgs) 20%
BeefCarcass  Conformation (Grade) 12%
Production Dry Matter  Intake (Kgs) 8%
Sub - Index Carcass  Fat (Grade) 5%out and good lifetime feed efficiency  will score  hi^y.
WCSI (€) This Sub-Index will estimate  how good  a bull is at producing  high 
value  weanlings  for sale. Suckler  farmers  vAxo are selling  theirWeaning  Weight (Kgs) 31%
Weaned  Calf Caif Quality __ 69%
Sub - Indexweanlings  should look more  closely  at bulls in this Sub Index.
BCSI (€) This Sub-Index  puls a direct  cost on calving  problems  estimated  for 
each bull when used  in a Suckler  Herd. It puts a direct  cost on 
calving  problems estimated  for each bull. It lakes  into account  
calving  difficulty,  gestation  length  and mortality.Calving  Dfficultv (%) 46%
Beef CalvingGestation  Length (Days) 28%
Calf Mortality (%1 27%
Sub - Index
DCSI (€) This Sub-Index  puts a direct  cost on calving  problems  estimated  forCalvinq  Difficulty (%) 35%
Dairy  CalvingGestation  Length (Days) 55%each bull when  used  in a Dairy Herd. It is very similar  to the beef
Calf Mortality __ 10% calving  index,  except  that the economic  impact of using  a
Sub - Index“difficult ” calving  bull on the dairy  herd  is much  higher.
MSI (€)Cow  Survival (%) 14%
This Sub-Index  is to be used where  a suckler  farmer  is choosing  a Calvinq  Interval (Days) 20%
MaternalAge at First Calving (Days) 11% bull to breed  replacements  from.  Unfortunately  information  on this
Maternai  Calvino  Difficultv  (%) 14% sub-index  is not yet complete  due to lack of ancestry  &
Maternal  Weaning  Weight  (Kgs) 39% performance  data on our national  suckler  herd.
Sub - Index Cull Cow  Carcass  Weight  (Kgs) 2%
Table 2. Comparison  of top & bottom  5 bulls  for 6 beef breeds
Index Pred.  differences Age @ rec 
BPSI Cwt Conf Wwt Cwt WwtRaw data 
Cwt Conf Wwt
Top bulls 
Bottom  bulls€94
-€528
-12.2
1.36
-17660
694235
246352
300317
250
Looking  at the performance  of the top and bottom  Al sires for each of the six main beef 
breeds  (based  on Beef Performance  Sub Index  - Table  2), indicates  that the progeny  of 
the high index  sires had higher  carcass  weights  (+52kg),  better  conformation  grades  (al­
most 1 point)  and higher  weaning  weights  (+67kg)  based  on raw data. In addition,  these  
levels of performance  were achieved  at younger  ages compared  to the lower  index  sires  
(-34 days  for carcass  weight  and -11 days  for weaning  weight).  After  accounting  for differ ­
ences  due to environment  and management,  the genetic  differences  in favour  of the high 
index bulls is +29kg  carcass  weight,  +1.1 conformation  score  and +23kg  weaning  weight,  
representing  a difference  in beef profit  of €99 per animal  slaughtered.  Similar  results  are 
available  for each of the other  sub-indexes,  and total beef EBI, indicating  that farmers  can 
have confidence  in the new indexes  to increase  profit  from breeding.
Publication  of the new indexes
Information  is already  available  on 4 of the sub-indexes  outlined  in Table  2; calving  (dairy  
& beef), export  & slaughter.  Work  on the final sub-index  (maternal)  and hence  total beef 
EBI Is continuing  and expected  ahead  of the winter  2006 season.  Farmers  can view the
31
indexes  for all relevant  traits  on the ICBF  website  (httD:// www.icbf.com t or in Al brochures  
for Al bulls. The key thing to note regarding  these  new indexes  is that there are large  dif­
ferences  within breeds  on how much profit a given bull will leave at calving,  slaughter, 
weaning  or as a maternal  replacement  compared  to another  bull. The simple  advice to beef 
farmers  is that they should  start  to use the indexes  immediately  to help improve  the profits  
from their beef enterprises.
In addition  to EBI’s for Al bulls, new Beef  EBI reports will  be posted  to herd-owners.  These  
reports  will include  for the first time, key information  on maternal  traits and total beef EBI, 
in addition  to information  on calving,  export  & slaughter.  Again,  herd-owners  should  use 
the new indexes  to identify  the cows and bulls that will leave more profit. In addition  the 
reports  will provide  summaries  by breed  and age group  to allow  herd-owners  benchmark 
the genetic  merit  of their herd, relative  to other  herds  for these  new indexes.
3. A breeding  program that ensures  the best  animals  are used  widely  throughout  the 
cattle  breeding  industry
Increasing  genetic  gain
The current  level of genetic  gain in the national  beef herd is €2/cow/year,  which  is about  
10% of what could be achieved  from an optimal  program  (€18/cow/year).  Achieving  this 
level of genetic  gain could  generate  an additional  €16 million/annum  for Irish beef  farmers  
and the beef  industry.  Achieving  this level of gain would  require  a major  up-scaling  in prog­
eny testing  efforts,  from the current  10 bulls/year  (fully  tested)  to some 100 bulls/year.  As 
a result  of these  potential  benefits  (and costs),  ICBF and DAF are currently  investigating 
options  for a new beef progeny  test program,  which  would  have a combination  of industry  
and government  support.
New beef orooenv  test program
The objective  of the beef  program  is to increase  genetic  gain, by progeny  testing  some  100 
bulls/year  (75 daughters  per bull) across  all of the main beef breeds,  with all bulls having  
full progeny  test proofs  at the end of 4 years (including  maternal  proofs). The program  
would  have 3 main elements;
Registrar  of elite cows,
Performance  & progeny  test of high index  young  bulls.
Return  of elite progeny  test bulls.
(a) Registrar  of elite cows
Each  of the main beef  breeds  would  have  a ‘registrar ’ of elite females.  This registrar  would  
initially  comprise  only a few cows (i.e., bull-mothers)  but would  build over time to contain  
some  300 cows  for the larger  beef breeds  and 100 cows  for the smaller  beef breeds,  re­
sulting  in approximately  2,000  elite cows  across  all breeds.  These  cows would  be selected  
on the basis  of; (i) overall  beef EBI, (ii) genetic  diversity  within  their population  & (iii) phys­
ical conformation.  Maintenance  of the elite female  registrar  would  be the responsibility  of 
the relevant  herd-book,  working  in consultation  with ICBF and the Al industry.  From this 
group  of 2,000  elite females,  some  300 male calves  would  be selected  each year  for per­
formance  testing  at Tully,  with the top 1/3"'^ within  each breed  then selected  for subsequent 
progeny  testing  (i.e., top 100 bulls).
32
(b) Performance  & progeny  test of high index  young  bulls
Bulls would  be performance  and progeny  tested  at the central  performance  test station  
(Tully). Given  the change  in emphasis  for bull selection  (towards  total profit as opposed  
to growth),  it is proposed  that a review  of the Tully regime  (i.e., duration  of test, diet and 
traits recorded)  be undertaken.  On completion  of the performance  test, the top 100 bulls  
(from a total of 300 bulls on performance  test) would  then undergo  a period  of semen  col­
lection  (minimum  of 1,000  doses/bull),  with 600 straws/bull  being  dispatched  to “targeted ” 
beef herds  for progeny  testing  and the remaining  being  kept in storage  for “elite” matings  
(to cover  the scenario  where  a bull does not return  to active  Al service,  due to health-  
related  problems  or injury). It is anticipated  that some  1,500  herds  will be required  for the 
progeny  test program  (testing  100 bulls). All herds  would  receive  a minimum  of 25 straws  
(5 bulls X 5 straws),  with a view  to getting  5 female  replacements/herd.  The distribution  of 
semen  to targeted  herds would be co-ordinated  centrally  by ICBF through  Al service  
providers.  Farmers  would  simply  nominate  their  Al service  provider  and semen  would  be 
dispatched  accordingly.  To ensure  a high level of uptake  for the program  amongst  com­
mercial  farmers,  there  would  be a number  of incentives  attached  to the program  including;  
An incentive  of €250 per replacement  heifer  (having  a weaned  calf);
An incentive  of €100 per male animal  slaughtered  in Irish abattoirs;
Afocused  ‘herd breeding  program ’ including;  (i) access  to regional  progeny  test co-ordina-  
tor (who would  oversee  the program),  and (ii) a range  of options  for participating  farmers  
including  access  to test bull semen,  synchronisation  drugs,  a technician  service  & a scan ­
ning service.
(c) Return  of elite progeny  test bulls
From the initial group of 100 progeny  tested bulls, it is anticipated  that some 20-25  
bulls/year  would  be returned  as ‘elite progeny  test bulls ’ (across  all of the beef breeds).  It 
is critical  that semen  from these  bulls is available  for elite matings  and that a proportion  of 
these  sires are also available  to Irish farmers  through  commercial  Al.
Elite matings.  The collection  of additional  semen  at Tully (i.e., an extra  400 straws)  will en­
sure that in all circumstances  top genetics  are available  for elite matings.
Commercial  Al. For the program  to work optimally,  a set number  of bulls (5-8 bulls/year)  
need to be returned  each year to Irish farmers  through  commercial  Al.
(d) Cost/benefits  of the program
Total income  from the program  (Tully  bull charge,  breeding  female  charge  & industry  sup­
port) is expected  to €7.16  million  (500 bulls progeny  tested  by 2013). On the negative  
side, the total cost of the program  is expected  to be €24.54  million  (principally  financial  in­
centives  for beef farmers),  leaving  an operating  shortfall  of some  €17.38  million  (or 70% 
of the total cost of the program).  When  expressed  on a per year basis,  this equates  to ap­
proximately  €2.5 million  over  the 7 years  of the program  (2007-2013),  which  is considerably  
less than the expected  benefits  from the program,  some  €18 million  for Irish beef  farmers  
and the beef industry.
At this stage,  the proposition  has received  widespread  support  from the beef industry,  the 
main benefits  being;  an opportunity  for the Irish beef  industry  (farmers,  DAF, cattle  breeding  
organisations,  meat  & milk processors)  to substantially  increase  profit  from cattle  breeding  
From the current  €1-2 million/annum  to €18 million/annum  at a relatively  low cost.
33
Conclusion
The benefits  of cattle  breeding  are permanent  (they  stay with the animal  in its lifetime),  cu­
mulative  (they pass from generation  to generation),  and are highly  cost-effective  (i.e., for 
an investment  of €2.5 million  in a new progeny  testing  program,  the Irish beef industry  
could expect  to accrue  benefits  in the region  of €18 million). However,  to achieve  these  
improvements,  cattle-breeding  must be structured,  systematic  and science-based.  ICBF  
have invested  much  time, resource  and effort  into establishing  systems  of beef recording, 
genetic  evaluation  and breed  improvement  that are world  leading.  The opportunity  now  ex­
ists to tap into these  benefits  and move  beef  cattle  breeding  onto a new level for Irish beef 
farmers  and the beef industry.  The simple  question  is can we afford  to miss the opportu ­
nity?
34
Relationship  between  Beef Carcass  
Classification  Grades  with Meat Yield and
Value
Michael  Drennan
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath
Introduction
The national  cow herd has changed  considerably  during  the last twenty  years  resulting  in 
a change  in the type of carcass  produced.  Total cow numbers  increased  from 2.08 million  
in 1984  to 2.35 million  in 2005,  with beef  cows  showing  almost  a 3 fold increase  and dairy  
cows now at only two-thirds  the 1984 level (Table  1). Associated  with this change  was an 
increase  in the proportion  of progeny  of continental  sire breeds  from 17% of the calf crop  
In 1985 to 56% In 2005. In addition  the proportion  of continental  x dams in the suckler  
herd has increased  from 29% in 1992 to 69% in 2005.
Table 1. Cow numbers  (million)
Dairy Beef Total
1984 1.64 0.44 2.08
2005 1.12 1.23 2.35
Source;  CSO (1985  and 2005)
Total cattle  disposals  are approximately  2 million  yearly  of which  1.8 million  are slaughtered  
in Ireland.  Live exports  have varied  from 134,000 to  218,000  in recent  years  (Table  2). Ap­
proximately  14% of beef output  is destined  for the home market,  with the remainder  ex­
ported. The destination  of Irish beef exports  has changed  considerably  over the last 10 
years. In the years 1996 to 2000 international  markets  accounted  for 51 to 62% of total 
exports,  but in 2001 they declined  to 15% and further  decreased  to only 8% in 2005 (Figure  
1). Although  the United  Kingdom  (UK) market  showed  the greatest  increase  in Irish beef 
exports from 2001,  exports  to continental  EU countries  have increased  gradually  in recent  
years. While  the UK market  accounted  for 53% of total beef  exports  in 2005  and continen ­
tal EU markets  accounted  for 39%, the monetary  value  of exports  was the same  for both 
markets  (Table  3).
Table 2. Irish cattle  disposals  (‘000)
2003 2004 2005
Live exports 218 134 186
Slaughtered 1,860 1,831 1,684
Source:  Bord Bia (2006a)
35
Figure  1. Destination  of Irish beef  exports  as carcass  weight  equivalent  (%)
■ UK
' Continental  EU
■ International  Market
Year
Source:  Bord Bia (2006a)
Table  3. Value  of Irish beef  exports  (excluding  offal)  2005
Million  € %
UK 629 48
Continental  EU 622 48
International 47 4
Total 1298 100
Source:  Bord Bia (pers. comm.)
A breakdown  of beef  meat  exports  in 2005  shows  that only 15% is exported  as bone-in with 
72% in boneless  form and 14% processed  (Table  4). Therefore,  with boneless  sales pre­
dominating,  meat  yield and distribution  (proportion  in higher  value  cuts) are important  de­
terminants  of carcass  value.
Table  4. Breakdown  of beef  exports  %
Bone-in
Boneless
Processed15
72
14
Source:  Bord Bia {pers. comm.)
Beef  carcasses  are graded  for conformation  (EUROP  scale  with E best for conformation)  
and fatness  (scale  1 to 5 with 5 fattest)  as part of the carcass  classification  system,  which 
also includes  category  (steer,  heifer,  young  bull, cow, bull) and carcass  weight.
Conformation  score  has a major  effect  on carcass  price. However,  there  is considerable  
variation  between  EU countries  in the price difference  between  the various  conformation  
classes  (Figure  2). The data shows  that relative  to Irish prices  (100)  for 03 steers  in 2005,  
the corresponding  steer  (or bull) relative  prices  in Great  Britain  (GB),  France  and Italy were  
103,108  and 108, respectively.  For R3s the corresponding  relative  prices  were 100,105,  
121 and 121 while  the prices  for U3s were 100, 105, 127 and 137. Similar  findings  were 
evident  for heifers  (Figure  3). Therefore,  while  the price  of 03 carcasses  in Ireland  and GB
36
were not far below  those  in continental  EU, the difference  for R3 and U3 carcasses  partic ­
ularly  when  compared  to France  and Italy were substantial.  Thus, market  outlet  is an im­
portant  determinant  of price. Such price advantages  have implications  for the future  
viability  of suckler  beef production  in Ireland,  which  is the principal  source  of animals  with 
good conformation.
If carcass  grades  are to  be used for price purposes  it is important  to know  how the grades  
relate  to meat  yield and distribution  in the carcass.  The importance  of meat  distribution  is 
evident  from the fact that following  fat removal,  the cube  roll, fillet and striploin  only account  
for 7 to 8% of carcass  weight  but about  30% of carcass  value.
The objectives of the study  were  to examine  the relationship  between  carcass  conformation  
(CS) and carcass  fat (FS) scores  with (1) carcass  meat,  fat and bone proportions,  (2) the 
proportion  of high-priced  meat  cuts in the carcass  and (3) carcass  value.
Figure  2. Steer  (bulls  in Italy, Spain  and Netherlands)  carcass  prices  for 2005 (c/kg  
excluding  VAT)
0O
S Ireland gGB
Source:  Bord Bia (2006b)R3
Carcass  Grade
3 France □ Italy @ Spain b Netherlands
37
Figure  3. Heifer  carcass  prices  for 2005 (c/kg excluding  VAT)
400
350
300
o>
250
0)o200
ft150
100
50
03
Source:  Bord Bia (2006b)R3
Carcass  Grade
^Ireland Q GB ^France Italy ^ Spain
Steer  Experiment
Materials  and Methods
A total of 134 steers  were used representing  the various  sections  of the carcass  classifi ­
cation  grid for conformation  and fatness.  Carcasses  were mechanically  graded  according  
to the EU Beef Carcass  Classification  Scheme.  Carcass  meat,  fat and bone proportions  
were obtained  by dissection  of the right side of each carcass,  which  was split into an 8 rib 
pistola  hindquarter  and the remainder  as forequarter.  The pistola  was dissected  into 12 
meat  cuts (silverside,  topside,  knuckle,  rump,  tail of rump,  fillet, striploin,  cube roll, cap of 
ribs, leg, heel and salmon).  The bones  were removed  and scraped  clean. All dissectable  
fat was removed  from each cut. The weight  of each cut and total weight  of fat trim, lean 
trim and bone were recorded  for the pistola. The forequarter  was dissected  into 11 cuts 
(front  shin, brisket,  chuck,  neck,  flat ribs (1 to 5), plate,  leg of mutton  cut, bladesteak,  brais ­
ing muscle,  chuck  tender  and clod)  and a similar  dissection  procedure  was undertaken  as 
outlined  for the pistola. For both quarters,  lean trim was added  to the meat cuts to give 
meat  yield. Total carcass  yields  of meat,  fat and bone were the combined  values  for the 
pistola  and forequarter.  Carcass  value  was taken  as twice  the sum of the commercial  val­
ues of the individual  meat  cuts and meat  trim in the half carcass  with a deduction  for bone.  
Thus,  when  estimating  carcass  value  the weight  of carcass  fat was not taken  into consid ­
eration.
Results
The slaughter  and carcass  weight  of the steers  were  619 and 319 kg, respectively.  Regres ­
sion analysis  were used to quantify  the relationship  between  carcass  conformation  and fat 
scores  with carcass  meat,  fat and bone proportions,  meat distribution  and carcass  value  
(Tables  5 and 6). A one unit increase  in carcass  conformation  score (e.g. 03 to R3) in­
creased  meat  yield by 4.2 percentage  units and decreased  fat and bone yield by 1.8 and 
2.3 percentage  units, respectively.  A one unit increase  in conformation  score also in­
creased  high-value  cuts by 0,6 percentage  units and increased  carcass  value  by 22 c/kg.
38
The effect  of a 1 unit increase  in carcass  fat score  was an increase  of 3.0 percentage  
units in fat and decreases  of 2.2 and 0.7 percentage  units in meat  and bone respectively.  
There  was also a reduction  of 0.2 percentage  units in high priced  cuts. A one-unit  increase  
in fat score  decreased  carcass  value  by 9 c/kg. Thus,  unit changes  in conformation  score  
have more  than twice  the effect  on meat  yield and carcass  value  as similar  changes  in fat 
score. In addition  there is a minimum  fat requirement  that varies  with the actual  market  
(greater  in the UK than in continental  EU) and thus, unlike  conformation,  changes  in fat 
score  do not apply  across  the entire  classification  grid.
Table  5. The effect  of a 1 unit increase  in conformation  score  in steers  (No = 134)
03 R3 Difference
Meat  (%) 66.7 70.9 +4.2
Fat (%) 11.8 10.0 -1.8
Bone  (%) 21.3 19.0 -2.3
High value  cuts (%) 6.9 7.5 +0.6
Value  (c/kg carcass) 281 303 +22
6. Effect  of a 1 unit increase  in fat score  in steers  (No = 134)
03 04 Difference
Meat  (%) 66.7 64.5 -2.2
Fat (%) 11.8 14.8 +3.0
Bone (%) 21.3 20.6 -0.7
High value  cuts (%) 6.9 6.7 -0.2
Value  (c/kg carcass) 279 270 -9
Suckler  v Holstein/Friesian  steers
Included  in the 134 steers  were 20 sucklers  which  were about  % continental  breeds  and 
65 Holstein/Friesians.  The carcass  weights  of the sucklers  and Holstein/Friesians  were  
376 and 310 kg, respectively  (Table  7). Corresponding  conformation  scores  were R* and 
0‘while both had similar  fat scores  of 3^. The sucklers  had 7.5 (72.3 v 64.8)  percentage  
units more meat, 3.1 (9.9 v 13.0) percentage  units less fat, 4.4 (17.8 v 22.2) percentage  
unit less bone, 1.1 (7.8 v. 6.7) percentage  units more high-value  cuts and were  valued  at 
44 c/kg more than the Holstein/Friesians.
Table  7. Data for Suckler  v. Holstein/Fr  steers
Sucklers Holstein/Fr
Carcass  \wt. (kg) 376 310
Carcass  grade 3^ 0 3^
Meat  (%) 72.3 64.8
Fat (%) 9.9 13.0
Bone  (%) 17.8 22.2
High value  cuts (%) 7.8 6.7
Value  (c/kg) 315 271
39
Young  bull and heifer  experiments
Carcass  dissection  studies,  using  procedures  similar  to those  outlined  for steers  were  car­
ried out using 74 young  bulls (52 sucklers  and 22 Holstein/Friesians)  slaughtered  at 14 to 
16 months  of age, and 40 heifers  (36 suckler  and 4 Continental  X Holstein/Friesians)  
slaughtered  at 20 months  of age. The effect  of carcass  conformation  score  (and fat score)  
on carcass  composition  and carcass  value  was similar  to that outlined  for the steers. The 
effect  of a one unit increase  in carcass  conformation  score  in the bulls on yield (percentage  
units)  was +3.6, -1.3, -2.3 and +0.3 for meat, fat, bone and high-value  cuts, respectively  
(Table  8). The corresponding  figure  for the heifers  was +4.5, -2.1, -2.3 and +0.6 (Table  9). 
The effect  of a unit increase  in conformation  score  on carcass  value  was +18 c/kg for the 
bulls and +25 c/kg for the heifers.
Table  8. Effect  of a 1 unit increase  in conformation  score  inbulls (No=74)
03 R3 Difference
Meat  (%) 65.7 69.2 +3.6
Fat (%) 11.6 10.3 -1.3
Bone  (%) 22.8 20.5 -2.3
High value  cuts (%) 6.7 7.0 +0.3
Value  (c/kg carcass) 278 296 + 18
Table  9. Effect  of a 1 unit increase  in conformation score  inheifers  (No = 40)
03 R3 Difference
Meat (%) 66.7 71.2 +4.5
Fat (%) 12.3 10.2 -2.1
Bone  (%) 21.1 18.8 -2.3
High value  cuts (%) 7.4 8.0 +0.6
Value  (c/kg carcass) 292 317 +25
Comparison  of meat  yield and distribution  results  with market  prices
The price advantage  between  U3 and 03 steer  or bull carcasses  in 2005  varied  from 17 
c/kg in Ireland  to 70 to 80 c/kg in France  and Italy (Table  10). With the exception  of Ireland 
and GB the advantage  in EU countries  was equal  to or considerably  greater  than the 44 
c/kg calculated  for steers  and 36 c/kg for bulls in the present  study  based  on meat  yield and 
distribution.  While  there  are no Irish or GB quotations  for heifers  grading  U for conforma ­
tion, it is noticeable  that in continental  EU markets  the effect  of conformation  on heifer  
prices  is even greater  than for steers/bulls.  It is evident  that the cattle  pricing  structure  in 
Ireland  must  be reviewed  if emphasis  in breeding  goals  are to be placed  on improving  car­
cass meat  yield and distribution  in addition  to meeting  export  market  requirements.
40
Table 10. Price difference  (c/kg)  between  carcasses  grading  R3 or U3 over 03 in 
2005
Present  study Ireland GB France Italy Spain
Steer  (bull)
R3 V. 03 +22 +10 +16 +44 (+35) (+17)
U3 V. 03 +44 +17 +23 +70 (+79) (+39)
Heifer
R3 V. 03 +25 +13 +15 +54 +145 +45
U3 V. 03 +50 - - +98 +187 +49
Beef carcass  classification
Beef  carcass  classification  data for 2005 shows  that 87% of steers  and 91 % of heifers  fall 
into the combined  conformation  classes  of O and R (Table  11). Therefore,  a better  differ ­
entiation  would  be achieved  by grading  on a 15 point scale  (eg R', R, R*) rather  than on a 
5 point  scale. For the same  reason  it would  be more  informative  to have carcass  fat class  
also graded  on a 15 point scale (Table  12). The mechanical  grading  system  currently  in 
operation  at Irish Meat processing  plants  would  facilitate  this expanded  grading  system.
Table  11. Percentage  of beef  carcasses  in the different  conformation  classes  in 2005
E U R 0 P Carcass  wt (kg)
Steers 6 46 41 7 352
Heifers 6 57 34 3 286
Cows 1 11 47 40 304
Source:  DAF (2006)
Table  12. Percentage  of beef  carcass  in the different  fat classes  in 2005
1 2 3 4L 4 4H 5
Steers  1 10 52 20 11 5 1
Heifers  2 9 41 21 14 9 4
Cows  9 11 30 16 12 10 10
Source:  DAF (2006)
It is suggested that using.this  expanded  beef  carcass  classification  system  for conformation  
and fatness  and a pricing  system  as outlined  in Table 13 would  be of benefit  to the Irish beef
industry.
Table 13. Suggested  price  differences  for carcass  classification  grades
Carcass  conformation  score
P+ 0- 0 0+ R- R R+ U- U U+
c/kg carcass -18 -12 -6 0 +6 +12 +18 +24 +30 +36
Carcass  fat score
3- 3 3+ 4- 4 4+ 5- 5 5+
c/kg carcass 0 0 0 -2.5 -5.0 -7.5 -10.0 -12.5 -15.0
41
Live Animal  Assessment
Discussion  to date has shown  effects  of carcass  conformation  and fat scores  on meat 
yield, percent  high value  cuts and carcass  value  but in cattle  improvement  programmes  it 
is also necessary  to be able to use evaluations  on the live animal.  High correlations  were 
obtained  between  visual  muscular  scores  and ultrasonically  scanned  muscle  depth  at the 
third lumbar  vertebra  with meat  yield,  the proportion  of high value  cuts and carcass  value 
(Figure  4). Although  live animal  skeletal  scores  or scanned  fat measurements  were not 
useful,  the data shows  that live animal  scores/measurements  are useful  in beef improve ­
ment programmes.
Figure  4. Correlation  of muscular  scores  and length  of back  visually  assessed  and 
scanned  fat and muscle  depth  with meat  proportion,  % high-vaiue  cuts and carcass  
vaiue
0.8 
0.6 
— 0.4
c g
3 0.2ffi
8 0 
-0.2 
-0.4m 9
Lenoth  of back 1'Mi'mk
ICBF  Muscular  
ScoreFat depth Muscle  depth
I J Meat prqxirtion Q % High  valuecuts I Carcass  value
Recommendations
Carcass  grading  for conformation  and fatness  should  be on a 15-point  scale.
A price premium  per unit improvement  in conformation  of at least 6 c/kg on a 15- point 
scale (= 18 c/kg on a 5-point  scale)  is merited  based  on the results  of the present  study.  
A deduction  in carcass  price per unit increase  in fat score  of 2.5 c/kg on a 15-point  scale 
(=7.5 c/kg on a 5-point  scale)  above  a fat score  of 9 on a 15-point  scale (3* on a 5-point  
scale).
Implications  of Using  the Suggested  System
Use of such a system  would  be of major  benefit  to the beef industry  by providing  a clear 
message  for producers  on carcass  value  and market  requirements.  This would  result  in: 
An overall  improvement  in the quality  of beef produced.
Improved  financial  viability  of suckler  units  which  are the source  of the higher  quality  beef 
carcasses.
More  animals  suitable  for the high-priced  continental  EU markets.
The provision  of clear guidelines  to those involved  in cattle genetic  improvement  pro­
grammes  such as ICBF,  Al organisations  and Breed  Societies.
The provision  of a fairer  system  for payment,  which  ensures  that payment  is based  on car­
cass value.
42
Conclusions
Increased  CS increased  carcass  meat  yield,  the proportion  of high-priced  cuts in the car­
cass and carcass  value  while  decreasing  carcass  fat and bone proportions.
Increasing  FS increased  carcass  fat proportion  and led to a decrease  in the proportions  of 
carcass  meat,  bone and high-value  cuts and carcass  value.
Muscular  scores  and scanned  muscle  depth  were  shown  to be good predictors  of the pro­
portion  of carcass  meat, bone and high value  cuts and carcass  value but were poor pre­
dictors  for carcass  fat proportion.
Skeletal  scores  showed  a poor negative  relationship  with carcass  meat  yield and value.  
Recommend  that: Grade  carcasses  on a 15-point  scale  e.g. conformation  R-, R, R*.
: Conformation  premium  of at least 6c/kg on 15 point scale  
(=18 c/kg on 5 point  scale).
: Monetary  deductions  for over-fatness.
References
Bord Bia (2006a).  Meat  and livestock  relview  and outlook  2006/07.
Bord Bia (2006b).  Market  monitor.  Dec. 23, 12 pages.
Central  Statistics  Office  (1985). Agricultural  Statistics.  Land utilisation  and numbers  of 
livestock  - regional  analysis.  Pp 3.
Central  Statistics  Office  (2005). Crops  and livestock  survey,  www.cso.ie
DAF (2006). EU classification  report  from January  1, 2005 to December  31, 2005.  
wvw.aariculture.ie  72 pages.
43
Alternative  Forages  to Grass  for Ensilage  and 
as Feeds  for Beef Cattle
Padraig  O’Kiely
Teagasc,  Grange  Beef  Research  Centre
This paper  will deal with:
Ensiiing  and feeding  alternative  forages  to grass  
Conserving  and feeding  high-moisture  grain  
Alternative  forages  to grass  for grazing
Ensiling  and feeding  alternative  forages  to grass
Grass  is the predominant  forage  ensiled  in Ireland,  and is likely  to remain  so for the fore­
seeable  future. If as is predicted,  cereal  prices  continue  to increase  in the years  to come,  
recent  downward  trends  in the attractiveness  of conserved  grass relative  to concentrate  
feedstuffs  are likely to be reversed.  It is important  to remember  that besides  providing  
winter  feed, grass  silage  also facilitates  grazing  management,  permits efficient and hygienic 
recycling  of animal  manures  and can be used to help reduce the  internal  parasite  challenge 
to grazing  cattle. High yields of quality grass ensiled with minimal  losses and 
produced/conserved/fed  with restrained  input costs  will therefore  continue  to be essential  
in order  to provide  cattle  with an economically  attractive  feedstuff  and to support  sustain ­
able systems  on most  farms.
However,  the relatively  modest  yields  achieved  in a single  harvest,  allied  to variability  in di- 
gestibiiity  and ensilability  (and thus intake  and animal  performance  response),  and the like­
lihood  of effluent  production  can create  disadvantages  for grass  silage  compared  to some 
alternative  forage  crops. Thus,  aiternative  forages  are worthy  of consideration.  However,  
it is important  to remember  that the function  of any of these  alternatives  to grass  silage  is 
to improve  farm profits  and not simply  to increase  intake  or levels  of animal  production.  
Consequently,  the role for alternative  forages  needs  to be considered  in terms  of factors  
such as relative  total costs  of production,  relative  revenues  from the sale of meat,  relative  
payments  of eligible  EU funds  and ultimately  farm profits.
Crops  for which  summaries  of Irish research  results  will be presented  in this paper  include  
forage  maize,  whole-crop  cereal  silage  (wheat,  barley  and triticale),  whole-crop  fodder  beet 
silage  and red clover.
Maize  silage
High dry matter  (DM) yields  are necessary  in order  to provide  feedstuff,  and ultimately  
meat,  at a competitive  cost. A target  of 13t DM/ha  harvested  whole-crop  forage  maize  in 
the absence  of plastic  mulch  (15.5  tDM/ha,  or higher,  where  plastic  mulch  is used)  is ap­
propriate  for crops  to compete  economically  with good grass  silage.
Excellent  quality  is essential  if there  is to be a consistent  economic  benefit  over  good  grass  
silage. Any potential  superiority  in the nutritive  quality  of maize  silage  is driven  mainly  by 
its content  of starch,  and thus of grain. Good  quality  crops  will have half of their harvested
44
DM contributed  by well-filled  cobs (i.e. grain + rachis)  with the remainder  coming  from the 
stover. Thus,  target  harvested  whole-crop  DM concentration  should  be 30% DM with a cor­
responding  starch  concentration  above  25% of the DM. The cobs themselves  should  have 
reached  50% DM. Since the  stover  accounts  for half of the harvested  DM, its quality  is also 
important.  The data in Figure  1 show  a major  decline  in stover  digestibility  (DMD)  as the 
crop matures.  Consequently,  It is important  to balance  achieving  optimal  yield and cob 
development  without  over-delaying  harvesting  to the  point  where  stover  digestibility  has de­
clined  excessively.
Conservation  losses  Include  physical  and respiration  (I.e. ‘heating ’) wastage  during  silo 
filling, losses  via effluent  or fermentation  during  ensilage,  and respiration  or physical  
wastage  again  at feedout.  The target  with maize  silage  is to restrict  these  losses  to about  
12% of the harvested  DM.
The ensiled  forage  needs  to be immediately  and perfectly  sealed  using two sheets  of 
0.125mm  black polythene  sheeting,  a complete  covering  of tyres and the edges  well 
weighted  down with silt, sandbags,  etc. Rapid  sealing  of ensiled  maize  is one important  
component  of the management  practices  that can help reduce  the risk of aerobic  deterio ­
ration (i.e. heating)  at feedout.
All silages  are inherently  unstable  when exposed  to air at feedout,  and a considerable  
range  in stability  occurs  within  silages  made  from any particular  crop species.  However, 
across  a series  of experiments  at Grange,  maize  silage  was In general  more  prone  to aer­
obic deterioration than  grass  or whole-crop  cereal  silages.  Thus,  the operator  must  demon ­
strate  excellent  management  of the maize  silage  face during  feedout  and subsequently  of 
the silage  in the feed trough.  The emphasis  must be on successfully  minimising  the dura ­
tion of exposure  of silage  to air. In most cases  good management  practices  will be ade­
quate  to limit the scale  of aerobic  deterioration,  although  in some  cases  specific  additives  
may be of assistance.
Experiments  with maize  silage  have shown  its nutritive  value  for beef cattle range  from 
being inferior  to good grass  silage  (Table  1), to being  superior  (Table  2). Thus, highly  di­
gestible  maize  silage  of high grain (i.e. starch)  content  can support  rates of carcass  gain 
by beef cattle that are superior  to what are achieved  with good grass silage,  but with a 
somewhat  lower  efficiency  of converting  ingested  forage  DM to carcass.  Similarly,  diets  
based  on ad libitum  access  to maize  silage  supplemented  with 3kg concentrates  daily  sup­
ported  live- and carcass-weight  gains  by cattle  of 84 - 86% and 83 - 91 %, respectively,  of 
diets based  on ad libitum  concentrates  (+ 1kg forage  DM daily),  and with total DM intakes  
at 94 - 97% of the high-concentrate  diet (Tables  6 and 7).
45
Figure  1. Patterns  of change  in yieid, piant  components  and plant  constituents  as 
forage  maize  matures  during  autumn  2002 (Little  et al., 2005a,c)
Cob digestibiliity (DMD;  g/kg)
31-Aug 10-Sep  20-Sep  30-Sep  10-Oct 20-Oct 30-Oct  09-Nov  19-Nov  
Harvest  date
Stover  digestibility  (DMD;  g/kg)
750 -
D 700 ' 
M
D 650 1
550 ■ 
500 -
31-Aug 10-Sep  20-Sep  30-Sep  10-Oct 20-Oct 30-Oct  09-Nov  19-Nov  
Harvest  date
Crop  digestibility  (DMD;  g/kg)
Harvest  date
There  was a slight  trend  towards  a higher  carcass  gain by cattle  offered  a mixture  of grass  
and maize  silages  compared  to the calculated  estimate  based  on their performance  when  
offered  either  silage  alone. However,  the data in Tables  1 and 2 do not indicate  that a sig­
nificant  synergistic  benefit  is necessarily  obtained  by cattle offered  a mixture  of grass + 
maize  silages  relative  to the average  of animals  offered  grass  silage  or maize  silage  alone.
46
Table 1. Intake,  performance  and feed conversion  efficiency  for maize  silage  (low 
starch  content)
% grass  silage  inmix with maize
100 67 33 0
Silage  DM intake  (kg/day) 6.1 7.2 7.1 6.1
Liveweight  gain (g/day) 1385 1384 1371 1068
Carcass  weight  gain (g/day) 870 829 745 633
Kill-out  rate (g/kg liveweight) 526 520 509 515
Kidney  & channel  fat weight  (kg)
Feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)12.2 10.8 10.7 9.7
Dietary  DM intake/livewt.  gain 6.3 7.0 7.0 8.1
Dietary  DM intake/carcass  gain 10.0 11.8 12.8 13.5
(Well preserved  unwilled  grass silage  of DMD = 74.6%;  Hf. X Fr. steers  with starting  liveweight  of 481kg  
offered  3kg concentrates  per head daily for 87 days) (O'Kiely  and Moloney,  1995b)
Table  2. Intake,  performance  and feed conversion  efficiency  for maize  silage  (high  
starch  content)
% grass  silage  in mix with maize
100 50 0
Silage  DM intake  (kg/day) 5.1 6.8 6.8
Liveweight  gain (g/day) 846 950 979
Carcass  weight  gain (g/day) 653 698 737
Kill-out  rate (g/kg liveweight) 552 548 554
Kidney  & channel  fat weight  (kg)
Feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)13.8 12.8 12.2
Dietary  DM intake/livewt.  gain 9.4 10.2 9.9
Dietary  DM intake/carcass  gain 12.0 13.6 13.0
(Well preserved  unwilted  grass silage  of DMD = 74.4%;  Char. X heifers  with starling  liveweight  of 443kg  
offered  3kg concentrates  per head daily for 170 days) (O'Kiely  and Moloney,  2000b).
Research  at Grange  indicates  that, relative  to grass  silage,  maize  silage  produced  a 
whiter  carcass  fat but a similar  colour  for lean tissue  when  both silage  types  were com­
pared under  similar  conditions.  Both silages  had similar  direct  effects  on meat  tough ­
ness when  compared  at similar  carcass  weight  (Keady,  2005; Little et al., 2005a,b,c;  
Moloney  etal., 1999,2000;  Muck  and O’Kiely, 1992; O'Kiely,  1998; O’Kiely and Moloney, 
1995b,2000a;  O’Kiely  et al., 1998; O’Kiely  and Muck, 1992; Walsh  et al., 2005a,b;  Walsh  
etal., 2006).
Whole-crop  cereal  silaoe
Issues  relating  to target  yield,  quality  and conservation  losses  for whole-crop  cereal  (small  
grain cereals  - wheat/barley/triticale)  are similar  to those  for maize  silage. Target  yields  
should  be those  relevant  to commercial  grain production  (e.g. lOt winter  wheat  grain or 7t 
spring  barley grain  per ha) with target  qualities  depending  on half of the harvested  crop DM 
being in the grain. The digestibility  of the remaining  half of the crop (straw  + chaff)  will 
clearly  influence  quality  (i.e. feed value).
Experiments  with whole-crop  cereal  silage  conserved  using  conventional  technologies  in­
dicate  that;
47
• Whole-crop  cereal  silage  is made  from autumn  or spring  sown crops  such as wheat, 
barley,  oats or triticale  (a hybrid  of wheat  and rye), and is harvested  at a more mature 
growth  stage  than arable  silage. Unlike  arable  silage,  it is not usually  undersown  with 
grass. It is grown  as for high yielding  commercial  grain production  using best tillage  
practices,  and has conventionally  been harvested  at DM concentrations  between  35 
and 60%. In different  countries,  different  practices  have developed  for how to ensile 
such crops,  and new technologies  for conserving  these  crops  are still being  developed.
The relatively  high DM concentration  ensures  that there will be no effluent  and that 
preservation  should  be straightforward.  The same requirements  for rapid filling and 
perfect  sealing  of silos hold as described  for forage  maize. Additionally,  whole-crop  
cereal  silage  needs  to be protected  from wildlife  such as birds, rodents,  etc. - this can 
sometimes  be quite a challenge.
• Harvesting  should  not take place until after the cereal  grain has progressed  beyond  
the milky-ripe  growth  stage - until it has at least reached  the soft-cheddar  consistency  
(i.e. above  35% DM) (Table  3).
• Crop  nutritive  value  is effectively  constant  from the ‘soft-cheddar ’ stage  until the cereal 
grain has reached  the hard-cheddar  consistency  (approx.  55% DM) - this is a window  
of almost  three  weeks  (Tables  4 and 5).
• No consistent  benefit  (and sometimes  disadvantages)  accrues  from treating  the crop 
with urea (i.e. using conventional  technologies).  The attractions  of urea are that it in­
creases  crop crude  protein  content,  restricts  mould  growth  at feedout  and has the po­
tential  to upgrade  fibrous  feed (alkali  effect). If used, it should  be applied  only to crops  
above  50% DM. If urea  is applied  to crops  of 40% DM, intake  and animal  performance  
may well be reduced  (possibly  severely)  (Tables  3 and 4).
Table  3. Whole-crop  barley  (WCB)  or wheat  (WCW)  silage  offered  to beef  cattle  sup­
plemented  with concentrates
Dry matter  
content  (%)Silage  DM 
intake  (kq/day)Liveweight  
gain (q/day)Carcass  
gain (q/day)
Experiment  1 (WCB)
Grain  milky ripe 26 - 617 292
Grain  mealy  ripe 35 - 869 442
Experiment  2 (WCB)
No additive 34 6.6 1166 629
Urea 36 5.8 1140 634
Experiment  3 (WCB)
No additive 46 6.8 712 374
Urea 48 7.9 783 477
Experiment  4 (WCW)
No additive 43 3.8 645 -
Urea  - low rate 39 3.2 509 -
Urea  - high rate 45 2.6 362 -
Grass  silage 22 3.7 719 -
(Exp. 1: Fr. steers  with starting  liveweight  of 502kg  offered  1.75kg  concentrate/hd/d  for 95 
days; Exp. 2: Hf. X heifers  with starting  liveweight  of 323kg  offered  2.9kg  concentrate/hd/d
48
for 101 days; Exp. 3: Hf. X heifers  with starting  liveweight  of 347kg  offered  1kg concen ­
trate/hd/d  for 84 days; Exp. 4; Char. X heifers  with starting  liveweight  of 230kg  offered  2kg 
concentrate/hd/d  for 112 days; Exp. 4; Well preserved  unwilted  grass silage  of DMD = 
74.2%;  Hf X Fr steers  with starting  liveweight  of 433kg  offered  3kg concentrate/hd/d  for 
170 days)  (O’Kiely and Moloney,  1995a).
Table 4. Intake,  performance  and feed conversion  efficiency  for whole-crop  wheat  
(modest  grain  yield)
Crop DM%  at harvestWhole-crop  wheat  silage
35% DM 50% DM Grass  silage
Additive  applied Alone Alone Urea
Silage  DM intake  (kg/day) 5.14 5.76 5.45 4.98
Liveweight  gain (g/day) 889 921 894 1051
Carcass  gain (g/day) 575 577 529 747
Kill-out  rate (g/kg liveweight) 529 524 515 552
Kidney  & channel  fat weight  (kg)
Feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)10.0 9.5 10.3 11.1
Dietary  DM intake/livewt.  gain 9.0 9.2 9.3 7.3
Dietary  DM intake/carcass  gain 13.7 14.8 15.8 10.2
(Well preserved  unwilted  grass silage  of DMD = 75.2%;  Char X heifers  with starting  liveweight  of 440kg  
offered  3kg concentrate/hd/d  for 161 days) (O'Kiely  and Moloney,  1999b).
Table 5. Intake,  performance  and feed conversion  efficiency  for whole-crop  wheat  
(good  grain  yield)
%
grass
silage% GS with whole-  
crop wheat  ensiled  
at 36%DM% GS with whole  
crop wheat  ensiled  
at 51% DM plus 
urea
100 67 33 0 67 33 0
Intake  (kg silage  DM/day) 4.81 5.35 6.27 6.33 6.26 6.01 5.96
Liveweight  gain (g/day) 866 941 1019 987 1031 968 869
Carcass  gain (g/day) 596 684 706 695 710 711 636
Kill-out  rate (g/kg liveweight) 534 539 534 534 533 542 537
Kidney  & channel  fat weight  (kg) 
Feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)11.4 9.4 10.7 9.3 8.5 9.0 10.5
Dietary  DM intake/carcass  gain 12.6 11.7 12.8 13.1 12.5 12.4 13.7
Well preserved  unwilted  grass silage  of DMD = 73.2%;  Cont. X heifers  with starting  liveweight  of 426kg
offered  3kg concentrates  per head daily for 142 days (O'Kiely  and Moloney,  2002).
• The nutritive  value  of whole-crop  cereal  silage  for beef cattle  can range  from being in­
ferior  to good grass  silage  (Table  4) to being  superior  (Table  5), with the difference  in 
nutritive  value relativity  being predominantly  determined  by the content  of developed  
grain. The digestibility  of the straw  component  of the crop is also important.  However, 
the proportion  of grain in the crop will have a major  bearing  on whole-crop  nutritive  
value,  and higher  grain yields  and/or  lower  yields  of harvested  straw  can influence  this. 
Excellent  whole-crop  cereal  can have nutritive  value very similar  to maize  silage,  but 
probably with  a somewhat  inferior  feed conversion  efficiency  (Tables  6 and 7). Further ­
more,  winter  wheat  and spring  barley,  both at approximately  50% grain in the harvested  
DM, can have a similar  (and excellent)  nutritive  value (Table  7).
49
Table  6. Feed DM intake,  growth,  kill-out  proportion  and feed conversion  efficiency  
(FCE)  for grass,  maize  and whole-crop  wheat  (WCW)  based  diets
Grass Maize Fermented Alkalage Ad lib.
silage silage WCW WCW Cones.
Forage  DM intake  (kg/d) 4.54 6.75 7.07 7.56 0.95
Total DM intake  (kg/d) 7.07 9.27 9.59 10.06 9.86
Liveweight  gain (g/d) 802 1200 1149 1132 1302
Carcass  gain (g/d) 479 776 723 686 851
Carcass  weight  (kg) 290 335 329 321 348
Kill-out  (g/kg) 523 547 539 532 551
FCE (kg DM fntake/kg  carcass  gain) 1 15.2 12.1 13.5 14.8 11.9
Unwilted  grass silage of DMD = 67.4%;  Cont. Xsteers with starting  liveweight  of 424kg offered  3kg
concentrates  per head daily for 160 days (Walsh  etal., 2005a).
Table  7. Feed DM intake,  growth,  kill-out  (KO) proportion,  carcass  and fat scores  and
feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)  for maize  and whole-crop  cereal  silages
Maize Fermented  Fermented Fermented  Fermented Ad lib.
silage WCW HCW WCB HCB Cones.
Forage  DM intake  (kg/d) 6.58 7.22 7.08 7.21 6.82 1.29
Total DM intake  (kg/d) 9.21 9.84 9.71 9.84 9.44 9.51
Liveweight  gain (g/d) 1235 1254 1237 1151 1208 1473
Carcass  gain (g/d)' 781 741 758 736 780 939
Carcass  weight  (kg) 344 338 341 337 344 366
Kill out (g/kg) 541 529 535 541 545 549
Kidney  & channel  fat (kg) 9.03 9.53 10.21 8.55 9.32 9.26
Conformation  score^ 3.27 2.80 3.00 3.00 2.93 3.30
Fat score® 3.14 3.31 3.19 3.11 3.41 3.55
FCE'' 12.0 13.5 13.1 13.6 12.4 10.3
' Assuming  an initial KO rate of 50%; ’IBased  on E;=5, U=4, R=3, 0=2, P=1; "Based  on 1=1, 2=2, 3=3,
4L=3.7,  4H=4.3,  5=5; ’Feed conversion  efficiency  expressed  as kg DM intake/kg  carcass  gain; WCW  = 
whoie-crop  wheat;  FICW = head-cut  wheat;  WCB = whoie-crop  barley;  FICB = head-cut  barley;  Cont. X 
steers  with starting  iiveweight  of 438kg  offered  3kg concentrates  per head daily for 160 days (Walsh  et 
al., 2006).
• It can be speculated  that allowing  the crop ripen so that crop DM concentrations  in­
crease  beyond  60% DM would  allow grain nutritive  value to increase.  However,  this 
would  produce  grain that if not processed,  would  be more likely  to pass  through  the an­
imal undigested  (thereby  significantly  reducing  effective  nutritive  value). Furthermore,  
the straw  component  of this more  mature  crop can be expected  to have diminished  di­
gestibility  (further  decreasing  nutritive  value). Such  a crop should  benefit  from its grain  
being  processed,  with an accompanying  urea/urease  treatment  increasing  the overall  
concentration  of crude  protein,  inhibiting  potential  mould  activity  and possibly  contribut ­
ing to upgrading  the fibre fraction  of the harvested  crop. The comparison  of 'Fermented  
WCW ’ and ‘Alkalage  WCW'  shown  in Table  6 involved  the same  crop of winter  wheat  
being  cut to the same  stubble  height  when the crop was at 40% DM and again three  
weeks  later  when  at 71% DM. The later harvested  grain was processed  at harvesting  
and the crop treated  with a urea-based  additive.  The results  in Table  6 show  a relatively  
similar  nutritive  value  for the 'Fermented  WCW ’ and the 'Alkalage  WCW ’ when  offered  
to finishing  beef steers.
50
• Raising  the cutting  height  of a crop (i.e. higher  stubble)  should  shift the balance  be­
tween  grain and straw+chaff  towards  grain, thereby  increasing  silage  nutritive  value.  
However,  in an experiment  (Table  7) where  the cutting  height  of winter  wheat  (67cm  
plant height)  was 12 (WCW)  or 29 (HCW)  cm and of spring  barley  (71 cm plant  height)  
was 13 (WCB)  or 30 (HCB)  cm, there  was no significant  impact  on animal  productivity  
of elevating  cutting  height  - presumably  in these  cases  cutting  height  needed  to be el­
evated  further  before  a significant  response  could be measured.
• Similarly,  diets based  on ad libitum  access  to fermented  whole-crop  cereal  silage  sup­
plemented  with 3kg concentrates  daily, supported  live- and carcass-weight  gains by 
cattle of 82 - 88%  and 79 - 81 %, respectively,  of diets based  on ad libitum  concentrates  
(+ 1kg forage  DM daily),  and with total DM intakes  at 97 -103% of the high-concentrate  
diet (Tables  6 and 7).
• Whole-crop  wheat  or barley  silages  should  ideally  be produced  from crops  that are be­
tween  40 - 45% DM. The target  is to have approximately  50% grain in a crop that has 
12cm stubble,  giving  starch  content  in excess  of 20% of the crop DM. Conservation  
losses  should  be limited  to a target  of 12% of harvested  DM, producing  aerobically  sta­
ble silage  with negligible  mould  presence.
• The data in Table  5 suggest  that a synergistic  benefit  can be obtained  by cattle  offered  
a mixture  of grass  + whole-crop  cereal  silages  relative  to the average  of animals  offered  
grass  silage  or whole-crop  cereal  silage  alone.
• Research  by Moloney  at Grange  indicated  that, relative  to grass or maize  silages,  
whole-crop  (small  grain)  cereal  silage  produced  a whiter  carcass  fat but a similar  colour  
for lean tissue  when all silage  types were compared  under  similar  conditions.  Each 
silage  had similar  direct  effects  on meat  toughness  when  compared  at similar  carcass  
weight (Keady,  2005; Moloney  and O’Kiely, 1994,1997;  O'Kiely and Moloney,  
1991,1995a,1999b,2000b,2002;  Walsh  etal., 2005a,b;  Walsh  et al., 2006).
Whole-crop  fodder  beet silaoe
Fodder  beet roots and leaves  have a high nutritive  value,  and data have previously  been 
published  on the nutritive  value  of each of these. Both leaves  and roots  can be ensiled  to­
gether  to produce  silage  of high nutritive  value  (Table  8). A whole-crop  fodder  beet silage  
based  diet can support  carcass  gains  that are 89% that of animals  on ad libitum  concen ­
trates  (albeit  with an 18% poorer  feed DM conversion  efficiency).  Whole-crop  fodder  beet 
can produce  large volumes  of relatively  high quality  (i.e. energy)  effluent  when  ensiled,  but 
this can be largely  retained  within  the silo by using sufficient  absorbent.  Thus,  when dry 
beet pulp nuts were  ensiled  with whole-crop  fodder  beet at 159kg/tonne,  effluent  output  de­
clined  from 419 to 1221/tonne  while  carcass  gain was not altered  (Table  9). (Moloney  and 
O'Kiely,  1999; O’Kiely  and Moloney  1999a;  O’Kiely et al., 1993).
51
Table  8. Feed DM intake,  growth,  kill-out  (KO)  proportion,  carcass  and fat scores  and 
feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)  for grass  and whole-crop  fodder  beet silages
Grass  silage WCFB  silage Ad lib. concentrates
WCFB  silage  DM intake  (kg/d) 0 8.5 0
Grass  silage  DM Intake  (kg/day) 5.6 1.2 1.3
Concentrate  DM intake  (kg/day) 3.5 0.9 8.8
Total DM Intake  (kg/d) 9.1 10.6 10.1
Liveweight  gain (g/d) 906 1084 1255
Carcass  gain (g/d) ’ 694 773 870
Carcass  weight  (kg) 306 316 326
Kill out (g/kg) 536 533 534
Kidney  & channel  fat (kg) 14.3 14.1 13.8
Conformation  score^ 2.4 2.4 2.7
Fat score ’^ 3.3 3.3 3.7
FCE" 13.1 13.7 11.6
' Assuming  an initial KO rale of 48.5%; 'Based  on E=5, U=4, R=3, 0=2, P='1; "Based  on 1=1, 2=2, 3=3,
4L=3.7,  4H=4.3,  5=5; Feed conversion  efficiency  expressed  as kg DM intake/kg  carcass  gain: WCFB  = 
whole-crop  fodder  beet; Fr. steers  with starting  liveweight  of 469kg  for a duration  of 118 days (O’Kiely and
Moloney,  1999a).
Table  9. Feed  DM intake,  growth,  kill-out  (KO)  proportion,  carcass  and fat scores  and
feed conversion  efficiency  (FCE)  for whole-crop  fodder  beet silage
Untreated  
WCFB  ^ 
silageAbsorbent-treated  WCFB Ad lib.
silage concentrates
Unsupplemented  3 kg meals
WCFB  silage  DM intake  (kg/d) 6.20 9.22 6.70 0
Grass  silage  DM intake  (kg/day) 1.18 1.18 1.18 1.24
Concentrate  DM intake  (kg/day) 2.62 0 2.62 9.54
Total DM intake  (kg/d) 10.0 10.4 10.5 10.8
Liveweight  gain (g/d) 1062 1219 1286 1327
Carcass  gain (g/d) ’ 818 830 916 983
Carcass  weight  (kg) 375 374 384 390
Kill-out  (g/kg) 569 557 565 571
Kidney  & channel  fat (kg) 15.9 16.2 17.4 15.4
FCE^ 12.2 12.5 11.1 11.0
Assuming  an initial KO rate of 53%: Feed conversion  efficiency  expressed  as kg DM intake/kg  carcass  
gain; WCFB  = whole-crop  fodder  beet; Fr. steers  with starting  liveweight  of 554kg  for a duration  of 99 
days (O'Kiely  etal., 1993).
Red clover
Red clover  is considered  a short-lived  perennial  herbage  legume  that can be highly  pro­
ductive  for two to three  years,  and whose  upright  growth  habit makes  it particularly  suited 
for hay and silage  making.  Since  permanent  grassland  dominates  most  ruminant  systems  
in Ireland,  the important  target  for red clover  Is to greatly  improve  its persistence  and thus 
its potential  contribution  to feed supply.  An ongoing  experiment  is quantifying  the impacts  
of cultivar,  companion  grass,  harvest  schedule  and nitrogen  (N) fertiliser  on crop yield and 
digestibility  over several  years.
52
Two cultivars  (Merviot  and Ruttinova)  were  sown  in monoculture  (15kg  seed/ha)  or in a bi­
nary mixture  with perennial  ryegrass  (cv. Greengold)  (10kg  red clover  + 10kg perennial  rye­
grass seed/ha)  in August  2001. They received  0 or 50kg inorganic  N fertiliser/ha  each 
March  and had a first-cut  harvest  date of late May or mid-June.  Sequential  harvests  fol­
lowed  each  first cut, with a total of four harvests  per system  completed  by early  December.  
Simultaneously,  monoculture  plots of perennial  ryegrass  (cv. Greengold;  30kg seed/ha)  
received  0, 50, 100 or 150kg  inorganic  N/ha in mid-March  and immediately  after the first 
three harvests,  with simiiar  harvest  dates  to the red clover.
Towards  the end of the fifth season  since  reseeding,  red clover  still dominates  some  treat ­
ments  while in others  it has long disappeared.  Factors  favouring  the persistence  of red 
clover  include  no application  of inorganic  N in March  and a first-cut  harvest  date in late May 
rather  than mid-June.  Furthermore,  the binary  mixture  with grass  resulted  in an improved  
annual  yield and digestibility  compared  to sowing  red clover  as a monoculture.  In the first 
year after reseeding,  the red clover  + grass  swards  that received  no inorganic  N fertiliser  
and had a first-cut  harvest  date in late May, had an annual  DM yield (13.2 t/ha) that was 
136 and 86% of perennial  ryegrass  monocultures  that received  an annual  input  of inorganic  
N fertiliser  of 0 and 360kg  N/ha, respectively.  The corresponding  values  in the third year 
(16.4  tonnes  DM/ha)  were 167 and 95% (O’Kiely et al., 2006).
Conserving  and feeding  high-moisture  grain
Cereal  grains  of less than 14% moisture  can be safely  stored  for an extended  duration.  As 
grain moisture  content  rises  the duration  of safe storage  becomes  shorter  and the require ­
ment  for aeration  initially  and then for drying  or other  preservation  treatment  progressively  
increases.  Alternative  technologies  used in recent  years  facilitate  systems  of successfully  
conserving  grain harvested  at up to greater  than 40% moisture.
Balance  of yield & quality
One important  issue when considering  the different  options  for conserving  grain is how 
does  the stage  of ripening  at harvest  influence  grain  yield and quality.  During  two seasons,  
crops  of winter  wheat,  barley  and triticale  were grown  and harvested  at a series  of stages  
from above  40% to under  20% moisture.  The results  are summarised  in Figures  2 - 4. 
For each cereal,  the fresh  yield of grain declined  with advancing  ripening,  reflecting  the dis­
appearance  of water  from the mature  grain  as it dried. However,  if the grain yield at each 
stage of ripening  is expressed  with its water  content  excluded,  then the resultant  yield of 
grain dry matter  (DM) was constant.  Physiological  maturity  is the point at which grains  
reach  their maximum  dry weight,  so clearly  each of the crops  summarised  in Figures  2-4 
had reached  physiological  maturity  prior  to the commencement  of the study. Consequently, 
it is important  to recognise  that the yield of fresh grain is not a helpful  indicator  of the 
amount of feedstuff  produced,  whereas  the yield of harvested  grain DM is very important.
53
Figures  2-4. Changes  in grain yield and quality  as cereals  ripen (Stacey  et al., 
2002,  2003)
The ripening  process  from above  40% to below  20% moisture  took from 10 to 22 days,  de­
pending  on the crop and on prevailing  weather  conditions.  Thus,  daily  drying  rates ranged  
between  a decrease  of 0.9 to 2.9 percentage  units of moisture  per day. In addition,  grain  
drying  rates also varied  within individual  days. This means  that frequent  monitoring  of 
grain moisture  content  is required  if farmers  wish to harvest  at a target  moisture  content,  
and the duration  for which  this target  moisture  content  is maintained  can be relatively  short.
In general,  measurements  of grain nutritive  value  such as digestibility  (organic  matter  di­
gestibility  - OMD),  starch,  protein  and ash were relatively  constant  during  the ripening 
process  from above  40% to below  20% moisture.  The values  for OMD and starch  can be 
seen in Figs. 2 - 4. Measurements  of ensilability,  including  sugar  content  and buffering  ca­
pacity,  indicated  that the various  moist  grains  investigated  were  likely  to preserve  satisfac ­
torily  were they to be ensiled  (e.g. crimped  grain).
Only in the case of barley  when it reached  14-17%  moisture  was there any apparent  loss
54
of grain prior to harvesting.  Once  the settings  on the combine  harvester  and its forward  
speed  are set appropriately,  grain losses  during  harvesting  of each of the cereals  should  
be similar  to the values  achieved  when harvesting  conventionally  dry grain. Thus;
• Under  the prevailing  conditions,  wheat,  barley  and triticale  probably  reached  physiolog ­
ical maturity  when  their grains  are somewhere  around  40-50%  moisture  content.
• Beyond  this point  DM yields  and grain  nutritive  value  are usually  constant,  at least  until 
the ripening  grain become  very dry.
• There  is a 1 -3 week  time interval  between  around  40% and 20% moisture,  during  which  
farmers  can select  from among  alternative  grain conservation  strategies  in the knowl ­
edge that grain DM yield and quality  are not changing.
• However,  since  the rate of drying  can vary both across  days and within  days,  frequent  
monitoring  and timely  harvesting  are required  if crops  are to be harvested  at a target  
moisture  content.  This can have implications  for the grain conservation  strategy  cho­
sen, as individual  conservation  systems  have preferred  moisture  contents  at which  
they are operated
Finishing  beef cattle
Farmers  thinking  of using alternative  techniques  for preserving  and processing  cereal  
grains  destined  for feeding  to beef  cattle  need  to know  how  the feeding  value  of such grains  
compare  with grains  conserved  using  more  conventional  techniques.  To answer  this ques ­
tion, finishing  continental  crossbred  steers  were offered  a low digestibility  grass  silage  
alone  or with wheat-based  concentrates  at the equivalent  (standardised  for moisture  con­
tent) of 3 (low) or 6 (high)  kg/head/day,  or ad libitum,  for 144 days. Wheat  had been ei­
ther:
harvested  at 30%  moisture,  crimped  (i.e. rolled),  treated  with a mixture  of organic  acids  and 
ensiled  (‘Crimped  & ensiled ’).
harvested  at 26% moisture,  treated  with urea solution  and stored  under  plastic  sheeting.  
This was offered  whole  (i.e. unrolled)  (‘Urea-whole ’).
harvested  at 16% moisture,  treated  with propionic  acid and rolled before  feeding.  This 
was considered  the ‘Conventional ’ or reference  treatment.
The ‘Crimped  & ensiled ’, ‘Urea-whole ’ and ‘Conventional ’ wheat  had pH values  4.3, 9.3 and 
4.8, respectively,  and corresponding  crude  protein  values  of 11.6, 14.5 and 11.1%  of the 
DM.
The results  are summarised  in Table 10.
55
Table 10. Feed intake,  growth  rate and faecal  starch  for steers  offered  alternative  
forms  of conserved  wheat  grain
Diet
Grass
silageCrimped  & 
ensiledUrea-whole Conventional
Wheat  level 0 Low MedAd
lib.Low MedAd
lib.Low MedAd
lib.
Dry matter  intake
Silage  (kg/ day) 7.4 5.3 3.7 1.3 5.9 4.6 1.5 5.8 3.9 1.2
Wheat  (kg/day) 0 2.5 4.9 7.8 2.4 4.8 8.3 2.4 4.9 8.2
Liveweight  gain 
(g/day)
Kill-out  (g/kg)101 684 887 983 612 724 843 650 868104
3
484 503 502 516 495 502 501 493 511 520
Carcass  gain 
rn/rlav164 421 517 629 351 433 491 362 545 676
Faeces
Starch,  % DM <1 1 1.5 3.1 5.1 9.9 11.8 1 1.4 2.0
A/ell preserved,  unwilted  stemmy  (67.9%  DMD) silage; Fr. Steers  with mean starting  
iveweight  of 518kg,  offered  diets over duration  of 144 days (Stacey  etal., 2005).
Cattle  offered  grass silage  without  supplementation  had the highest  intake  of silage 
DM but the lowest  live- and carcass-weight  gains.
Increasing  levels of wheat  consumption  progressively  reduced  silage  DM intake,  but in­
creased  both live- and carcass-weight  gains.
• Cattle  offered  ‘Crimped  & ensiled'  and ‘Conventional'  wheat  had similar  silage  intakes,  
live- and carcass-weight  gains.
• Cattle  offered  ‘Crimped  & ensiled ’ and ‘Conventional ’ wheat  consumed  less grass silage  
than cattle  offered  ‘Urea-whole ’ wheat,  but had higher  live- and carcass-weight  gains.
For steers offered  wheat  ad libitum,  grain DM intake  was lower  with ‘Crimped  & ensiled ’ 
wheat  than with ‘Conventional ’ or ‘Urea-whole ’ wheat.
• Cattle  offered  ‘Urea-whole ’ grain had the highest  amount  of starch  in their faeces,  in­
dicating  considerable  loss of undigested  grains.
Muscle  redness  was similar  for cattle  offered  each of the three  forms  of wheat.
• Fat was more  yellow  when  cattle were  offered  ‘Urea-whole ’ compared  to ‘Crimped  & en­
siled ’ wheat.
Thus:
‘Crimped  & ensiled ’ could replace  ‘Conventional ’ grain in the ration of finishing  cattle  
without  compromising  performance  or meat colour,  provided  conservation  losses  for 
both forms  of wheat  were properly  restricted.
56
• The large faecal  losses  of undigested  grains  resulted  in lower  growth  rates  by cattle  of­
fered 'Urea-whole'  wheat,  and this loss in gain got bigger  as its inclusion  rate in the 
diet increased  (Keady  etal., 2005; Stacey  etal., 2002, 2003a,b, 2005).
Alternative  forages  to grass  for grazing
The primary  emphasis  when  feeding  cattle  in most  Irish beef  production  systems  is to max­
imise  the quantity  of grazed  grass  that can be sensibly  consumed  within  sustainable  sys­
tems. However,  grass  growth  is seasonal,  with relatively  little growth  occurring  at soil 
temperatures  below  6°C. In contrast,  some  brassicas  and forage  cereals  can grow  at lower  
temperatures  than this, and produce  relatively  high yields  during  the winter  period.
Whilst  there  has been no recent  Irish research  on alternative  crops  as winter-feed  for graz­
ing beef  cattle,  ongoing  work  at Teagasc  Moorepark  is evaluating  rape, stubble  turnips  and 
forage  oats within dairy systems.  Researchers  sowed  forage  rape (cv. Stego;  6.5kg  
seed/ha)  on 3 sowing  dates  (1,15  and 31 August)  and on each occasion  applied  4 rates  
of inorganic  N fertiliser  (0, 40, 80 and 120kg  N/ha). A second  forage  rape (cv. Swift)  was 
sown at 6.5kg seed/ha  on the 15 August  with an application  of 80kg N/ha. Stubble  turnip  
cultivars  (Delilah,  Barkant,  Samson  and Tyfon)  were  sown (6.5kg  seed/ha)  on two sowing  
dates  (1 and 15 August)  with 80kg N/ha. On the 15 August,  two forage  oat cultivars  (Stam ­
pede and Hokonui)  were sown at a seeding  rate of lOOkg/ha,  with 80kg N/ha applied.  
Each forage  was harvested  either  on 1 December  2005 or 1 February  2006.
To date, Keogh  et al., (2006)  have shown  (Table  11 and Figure  5):
• Winter  harvestable yields of 2.8 to 4.9 tonnes  DM/ha  were  achieved.  Differences  in har- 
vestable  DM yield occurred  between  forages,  and between  cultivars  within  forages.  
The authors  concluded  that the yields  achieved  were adequate  to support  In situ graz­
ing during  the winter.
• The relativities  of the differences  between  forages  and cultivars  changed  considerably  
between  1 December  and 1 February.  Thus,  some  forages  or cultivars  appeared  more  
suited  than others  for providing  forage  early or alternatively  late in the winter.
• An interaction  was found between  N level and sowing  date of forage  rape (Stego)  - 
there  was an increase  of 17.3 and 10.4kg  DM/ha/day  for every 1kg increase  in N ap­
plied at the  sowing  dates  of 1 or 15 August,  respectively.  However,  no benefit  accrued  
from N applied  to crops  sown  on 31 August  (a reduction  of 1.5kg DM/ha/day  for every  
1kg increase  in N applied  was recorded).
• Sowing  date had more of an effect  on DM yield/ha  of forage  rape than N level, with a 
delay  in sowing  date beyond  the 1 August  resulting  in a reduction  of 735kg  DM/ha/week  
delay
57
Table 11. The effect  of variety  and harvest  date on total DM yield (kgDM/ha)  and 
morphological  components  of forages  sown  on the 15 Aug at 80kg N/ha
Forage CultivarHarvest
DateTotal DM 
yieldLeaf (g/g)Stem
(g/g)Dead
(g/g)
Rape Stego 1 Dec 3663 0.72 0.17 0.11
1 Feb 3295 0.67 0.21 0.12
Swift 1 Dec 3457 0.60 0.24 0.16
1 Feb 3931 0.59 0.27 0.13
Stubble  turnips Delilah 1 Dec 4930 0.27 0.68 0.04
1 Feb 4372 0.14 0.78 0.07
Barkant 1 Dec 4168 0.28 0.56 0.14
1 Feb 3628 0.20 0.60 0.18
Samson 1 Dec 3245 0.23 0.55 0.22
1 Feb 3972 0.16 0.71 0.12
Tyfon 1 Dec 3248 0.63 0.20 0.16
1 Feb 2226 0.23 0.54 0.23
Forage  oats Hokonui 1 Dec 2815 0.43 0.37 0.18
1 Feb 2827 0.31 0.37 0.31
Stampede 1 Dec 3213 0.37 0.51 0.11
1 Feb 3693 0.15 0.59 0.25
Source:  Keogh  etal.,  2006
Figure  5. Effect  of nitrogen  (N) level and sowing  date on the DM yieid  of forage  rape  
(cv. Stego)  (Keogh  et al., 2006)
6000  
5500  
5000  
4500  
4000  
M/ 3500  
ha 3000  
2500  
2000  
1500 
1000-01-Aug • 15-Aug^5^31-Aug
40 80
N Level (Kg/ha)120
In further  work, the same researchers  offered  dry spring-calving  dairy cows kale (8kg 
DM/day),  swedes  (8kg DM/day)  or grass  (12kg DM/day),  each supplemented  with 4kg 
grass  silage  DM/day,  from 1 December  until calving  (mean  of 20 February).  The grazing  
cows  utilised  approximately  84, 75 and 65% of the kale, swedes and  grass on offer, respec ­
tively. It took the cows  offered  Swedes  a considerable  period  before  they started  consum-
58
ing them (almost  3 weeks). However  once they became  adapted,  they progressed  very 
well. A fourth group  of similar  cows were accommodated  indoors  and offered  excellent  
quality  grass silage ad libitum  (approximately  77% DMD; no supplement  fed). Mean  
changes  in body  condition  score  were +0.17,  +0.16-0.23 and +0.50  for the cows  consum ­
ing kale, swedes,  grass  and silage,  respectively.  There  were no significant  carryover  ef­
fects to the subsequent  lactation  (i.e. subsequent  milk yields  did not differ).
Further  research  still needs  to be conducted  on producing  and grazing  forages  during  the 
winter,  with emphasis  on the yields  and quality  produced,  the level of intake  and perform ­
ance achieved  under  different  management  regimes,  and the implications  for farm labour, 
animal  welfare,  the environment  and compliance  with various  governmental  schemes  
(Keogh  ef a/., 2006).  ''
References
Keady,  T.W.J.  (2005).  Ensiled  maize  and whole  crop wheat  forages  for beef  and dairy  cat­
tle: effects  on animal  performance.  In: Silage  production  and utilisation  - Proceedings  of 
the XIV International  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. Park & M.D. Stronge),  July 2005,  
Belfast.  Wageningen  Academic  Publishers,  p 65 - 82.
Keady,  T.W.J. , Lively,  F.O. and Kilpatrick,  D.J. (2005). An evaluation  of grain processing  
and storage  method,  and feed level,  on the performance  and meat  quality  of beef  cattle  of­
fered two contrasting  grass  silages.  In: Silage  production  and utilisation  - Proceedings  of 
the XIV International  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. Park & M.D. Stronge),  July 2005,  
Belfast.  Wageningen  Academic  Publishers,  p 153.
Keogh,  B., French,  P, McGrath,  T. and Storey,  T. (2006).  Forages  for winter  grazing;  effect  
of N level and sowing  date. Proceedings  of the British  Grassland  Society Research  
Conference,  Royal Agricultural  College,  Cirencester,  4-6 September,  2006, p7 - 9.
Little, E.M., O'Kiely,  P, Crowley,  J.C. and Keane,  G.P (2005a).  Yield and composition  of 
forage  maize:  interaction  of harvest  date, cultivar  and plastic  mulch. Proceedings  of the 
XIV International  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. Park and M.D. Stronge),  Belfast,  3 to 6 
July 2005.  Wageningen  Academic  Publishers,  pi76.
Little, E.M., O'Kiely,  P, Crowley,  J.C. and Keane,  G.P. (2005b).  Cob development  in forage  
maize;  influence  of harvest  date, cultivar  and plastic  mulch. Proceedings  of the XIV Inter­
national  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. Park and M.D. Stronge),  Belfast,  3 to 6 July 2005. 
Wageningen  Academic  Publishers,  pi 75.
Little, E.M., O'Kiely,  R, Crowley,  J.C. and Keane,  G.P. (2005c).  Composition  of maize  
stover;  interaction  of harvest  date, plastic  mulch  and cultivar.  Proceedings  of the Agricul ­
tural Research  Forum,  Tullamore,  14 & 15 March,  2005, p76.
Moloney,  A.P, French,  R, O'Kiely,  P. and O'Riordan,  E.G. (2000). Fatty acid composition  
from beef cattle  fed pre-slaughter  rations  based  on grass  silage  or maize  silage. Journal  
of  Animal  Science,  78 (suppl.  1 )IJournai  of Dairy  Science,  83 (suppl.  1; abstract  664), pi 56.
Moloney,  A.P, Mooney,  M.T., O’Kiely, P. and Troy, D.J. (1999). Fat colour  and the quality  
of meat  from beef  cattle  offered  grass  silage  or maize  silage-based  diets. Proceedings  of 
Twelfth  International  Silage  Conference  (edited  by T. Pauly)  held at Swedish  University  of 
Agricultural  Sciences,  Uppsala,  Sweden  on 5-7 July, 309-310.
59
Moloney,  A.P. and O’Kiely, P. (1994). Influence  of growth  stage and alkali-treatment  on 
the nutritive  value  of whole  crop cereal  silage  for beef  cattle. Proceedings  of the National  
Conference  on Forage  Quality,  Evaluation  and Utilisation,  Lincoln,  Nebraska,  USA, April 
13-15,  p79.
Moloney,  A.P. and O’Kiely, P. (1997). Digestibility,  nitrogen  retention  and plasma  metabolite 
concentrations  in steers  offered  whole  crop wheat  silage-based  rations. Irish Journal  of 
Agricultural  and Food  Research,  36: 135-144.
Moloney,  A.P. and O’Kiely, P. (1999).  Rumen  and blood  variables  in steers  fed grass  silage 
or whole  crop fodder  beet silage. Animal  Feed  Science  and Technology,  18: 221-225.
Muck,  R.E. and O’Kiely, P, (1992).  Aerobic  deterioration  of lucerne  (Medicago  saliva)  and 
maize  (Zea mays)  silages  - effects  of fermentation  products.  Journal  of the Science  of 
Food  and  Agriculture,  59: 217-226.
O’Kiely, P. (1998).  A note on the conservation  characteristics  of physiologically  immature  
forage  maize  ensiled  with different  additives.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  and Food Re­
search,  37: 237-242.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney,  A.P. (1991).  Live and carcass  weight  gains  of cattle  offered  whole-  
crop barley  silage  at an immature  growth  stage. Animal  Production,  52: 605-606.  (abstract)  
[also Proceedings  of Winter  Meeting,  British  Society  of Animal  Production,  paper  149].
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney  A.P. (1995). Performance  of cattle offered  whole-crop  barley  or 
wheat  silage. Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research,  34: 13-24.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney,  A.P. (1995). Performance  of beef cattle  offered  differing  ratios  of 
grass  and maize  silage. Irish Journal  of  Agricultural  and Food  Research,  34: 76 (abstract)  
[also Proceedings  of 21st IGAPA  Research  Meeting,  p 11-12).
O’Kiely, R, and Moloney,  A.P. (1999a).  Conservation  characteristics  of ensiled  whole  crop 
fodder  beet and its nutritive  value  for beef  cattle. Irish Journal  of  Agricultural  and Food  Re­
search,  38: 25-41.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney, A.P. (1999b).  Whole  crop wheat  silage  for finishing  beef heifers. 
Abstract  in Irish Journal  of Agricultural  and Food  Research,  38: 296 [also in Proceedings  
of Agricultural  Research  Forum,  UCD Belfield,  25 and 26 March,  1999, p 243-244.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney,  A.P. (2000).  Maize  and grass  silage  for beef heifers  when  offered  
alone  or in mixtures.  Beef  from Grass  and Forage.  Proceedings  of British  Grassland  So­
ciety Conference  held atTillington  Hall, Stafford  on 21 and 22 November,  (Ed. D. Pullar), 
P117-122.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney,  A.P. (2000). Nutritive value  of whole  crop wheat  silage  for finishing  
beef heifers.  Beef  from Grass  and Forage.  Proceedings  of British  Grassland  Society  Con­
ference  held atTillington  Hall, Stafford,  21 and 22 November,  (Ed. D. Puller),  p141-145.
O’Kiely, P. and Moloney,  A.P. (2002). Growth  and feed efficiency  of beef cattle offered  
whole  crop wheat  or grass  silages  alone  or in mixtures.  Proceedings  of 13'^ International  
Silage  Conference,  Scottish  Agricultural  College,  Auchincruive,  Scotland,  11 to 13 Sep­
tember,  2002, P316-317.
O’Kiely, P, Moloney,  A.P, O’Grady,  J. and Keating,  T. (1998). Comparison  of laboratory
60
methods for estimating  DMD of immature  forage  maize.  Alternative  Forages  for Ruminants  
(Ed. G.P.F.  Lane and J.M. Wilkinson),  Chalcombe  Publications,  115-118.
O’Kiely, P., Moloney,  A.P. and Rogers,  P.A.M.  (1993).  The influence  of the addition  of sug- 
arbeet  pulp as an absorbent  at ensiling  on the nutritive  value of whole-crop  fodder  beet 
silage. Proceedings  of fOth International  Silage  Conference,  Dublin  City Universitv  D 147- 
148.
O'Kiely,  P. and Muck,  R.E. (1992).  Aerobic  deterioration  of lucerne  (Medicago  sativa)  and 
maize  (Zea mays)  silages  - effects  of yeasts.  Journal  of the Science  of Food  and  Agricul ­
ture, 59: 21t-2t6.
O'Kiely,  R, O’Riordan,  E.G. and Black,  A.D. (2006). Red clover  for silage:  management  
impacts  on yield and digestibility  during  the season  after sowing. In: J.LIoveras,  A. Gon-  
zalez-Rodriquez,  O. Vazquez-Yanez,  J. Pineiro,  O. Santamaria,  L. Olea and M.J. Pobla-  
ciones  (eds) Sustainable  grassland  productivity-Proceedings  of the 2P‘ general  meeting  
of the European  Grassland  Federation,  Badajoz,  Spain.  3-6 April, 2006.  p243-245.
Stacey,  R, O’Kiely, R, Hackett,  R., Rice, B. and O’Mara F.P. (2002). Identification  of the 
optimal  harvest  stage  for cereal  grains  in order  to achieve  the best balance  between  yield 
and composition.  Proceedings  of IT International  Silage  Conference,  Scottish  Agricultural  
College,  Auchincruive,  Scotland,  11 to 13 September,  2002, p392-393.
Stacey,  R, O’Kiely, R, Moloney,  A.P. and O’Mara, FR (2005). Nutritive  value  for finishing  
beef steers  of wheat  grain conserved  by different  techniques.  Proceedings  of the 14"’ In­
ternational  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. Rark and M.D. Stronge),  Belfast,  3 to 6 July 2005  
Wageningen  Academic  Rublishers,  pi 54.
Stacey,  R, O Kiely, R, Rice, B., Hackett,  R. and O’Mara, F. (2003). Changes  in yield and 
composition  of wheat,  barley  and triticale  grains  with advancing  maturity.  Proceedings  of 
the Agricultural  Research  Forum,  Tullamore,  3-4 March,  pi 28.
Stacey,  R, O Kiely, R, Rice, B. and O’Mara,  FR. (2003).  A note on the on-farm  moist  grain  
storage  and feeding  practices  in Ireland.  Irish Journal  of  Agricultural  and Food  Research  
42:131-136.
Walsh,  K., O’Kiely, R, Moloney,  A.P. and O’Mara, FR (2005b).  Conserved  whole-crop  
wheat  and forage  maize  feeding  value  relative  to grass  silage  and ad libitum  concenrates  
for beef  cattle. Journal  of  Animal  Science,  83 (suppl. 1 ):274-275  and Journal  of Dairy  Sci­
ence, 88: 274-275.
Walsh,  K., O’Kiely, R, Moloney,  A.P. and O’Mara, FR (2005c).  The feeding  value  of con­
served whole-crop  wheat  and forage  maize  relative  to grass  silage  and ad-libitum  concen ­
trates  for beef cattle. Proceedings  of the 14'^ International  Silage  Conference  (eds. R.S. 
Park and M.D. Stronge),  Belfast,  3 to 6 July 2005. Wageningen  Academic  Publishers
p166.
Walsh,  K., O’Kiely, P. and O’Mara, FR (2006). Intake  and performance  of beef cattle  of­
fered conserved  whole-crop  wheat  and barley  harvested  at two cutting  heights  relative  to 
maize silage and ad-libitum  concentrates.  Proceedings  of the Agricultural  Research  
Forum,  Tullamore,  15 & 16 March,  2006, p52.
61
Irish Grassland  Association  1946-2006  - 
Delivering  the Benefits  from Grassland
Sean Flanagan
Introduction
The Irish Grassland  Association  (IGA)  is Ireland ’s leading forum  for discussing  the science  
of grass  and animai  production,  and the economics  and finances  of dairy, beef cattle  and 
sheep  production  systems.  Membership  is 800 and is a lively mix of progressive  farmers  
(70%),  research  scientists,  advisers  and agribusiness  personnel.  The IGA is a member  of 
the European  Grassland  Federation  and has close working  relationships  with the Ulster  
Grassland  Society,  Fermanagh  Grassland  Club and the British  Grassland  Society.
This paper  contains  a summary  of the Association's  objectives,  its activities  and technology  
interactions  over the decades,  and includes  the developments  described  previously  by 
O’Keeffe  (1996). It will be shown  that: (a) Research  and Development  have always  been 
core components  of IGA meetings  and, (b) the IGA has  been a significant  driving  force in 
the use of knowledge  by dairy, beef  cattle  and sheep  producers  for exploiting  grazed  grass 
as the cheapest  form of feed for ruminant  production.  In particular,  the IGA draws  heavily  
on the skills and knowledge  of scientists  at the Teagasc  research  centres,  ARINI  at Hills­
borough,  and the Plant  Testing  Station  at Crossnacreevy.
The formative  years
Following  six years  of impoverished  farming  during  World  War 2, lack of Inputs  and knowl ­
edge  were Identified  as major  constraints  limiting  successful  grassland  farming.  Basic  in­
formation  on soil fertiliser  requirements,  grass  varieties,  reseeding  and animal  nutrition  
was non-existent.  The New  Zealand  consultant,  George  Holmes,  brought  In by the Minister  
for Agriculture  James  Dillon,  concluded  that Irish grassland  in the post-war  years  was pro­
ducing  significantly  less than its potential.  However,  some  pioneering  farmers  were  gath­
ering information  to show  that Irish grassland  was capable  of producing  significantly  more  
than the limited  5 to 6 months  grazing  that was customary  at the time.
It was against  this background  that a group  of enthusiasts  held two meetings  in Dublin  in 
1946; in 84 Merrion  Square,  Dublin  on May 29 and at the Horse  Show  on July 7, and 
formed  the Irish Grassland  Association.  The group  included  progressive  farmers.  The 
O’Morchoe,  R. McCulloch  (Ballyboughal,  Dublin),  W. Bland (Laois),  H.M. Fitzpatrick,  - 
Leonard,  J. Litton,  W. Bryan  and Capt. Redmond  together  with Professors  P.J. Caffrey,  M. 
Gorman,  E.J. Sheehy  (University  College  Dublin),  and Harry  Spain  (Department  of Agricul ­
ture).
Objectives  were clearly  set:
To identify  all available  information  on grass  farming  and to help in its application  in farm 
practice.
To advance  and spread  the knowledge  of grassland  and animal  production  methods  which  
can increase  farm profits.
To provide  opportunities  for farmers,  research  workers  and advisers  to discuss  worthwhile  
developments  in research  and farm practice.
62
To publish  original  articles  or literature  on progressive  ideas for the advancement  of the 
agricultural  industry.
The founders  quickly  established  a pattern  of strong  relationships  and interactions  between  
farmers  and research  workers.  It was accepted  at the outset  that both were inter-depen ­
dant and that each  thrived  on the others ’ ability  to mutual  advantage.  This pattern  of inter­
dependence  has been a feature  of the Association ’s progress  over the decades  and 
continues  to flourish  today.
In the early years  the Association  was dependent  on research  information  from outside  
the jurisdiction.  Useful  relationships  were  established  with  Aberystwyth  (Wales),  the Grass ­
land Research  Institute  (UK), and with pioneering  work  already  underway  in Northern  Ire­
land, notably  by John Lowe. The IGA invited  leading  researchers  from these  sources  to 
its meetings.  Progress  was made by identifying  areas  of weakness  and arranging  visits  
to the limited  research  facilities  and progressive  farms. Existing  information  was of a very 
fundamental  nature. Factors  affecting  soil fertility  were scarcely  understood  and repre ­
sented  the greatest  limitation  to grass  growth.  Lime was applied  infrequently,  and clinical  
phosphate  deficiency  in cattle  existed.
Johnstown  Castle
Matters  improved  in the early 1950s  after the Department  of Agriculture  acquired  John ­
stown  Castle  In Co. Wexford.  A research  programme  was established  with objectives  cen­
tred on defining  optimum  levels of lime and fertilisers  for Irish grassland.  Production  targets  
for Irish grassland  based  on measurement  were identified  for the first time. However,  
today ’s view of grassland  being  fully integrated  in a farming  system  scarcely  existed. In 
those  early years  of the Association  there  was a tendency  to regard  good green  grass  as 
an end in itself. However,  this attitude  did not prevail  for long.
Evolution  of policy  and interests
The President  in 1952 (Edward  Richards  Orpen),  instigated  change  by developing  a new 
policy,  - that better  farming  must be measured  by the trend in net profit  on a whole-farm  
basis. Yields  per acre or per animal  were  of little interest  unless  accompanied  by improved  
net profits. In the evolution  of this policy  IGA interests  became  centred  on the inter-rela ­
tionships  of animal  and pasture  on livestock  performance.
Responding  to the change  in emphasis,  the Council  invited  authoritative  speakers  from 
overseas  institutions  to discuss  specialised  livestock  topics  - especially  dairying.  Chief  
amongst  these  were Mac Cooper  (then at Wye College  and later at Newcastle  University)  
who became  very much  part of the IGA platform;  McMeekan  from New Zealand  discussed  
low cost performance  and whole-farm  output  without  expensive  frills, and Alan Stewart  
from the Milk Marketing  Board  in England.  Stewart  told the IGA members  that looking  at 
yields of cows was not good enough  and that if progress  in A.I. breeding  was to be 
achieved,  careful  assessments  and selection  of bulls from performance  measurements  on 
their daughters  were required.  Although  the IGA had significant  impact  during  the 1950s  
in providing  knowledge  and encouragement,  it had no impact  on animal  breeding.
Uncertainties  surrounding  the conservation  of winter-feed  presented  another  bottleneck  
that bedevilled  successful  farming.  Hay making  in Irish weather  was always  unpredictable.  
Insufficient  winter  feed resulted  in animal  stress  in a bad year and produced  emaciated
63
cows on dairy farms. At an IGA meeting  Henry  Kennedy  described  the condition  as sci­
entific  starvation ’. The IGA saw the need for more and better  silage  and organised  visits 
to the early silage  making  farms  of Rob McCulloch,  Sean  O’Neill (Lurgan)  and elsewhere.  
Uptake  was hampered  by confusion  on additives  and conservation  techniques.  This situ­
ation was soon  to change,  not alone  In silage  making  but across  all sectors  of grass  farm ­
ing.
An Foras  Taluntais
Following  the establishment  of An Foras  Taluntais  (AFT)  in 1958 (for which  the IGA was a 
nominating  body),  its research  programme  under  Director  Tom Walsh  gave  a new impetus  
to Irish agriculture  that continued  into the following  decades.  The pursuit  of knowledge  
and pushing  forward  the horizons  on all sectors  of grass  farming  and ruminant  production  
was a central  feature  of the AFT programme.  For the first time, grass-based  livestock  pro­
duction  systems  were developed  based  on sound  scientific  principles  and the application  
of measures  of efficiency  under  Irish climatic  conditions.
One of the most  significant  research  outcomes  related  to maximising  the level of N fertiliser  
use for Irish grassland,  and to increasing  stocking  rates sufficient  to consume  all grass  
grown. Research  conducted  at Moorepark,  Grange  and Creagh  identified  the commercial  
levels  of N fertiliser  for the appropriate  stocking  rate in dairy, beef and sheep  enterprises.  
Timing  and rates  of N applications  for grass  growth  were  established  at Johnstown  Castle, 
including  urea and the role of sulphur.  The forage  harvester  replaced  the buckrake.  Stud ­
ies on silage  conservation  at Grange  clarified  the factors  affecting  digestibility,  preservation  
and animal  performance,  resulting  in a consistent  and reliable  winter-feed.
The development  of creamery  milk production,  beef  cattle  and sheep  output  was now un­
derpinned  by research  and measurement  back-up.
EU Entry  1973
In a keynote  paper  presented  at the 1971 Winter  Meeting  in Cahir,  Past-President  Michael  
Walshe  described  how the current  output  of Irish agriculture  could  be trebled,  and he quan ­
tified the inputs  required,  including  labour,  credit  and finance.  As ever, the IGA platform  pro­
voked  some straight  talking. Weaknesses  in Irish agriculture  and lack of Government  
commitment  to the development  of the very industry  that hoped  to benefit  most from EU 
entry in 1973 were exposed.
It is of interest  to recall  35 years  on, that land structure  and the exodus  from the land were  
talking  points  in general  circulation  then as now. This was evident  in the discussion  follow ­
ing the address  by Dr. Sicco  Mansholt,  President  of the EU Commission  at the 25*^ Anniver ­
sary Conference  held in Dublin in 1971. The debate  was neatly summed  up by 
Past-President  Joe Bruton:  “We have Michael  Walshe  telling  us about  the potential  of our 
grassland,  Dr. McMeekan  (then  with the International  Bank for Reconstruction  and Devel ­
opment,  Washington  DC) telling  us where  the money  could  come  from and now Dr. Man­
sholt  telling  us of the product  market  potential.  I don’t know  what  more  we want  offered  to 
us by way of encouragement,  but what  we do want is national  courage  in this country ’’.
Down  on the farm,  there  was an accelerated  uptake  of AFT information  for maximising  the 
opportunities  created  by EU entry. Capital  investment  in farm modernisation  was huge,  ro­
tary parlours  were installed  for the efficiency  of labour,  slatted  sheds  erected  and beef
64
cattle feedlots  established.  Land prices  soared,  credit  was readily  available  and costs  
were not a main concern  in the context  of unlimited  markets  and high prices.  The thirst  for 
R&D information  and innovative  ideas  was clearly  evident  when over 400 Grassland  en­
thusiasts  turned  up for the 1973 Summer  Tour to Grange/Meath/Louth  organised  jointly  
with the Ulster  Grassland  Society. Sheep  production  did not develop  as an important  
money  making  enterprise  for another  decade  due to restrictions  in the French  market  and 
associated  economic  factors.
Blueprint  for milk production
The following  decade  was characterised  by massive  technological  change  with grassland  
management  improving  to the extent  that good farmers  required  only a third of a hectare  
of land to carry one cow per year. Research  at Moorepark  developed  the following  blue­
print for milk production:  5150 kg milk output/cow,  stocking  rate 0.34 ha/cow  (1100  gal on 
0.85 acres/cow),  1.3 t silage  DM/cow,  3.5 t grazed  grass/cow,  400 kg N/cow  and 650 kg 
concentrates/cow  (P. Dillon  pers. comm.).
Achieving  high dry matter  intake
Following  the introduction  of milk quotas,  maximising  output  from grazed  grass  became  a 
priority due to the shift in emphasis  to maximising  profit  per gallon  with quota  being  the lim­
iting factor. Constraints  to DM intake  at pasture,  e.g. quality,  pre- and post-grazing  height  
and grass  allowance  became  crucial. Research  at Moorepark  over the last 10 years  has 
developed  grazing  strategies  for increasing  the proportion  of grazed  grass in the cow’s 
diet to 75%, reducing  grass  silage  to less than 20% and concentrate  input to 5%. These  
changes  in the feed budget  have  potential  to reduce  feed costs  by 0.8 cent/litre.  Measure ­
ment  of farm grass  cover  is a key requirement  for implementing  these  guidelines  and the 
relevant  grass  cover  targets  for spring-calving  systems  have been established.  The sig­
nificance  of high DM intake  is vividly  illustrated  in Figure  1. (Dillon  et al., 2005).
Figure  1. Relationship  between  total costs  of production  and proportion  of grazed  
pasture  in cows  ration  (Dillon  et al., 2005)
y =-0.271  lx+ 39.341  
R=’ = 0.7804
.10 40 -10 ftO 70
Proportion  of grass  In diet (%)80
65
For the future,  due to increased  emphasis  on product  quality  and issues  associated  with 
nitrogen  leaching,  soil compaction,  gas emissions  and animal  welfare,  higher  productivity  
per animal  will be required.  Daily  grass  intake  will be maximised  by adhering  to important  
sward  characteristics  such  as maintaining  a high proportion  of green  leaf within  the grazing 
horizon  while allocating  an adequate  daily herbage  allowance.  Increasing  the green  leaf 
proportion  at the base of the sward  may play an important  role in increasing  herbage  intake 
and making  grazing  management  easier.
Progress  in grass  breeding  has been less than might  be expected.  Current  grass  selection  
and evaluation  systems  target  improved  grass DM yields  under  cutting  systems  of man­
agement  rather  than animal  performance.  Although  grass breeders  have improved  DM 
yields  by 0.5%  per annum  between  1965 and 1990,  there  is a requirement  for an increased  
grass  selection  programme  focussed  on characteristics  that influence  animal  performance,  
i.e. herbage  intake.
Grass  breeding  in the future  will be assisted  greatly  by new technologies  involving  gene  
manipulation,  the identification  of quantitative  loci (QTL)  and the use of/n situ hybridisation  
to differentially  label chromosomes.  Careful  choice  of QTL in market-assisted  selection  
should  minimise  undesirable  correlated  responses  to selection  such as tendency  for early  
spring  growth  to be associated  with early heading  and stem development.  Use of tech­
niques  to genetically  modify  plants  will facilitate  the development  of plants  with elevated  
concentration  of ruminal  undegradable  dietary  protein  and high-energy  yielding  compounds  
such as starch  or triacylglycerides.  These  are some  of the possibilities  for future  production  
systems
Grass-based  beef systems
Beef  cattle  enterprises  are relatively  inefficient  when  compared  with dairying  due to lower  
conversion  rates of feed into output  and income.  At Teagasc  Grange,  Eddie  O’Riordan,  
Padraig  O’Kiely and colleagues  tackled  the priorities  for more efficient  measures  in beef 
cattle production,  feed cost and in animal  breeding.  During  the period  1980 to 1995 the 
targets  set for suckler  calf to beef were advanced  progressively  from a carcass  weight  of 
340 to  395kg for steers,  and from a carcass  output/ha  of 410 to 500kg/year.  Progress  was 
accelerated  by innovative  farmers  who joined  the IGA platform  and reported  on their ex­
periences  in commercial  practice,  including  weaknesses,  likely solutions  and ideas  that 
created  valuable  feedback  to researchers.
Critical  reappraisal  of the cattle diet generated  a new focus  on grassland  management  
strategies.  The national  balance  sheet  for the proportions  of grazed  grass,  conserved  
grass  and concentrates,  expressed  as DM intake was:  grazed  grass  57%, conserved  grass 
29%, concentrates  14% (McLoughlin,  1991). Costs  attributable  to the conserved  grass  
plus concentrate  components  amounted  to 70% of total feed costs. It was evident  that the 
economic  viability  of cattle  enterprises  is dependent  on developing  the competitive  advan ­
tages  of grazed  grass. As a priority,  more  flexible  grazing  procedures  were developed  to 
allow  for the ever-present  fluctuations  in grass  growth  while at the same  time utilising  the 
sward  in favour  of higher  animal  intake. Measurement  of grass  supply  week-to-week  has 
been adopted  as a key requirement  for utilising  grass  to best advantage  on the cattle  farm.  
Details  on the use of sward  height  measurements  for estimating  grass  supply  and the as­
sociated  benefits  for production  efficiency  were described  in detail  at the 50’^ Anniversary  
Beef Conference  in 1996 (O’Riordan  and O’Kiely, 1996),  and at the ‘Grass  Ireland  2000 ’
66
meeting  in Navan  (O’Riordan,  et al., 2000).
The current  targets  for suckler  beef systems  are:-
Standard  - 510kg  carcass  output/ha  ©stocking  rate 0.8 ha/cow  beef unit and  200kg  N/ha. 
REPS  - 410kg  carcass  output/ha  ©stocking  rate 1.0 ha/cow  beef unit and 100kg N/ha 
(Drennan  et al., 2004)
Other  advances  in grassland  science  include  the use of white clover-based  swards  for 
achieving  high output  of beef and palatability  evaluations  of perennial  ryegrass  cultivars.  
Strategic  management  in spring  and autumn  has increased  the grazing  season  by 4-5 
weeks. High performance  from maize  and whole-crop  cereal  silages  has been quantified  
and the appropriate  technologies  identified.  Technologies  now being  developed  to deliver  
the benefits from  grassland  include:  optimising  intake  of grazed  grass/legume  mix over an 
extended  grazing  season;  quantifying  the nutritive  value  of ryegrasses  on the DAF recom ­
mended  list; improved  legume  breeding  to produce  high DM yield and enhanced  N fixing  
abilities.
Outdoor  pads for wintering  cattle  were designed  and evaluated  successfully  to offer a ca­
pability  for lifting cattle  enterprise  competitiveness.  Their  adoption  in practice  around  the 
country  represents  present  day technology  uptake.
Challenges  to the sheep  sector
In the 1970s  the national  ewe flock plummeted  to less than two million  ewes. This was due 
to limited  market  access  and inferior  financial  returns  compared  with dairying  or beef. 
Sheep  farming  remained  in the doldrums  until the 1980s  when the Common  Policy  for 
sheep was implemented.  The Sheep  CAP heralded  a new era, and unprecedented  expan ­
sion in sheep  numbers  followed.  Profits  were second  only to dairying.
The delivery of AFT R&D information  facilitated  growth  in output  and wealth  creation  for the 
sheep  sector. AFT Council  member  and IGA Past-President  John Orpen  was a prime  
mover  in pushing  research  on specialised  sheep  systems  as a matter  of policy. It was the 
development  of silage-based  in-wintering  systems  that offered  farmers  a new strategy  for 
rationalising  their grass resources  with significant  knock-on  effects:  resting  of pastures,  
fertiliser  N applications  for higher  stocking  rates  and adoption  of paddock  grazing,  resulted  
in a big lift to the carrying  capacity  of Irish pasture,  up to 15 ewes per ha. Whole-farm  
grazing  systems  were  set up at Blindwell  and Knockbeg  to illustrate  the principles,  I.e. pro­
ductive  pastures  well stocked  with prolific  ewes  (litter  size 1.9) producing  an output  of over 
400kg  of carcass  lamb per ha.
However,  serious  gaps in know-how  prevailed,  e.g. skills in day-to-day  management  of 
large  flocks,  lamb survival  and disease  control.  IGA initiatives  included  the annual  Sheep  
Conference  first held in 1983. Outside  speakers  were brought  in, notably  Bill Fell from 
Yorkshire,  Karl Linklater,  VIC, St.Boswells  and John Read, a UK Shepherd  of the Year.  
Farm  Study  Tours  to Britain  were undertaken  with the help of MLC: 1980 Midlands/Lincoln,  
1984 Hereford/Chilbolton,  1985 Somerset/Devon,  1986 Cumbria,  1987 Mid-Wales.  Uptake 
of know-how  was extensive;  the number  of flock owners  expanded  to almost  50,000  and 
ewe numbers  to 5 million.
67
Changes  in CAP in the 90s altered  the income  relativities  of livestock  enterprises  putting  
sheep  at a disadvantage.  The lamb price/feed  cost ratio disimproved,  decline  w/as trig­
gered and there was a huge cull of nearly  400,000  ewes in 1999 alone. These  factors  
stimulated  a new focus  on the role of grazed  grass  for achieving:  (a) bottom  line production  
costs  and, (b) labour-saving  practices.  Research  at Knockbeg  showed  that by using  grass  
budgeting  principles  at stocking  rates  similar  to REPS,  extended  grazing  as a substitute  for 
silage  and housing  can cut costs  per ewe by over 20%. Man hours  per day were reduced  
by two-thirds.  Extended  grazing  is now being  practised  on a number  of commercial  farms.  
Winter  housing  will continue  to be a central  component  of the intensively  stocked  system.  
In tackling  the labour  issue,  a good example  of how  top farmers  have  stimulated  new ideas 
was seen at the IGA visit to George  Stanley ’s 800 ewe flock in Laois  in 2003. The use of 
equipment  modified  for speeding  up feeding  and day-to-day  housing  jobs marked  new ad­
vances  in short-circuiting  competing  demands  for time and labour.
Following  the 2004 CAP Reforms  and decoupling,  the IGA linked  up with Alistair  Carson  
and his colleagues  in Northern  Ireland  to decide  on appropriate  response.  Jointly  with 
DARDNI, ARINI,  UGS and BGS,  the IGA organised  a 2-day  Conference  at Greenmount  in 
May 2005 on the theme  ‘Profit From Your Labour ’. Keynote  speakers  and facilitators  in­
cluding  top sheep  breeders  Lesley  Stubbings  (Northants),  Murray  Rohloff  (NZ)  Alistair  Car- 
son, Seamus  Hanrahan  and John Shirley,  outlined  their vision for the sustainable  
development  of Ireland ’s sheep  industry.  Over 100 IGA delegates  participated  and de­
parted  with positive  messages  on measures  of efficiency  for cutting  costs  and maximising  
labour  returns.  One of Rohloff ’s recommendations  has been acted  on, i.e. the establish ­
ment  of the Sheep  Strategy  Group. Chairman  John Malone  presented  his first report  at the 
IGA 2006 Sheep  Conference,  pointing  out that: (a) Irish processors  have capacity  to 
process  a higher  output  into a market  that is only 80% self-sufficient  and, (b) one-third  of 
producers  do not cover  the costs  of production.  Of the various  measures  outlined  there  
was little mention  of our greatest  resource,  i.e. grass.
The future? The only sheep  R&D station  in the east of Ireland  has been closed. In its 
place  Teagasc  is undertaking  technology  transfer  initiatives  onto commercial  farms,  moves  
that hold promise.  The evidence  for maximising  grazed  grass  in the diet of the ewe is sig­
nificant,  yet expensive  creep  feeding  continues.  Why? The gains in profit from finishing  
lambs  on grass  alone  were  evident  at the IGA  visit to Andrew  Moloney ’s farm In Edenderry  
in 2006. What  effort is being made  to develop  and foster  skills for estimating  how much 
grass  DM is on the sheep  farm week-to-week?  Can we develop  ‘easy  care ’ sheep with  dis­
ease resistant  traits? Research  at Athenry  has identified  breed  differences  for resistance  
to worm parasites.  The use of molecular  genetics  in breeding  for resistance  to footrot  
offers possibilities  (Conington  et al., 2006). Can a footrot-DNA  test appropriate  for our 
breeds  be developed?  More immediately,  the Sheep  Strategy  Group  will be expected  to 
activate  measures  for increasing  the earning  power  of the 35,000  producers  who remain  
dependent  on sheep  for income.
Submissions  on agriculturai  policy
Responding  to changes  in current  agricultural  policy  as they take shape,  the IGA has en­
gaged  in discussion  with the policy  makers  of the day in government  and submitted  its 
proposals  in the interests  of a vibrant  and sustainable  Irish agriculture.  Submissions  in­
cluded:
68
In 1987, 1999 and 2003;  cutbacks  in Teagasc  Research  
In 1999;  Agric-Food  2010 Committee  
In 2001,2004  and 2006; Nitrates  Directive
In 2001,  then President  Noei Culleton  forewarned  the IGA  on the damaging  effects  to Irish 
agriculture  of the Nitrates  Directive.
In 2003; Milk Quotas
Strategic  reviews
With on-going  changes  in EU policies  and in the national  economy,  the IGA has conducted  
periodic  reviews  of its aims and vision,  its organisation,  and responses  to new opportuni ­
ties, led by the President  of the day, notably  Padraig  O’Kiely, Matt Dempsey,  Pat McFeely, 
Con Hurley  and John O’Brien. Issues  subjected  to scrutiny  include:
How best to address  the needs  of the membership  as changes  occur  in the national  econ ­
omy.
Review  of the IGA platform  as a debating  forum  especially  with policy  makers.
Planning  for future  initiatives  to provide  leadership  to the industry.
Improving  the presentation  and delivery  of the papers  presented  at its conferences.  
Increasing  the membership  including  corporate  membership.
Fundamental  questions
In keeping  with its role for vigorous  dialogue,  some  stark messages  have been delivered  
from the IGA platform  in recent  years. In particular,  at the 2000 September  meeting,  
Michael  Murphy  argued  that the agricultural  industry  had no clear  vision  for the future. He 
was strongly  critical  of the performance  of the institutions  and farm service  agencies  sur­
rounding  Irish agriculture,  the rigidity  of the milk quota regulations  and lack of innovation  
in milk processing  and marketing.  His message  was that “nine out of ten farmers  will either  
be out of business  or living in poverty  within 10 years ’’ and asked  “Where  are the people  
to plan and implement  constructive  change ’’? He urged all segments  of the industry  to 
come  together  and agree  a vision  to secure  the future,  develop  a vibrant  industry,  provide  
opportunity  for new entrants  and prosperity  and a future  for Irish farmers.  “I wish in 10 
years  time to be part of a positive,  dynamic,  growing  industry,  which  is highly  competitive  
internationally  and giving  good incomes  and careers  to people  at all levels  of the industry ”.
The debate  continues  with significant  contributions  from Mike Magan  on priorities  for turn­
ing around  the steady  erosion  of profit margin  on-farm.
International  Grassland  Congress
The world ’s grazing  lands  consist  of 3,000  million  ha of grassland,  most  of which  is utilised  
by livestock  for feeding  the world ’s populations.  The IGC is the premier  world event  for 
grassland  R&D, a forum  for authoritative  analyses  on world food production  and on new 
technologies  for utilising  grasslands  for the benefit  of mankind.  It is held every  four years.
With the build up of R&D information  in Ireland  and associated  grassland  impetus  in the 
70s, the Council  recognised  the potential  benefits  of bringing  the Congress  to Ireland.  At 
the XII Congress  in Moscow  in 1973,  the IGA submitted  a bid that had world-wide  support,  
but in the event  lost out to Leipzig  in East Germany  for 1977. The IGA then took the op­
portunity  to activate  a follow-on  event  to the Leipzig  Congress,  namely,  an International  
Meeting  on the theme  ‘Animal  Production  from Temperate  Grassland ’. President  Jim
69
O’Grady  in association  with Aidan Conway  and AFT headed  up the organisation  of this 
event  held in the RDS, Dublin,  June  5-12,1977.  Twenty-one  leading  researchers  were  se­
lected  to present  plenary  papers  focussed  on temperate  grass  growing  conditions,  with 53 
offered  papers  and study  tours. 365 delegates  from all temperate  zones  including  those  
in South  America  participated.
In 1997  at the XVIIIIGC in Canada,  BGS and IGA delegates  Roger  Wilkins  and the author  
agreed  to explore  the feasibility  of making  a joint UK/Irish  bid to host the XX IGC in 2005. 
The bid, compiled  by Dr John Walsh  for IGA with the theme  ‘Grassland  - A Global  Re­
source ’, was successful.  The management  of the Congress  was delegated  to a special  Or­
ganising  Committee  anchored  by Dr Frank  O’Mara (UCD)  and included  representatives  
from IGA, BGS,  Teagasc,  DAFF,  DARDNI  and UCD. The core programme  as held in UCD 
Belfield  on June  26 - July 1 2005 including  the Jan Crichton  Producer  Forum  that featured  
a paper  by IGA Past President  Jim Dwyer. Satellite  Workshops  were held as an integral  
part of the Congress  at Aberystwyth,  Belfast,  Cork, Glasgow  and Oxford.  The Congress  
attracted  over 1100 delegates  worldwide  including  95 from Ireland.
European  Grassland  Federation
The EGF facilitates  close contacts  between  European  Grassland  Organisations  by initiating 
symposia,  etc. and promoting  interchange  of scientific  ideas  and results.  Currently,  Eddie 
O’Riordan  at Grange  is IGA  representative.  A 4-day  general  scientific  meeting  is held every 
two years. Following  an invitation  by Aidan  Conway,  then President  of EGF, the IGA hosted 
the 12*^ General  Meeting  of the European  Grassland  Federation  in UCD Belfield  on July 
4-7 1988. Ten Plenary  papers  together  with 76 Offered  papers  were presented.  223 del­
egates  from 22 European  countries  including  46 from Ireland  participated.
British  Grassland  Society
The Summer  Meeting  of the BGS is regarded  by many  as its main event. It consists  of 
three  full days of farm study  visits  and AGM. The Meeting  has been hosted  by the IGA on 
two occasions,  in 1964 in Meath/Kildare/Cork  and in 1992 in Cork, led by Eamonn  White  
and Con Hurley  as Host  Vice-Presidents,  respectively.  The theme  in 1992 was ‘The Cork 
Grass  Mixture:  Research  + Practice  + Profit. Study  visits  to Moorepark  and to grass  farm 
enterprises  specially  selected  for innovative  and profitable  systems  were arranged.  199 
BGS members  participated.
Joint  meetings  - Grass  Ireland  2000
To mark  the new millennium,  the IGA in association  with the UGS, Fermanagh  Grassland  
Club and South  Armagh  Grassland  Club organised  two Meetings  in Tullamore  and Navan 
to gather  and update  the membership  on: (1) the latest R&D grass-related  information  
north and south;  (2) EU Policy  and, (3) producing  cattle for Europe. Franz Fischler,  EU 
Commissioner  for Agriculture,  was the keynote  speaker  in Tullamore.
Administration
Working  at the heart  of the Association,  the administrative,  secretarial  and financial  ex­
pertise  of Madeleine  Flanagan  and Grainne  Dwyer  have been  essential  components for the 
IGA’S progress.  This review  would not be complete  without  expressing  due recognition  
and tributes.  Quite apart  from the smooth  running  of the substantial  calendar  of events,  
dealing  with day-to-day  queries  and promoting  IGA interests,  the financial  health  of the 
Association  has been largely  due to their stewardship.
70
Donegal  Organising  Committee
In an area noted for its progressive  farming,  a number  of grassland  enthusiasts  in east 
Donegal  led by Neville  Chance  asked  for approval  from the IGA Council  in the 60s to form 
a sub-committee  for the purpose  of arranging  Grassland  meetings  locally. Distance  plus 
the difficulties  of getting  away  for two days  or so to participate  at meetings  in the south  were  
cited as reasons.  The Council  agreed  and also that all participants  be fully paid-up  mem ­
bers. The committee  with Neville  Chance  in particular  was very active  and successful.  
Two meetings  were held annually  in Raphoe  and there  was a close  affinity  with Northern  
Ireland  interests.  The committee  hosted  the IGA Summer  Meeting  on a number  of occa ­
sions, notably  in Derry  and east Donegal  in 1970, against  the backdrop  of the Troubles.  
Members  got a front-seat  view of the problems  when the bus driver  took a wrong  turn in 
Derry  city. Neville  passed  away  in 1994 and committee  interest  was overtaken  by newly  
formed  discussion  groups  and agri-business  meetings.
Association  Journal
The IGA’s Journal  was launched  during  the 60s principally  through  the efforts  of Vivian  
Vial, senior  AFT researcher  and IGA Council  member,  who recognised  more than most  
the importance of publishing the  papers  that contributed  to the development  of IGA  thinking.  
He saw the annual  proceedings  as a medium  for the dissemination  of authorative  and en­
lightened  ideas. He was succeeded  from 1973  to 2000 by the author  who collated  and ed­
ited all suitable  papers. David  McGilloway  has taken  over the editorial  work since  2000.  
Requests from overseas  libraries  indicate  awareness  of research  developments  and pro­
gressive  farming  in Ireland  and recognition  of the role of the IGA in reporting  this progress.  
It also provides  a permanent  record  of useful  reference  material  for farmers  and students.
Agricultural  Research  Forum
In 1970, to provide  opportunities  for scientists  to read short technical  papers  and to ex­
change  ideas,  the IGA initiated  a one-day  seminar  held twice annually  in Dublin. It was 
organised  by Sean  Crowley  initially,  followed  by Jim  O’Grady  and later by Padraig  O’Kiely.  
It was expanded  to two days in 1994 and jointly  with the Irish Tillage  and Land Use Society, 
Soil Science Society and the Agricultural  Economics  Society,  it operates  under  the umbrella  
‘Agricultural  Research  Forum'.  The number  of papers  including  posters  has grown  to 135 
in 2006 presented  in three  simultaneous  sessions.  Micheal  Diskin  has chaired  the Organ ­
ising Committee  since  2001. Ann Gilsenan  at Grange  provides  the highly  valued  admin ­
istrative  back-up. Held in Tullamore,  the Forum has become  a core event in the 
researcher ’s annual  calendar.
Summary
The IGA has provided  an independent  forum  for discussing  new information,  technologies,  
farm practices  and policies  and for stimulating  new ideas.
Members are  provided  with opportunities  to discuss  the latest  cutting  edge information  and 
ideas  that can increase  farm profits.
Grass  will continue  to be Ireland ’s main competitive  advantage  for ruminant  production.
71
References
Conington,  J., Bunger,  L. and Hosie,  B. (2006).  Breeding  for resistance  to footrot  in sheep. 
Proceedings  of IGA Sheep  Conference,  May 18.
Dillon,  P. (2006). Personal  communication.
Dillon,  R, Berry, D.B., Evans,  R.D., Buckley,  F. and Horan,  B. (2005). Consequences  of 
genetic  selection  for increased  milk production  in European  seasonal  pasture-based  sys­
tems of milk production.  Livestock  Science  (In press).
Drennan,  M.J., Fallon,  R.J. and Davis,  B. (2004). Quality  suckler  beef from low and high 
input  grassland  management  systems.  Teagasc,  Beef Production  Series.  No.48. End of 
Project  Report,  15pp.
Flanagan,  S. (2201). Maximising  grazed  grass  in the diet of the ewe for mid season  lamb 
production.  End of Project  Report,  Sheep  Series  No 15, Teagasc  Research  Centre,  
Athenry,  Co. Galway.
McLoughlin,  M. (1991). Feed balance  sheets  for Ireland  1983/84  to 1988/89;  supply,  de­
mand  and allocation.  Agricultural  Economics  Society  of Ireland,  December.
O’Keeffe,  P. (1996).  The Irish Grassland  Association  1946-96:  Perspective  and prospec ­
tive. Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  Journal,  30: 4-7.
O’Riordan,  E., McGilloway,  D. and French,  P. (2000).  Beef  from grass-based  system.  Irish 
Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  J. 34: 105-111.
O Riordan,  E.J. and O’Kiely, P. (1996). Potential  of beef production  systems  based  on 
grass. Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  Journal.  30: 185-217.
Sheep  Conference  “Profit  From  Your  Labour ”. CAFRE,  Greenmount  Campus  Antrim May 
6-7 2005.
72
