RESEARCH  FOR FARMIP^S^^C £? ''<■
coRRiGENDiA.  f 2 9 JAN 1970 )-^^)
Page  4, line 6, for “1933 ” read “1938 ”
Page  6, line 42, for “the constructive  way” read “a constructive  way
Page  7, line 39, for “soil definition ” read "scientific  definition ”
Page  9, line 28, for “watering ” read “weathering ”
Page 12, line 3, for “attempter ” read “attempted ”
Page  17, line 12, for “brough ” read “brought ”
Page  17, line 33, for “aspects ” read “effects ”
Page  18, line 12, for “status ” read “value ”
Page 18, line 17, for “phosphate ” read “phosphorus ”
Page 18, Table  6, caption  should  read “Soil analysis  of some Monksgrange
fields  1947-1960 ”
Page 18, Table 7, caption  should  read “Changes  in levels  of P and K
between  1954  and 1965 ”
Page 19, lines 5 and 6, for “The condition  of this lime deficiency ” 
read “This condition  of lime deficiency ”
Page 20, line 15, for “on calcium ” read “or calcium ”
Page 20, line 19, for “soil types ” read “soil type”
Page 20, line 36, delete “, we know now that”
Page 22, line 18, for “phosphatic ” read “phosphate ”
Page 24, line 17, for “have verified ” read “has verified ”
Page 27, Table  9, headings  should  read "Ne K P Ca”
Page 27, line 24, for “ration ” read “ratio”
Page 29, line 26, for “potassium ” read “potasslc ”
Page 30, line 14, for “that microbiological ” read “that a micro ­
biological ”
Page 33, line 4, for “variable ” read “viable”
Page 39, line 38, for “sympathetic ” read “systematic ”
Page 40, line 16, for “because  of intense  and” read “because  of
intense  interest  and”
Page 42, line 11, for “Gleeson,  J.” read “Gleeson,  T.”
First Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  Lecture
RESEARCH  FOR  
FARMING
BY
DR. THOMAS  WALSH  
Director  of An Foras Taluntois
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Open has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should  
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust  will select  the lecturer  
on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm practice.  
In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish farming,  the 
Trustees  will award  an honorarium  to the invited  speaker.
The following  have kindly  consented  to act as Trustees  along  
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill : R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture was delivered  by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director.  
An Foras Taluntais,  on “ RESEARCH  IN FARMING.”
This lecture took place at the Winter meeting  of the Irish  
Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association  on Friday,  29th 
November.  1968, in the South  County  Hotel,  Dublin.
Printing  of this paper has been made  possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  Goulding  Chemicals  and Fertilizers,  Ltd., and it was 
prepared  for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  
and Animal  Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  
1884 —1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where  he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active  interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Harold  Lett in the dis­
cussions  which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United  
Irishwomen,  now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school  for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  in 
1931. Later he turned to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party.  He became  an active  member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party  and subsequently  of Fine  Gael.  In 1947 
the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  of 
the Senate.  His political  work led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independent.  These aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951/52.  He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Thomas  Walsh,  M.Agr.Sc.,  D.Sc., Ph.D.,  M.R.I.A.,  is Director  
of An Foras  Taluntais.  Bom at Piercetown,  Co. Wexford,  he was 
educated  at the Christian  Brothers  Schools,  Wexford,  and gradu ­
ated from University  College,  Dublin,  in 1937 with an honours  
B.Agr.Sc.  degree.  He received  the M.Agr.Sc.  degree  from  University  
College,  Dublin,  in 1933, Ph.D.  irt 1941 and D.Sc. in 1947. He was 
elected  a Member  of the Royal Irish Academy  in 1955 and to 
Fellowship  of the American  Association  for the Advancement  of 
Sciences  in 1962.
Dr. Walsh  was lecturer  in soil science.  University  College,  Dublin,  
from 1938 to 1945, soils advisory  officer.  Department  of Agricul ­
ture, from 1945 to 1952, and senior inspector.  Department  of 
Agriculture,  from 1952 to 1958. He was appointed  first Director  
of An Foras  Taluntais  by the Government  in 1958 and permanent  
Director  in 1965.
Dr. Walsh  has published  some 80 scientific  papers  in national  
and international  journals  as well as many articles  of a general  
nature on scientific  developments.  He has lectured  by invitation  
to a number  of international  scientific  societies  and academies  of 
science.  He was awarded  the Francis  New Memorial  Medal  by the 
Fertilizer  Society,  London,  in 1967, and the Boyle Medal  by the 
Royal Dublin  Society  in 1969.
When I was invited  to give this first Orpen Memorial  L^ture  
I was pleased  and honoured  to acquiesce.  Many of you in this 
audience  knew Edward  Richards  Orpen of Monks^ange  as a 
progressive,  innovative  farmer  with his roots deep in the land,  
concerned  not only with farming  but also with a wide range of 
interests,  cultural,  economic  and social,  which  compelled  him to 
become  involved  in national  affairs.  My colleagues  and I knew  
him more especially  perhaps  for other reasons his deep interest  
in research,  his questioning  way of thinking,  his need to know  
not only that things  happened  but why they happened,  his meti­
culous  record keeping,  his understanding  that if a scientific  tool 
failed to produce  a given result,  there was a reason.  Because  of 
these and other attributes  we regarded  him in every sense as a 
research  colleague.
He provided  us with facilities  for our work, joined  in it, made  
observations  and recordings,  discussed  the results  and made them  
known.  He supported  us in every way he could at a time when  
support  was so badly  needed, when  research  was regarded  as some ­
thing  for the back-room  and when, indeed,  the word was scarcely  
ever heard.  He shared  our concept  that research,  as a basis for 
the scientific  development  of our resources,  had much to give to 
Irish farming —mission-oriented  research,  planned  to advance  our 
knowledge  so as to contribute  to the needs of the community.  
He saw, as we did, in such research  a rigorous  and satisfying  
discipline  in its own right giving  stimulation  to those  who partici ­
pated in it and capable  of giving  many  benefits  to those who used 
its products.  Captain  Orpen  broame  deeply  concerned  with pro­
viding  an adequate  agricultural  research  service  responsible  for a 
national  programme  of agricultural  research  through  the creation  
of the Agricultural  Institute  in which  he continued  to have a deep  
abiding  interest  as long as he lived.
It is difficult  to pay adequate  tribute  to such a man and from  
the platform  of this Association  which he so often graced,  I can 
only attempt  to do so by speaking  to this audience,  as if he were  
still among  you with his ear attuned  to take in what is said,  
especially  anything  which  might  be in any way new. This was one 
of the attributes  which  made  him so stimulating.  I have particular  
reason to know this, as in looking  over his farming  records,  so 
kindly made available  to me by his family,  I have seen myself  
described  as the dispenser  of information,  when I little thought  
I was going on record  as such. Indeed,  I have seen many things  
in black and white in these records  which neither  my colleagues  
nor I ever thought  would  be written  down  as our words  of wisdom.
I might  say that I have felt for some time a deep obligation  to 
pay tribute  to a man who gave so much stimulation.  Coming  as
we did from different  parts of the spectrum  of the national  com­
munity,  I was deeply  conscious  of one thing and that was his deep  
interest  in Ireland,  in the things that are of this country  and in 
what it could and should  be.
For the purposes  of my contribution  here I hope I will be 
excused  for selecting  from a wide range  of interests  and activities  
a few matters  through  which my own work brought  me into 
especially  close contact  with him, subjects  relating  to soils and 
grassland  and to research  and its use.
In approaching  this subject  perhaps  I might  bring  you back to 
the setting  at the time I first came to know  him well, just about  
two decades  ago. It was the time when our soil fertility  work in 
the Department  of Agriculture  began to take shape, when the 
facilities  which had been sought  for so long and, indeed,  which  
some years previously  had been the cause of such considerable  
controversy,  began to materialise.  The effects of the war were 
'beginning  to disappear,  more fertiliser  was becoming  available,  
we were already  aware that the nutrient  levels in our soils had, 
after half a century  of depletion,  reached  as near rock bottom  as 
they could go.^^l Lime deficiency  was a major problem  with a 
backlog  of many millions  of tons to be made  good. We knew that 
a major  programme  of soil fertility  building  was urgently  necessary  
to secure  increased  production  of crops  and pastures.  In fact, for a 
considerable  time we had been dissipating  our national  heritage.  
We knew  the general  road which  should  be followed.  We were very 
short  on certain  facts. However,  we were certain  the position  could  
be remedied  by a deliberate,  scientific  fact-finding  approach.  This 
is the basis  for progress  today  and will continue  so tomorrow.  The 
old traditional  way had let us down. I might  remind  you that at 
that time (1949)  our average  yield of cereals,  for instance,  was less 
than 20 cwt. per statute  acre, sugar  beet yields about 9 tons per 
acre; there were some 46,000  more farmers  in the country  than 
today:  we had only 10,000  tractors.  The overall  output  from agri­
culture  was £91 million  compared  with £194 in 1966. We were 
using  then on average  less than one-tenth  the amount  of fertilisers  
and lime we now use.
Some  two years or so previously,  experimental  work at Johns ­
town ^stle  and other  centres  had started,  and in this service,  while  
“ outside  the walls  ”, Monksgrange  began  to play a special  part 
as a farm where results  could be subjected  to assessment  under  
practical  conditions,  in the certainty  that if they did not match  up 
we would  hear about  it in the constructive  way and where,  more ­
over, we could attempt  to quantify  our findings.  It was a farm  
which presented  some unique  soil fertility  problems.  In the early  
years^  of this approach  it was not all sunshine.  There were many  
seeming  failures,  many  things  we could  not understand  then, many
reverses  in applyng  advice which would have daunted  a lesser  
man than Captain  Orpen.  It is because  of this that I have specially  
chosen  some of these problems  which  were particularly  frustrating  
at the time, particularly  intriguing  to him and on which,  as time 
went by, he periodically  brought  me to book.
Consequently  I am going to discuss  the soil as a basic resource;  
its drainage,  its physical  condition,  its acidity,  its nutrient  relation ­
ships. I want to talk about  grassland  management  and I want to 
talk about the use of research.  I will trace these subjects  from  
where we started at Monksgrange,  through  to the present  day 
developments  and I will say something  of the future.
The soil—a basic resource
It was realised  from an early stage in our soil fertility  work  that 
if the results of experiments  were to be interpreted  and used 
efficiently,  the information  would  have to be related  to soil type 
difference  as defined  scientifically.  That such a scientific  definition  
was possible  had already  been determined  by the work of Gallagher  
and Walsh, and subsequently  extended  by Brickley to the pre­
dominantly  tillage soils of Co. Kildare  and by Spain in Co. 
Limerick.
In attempting  to resolve  the complex  problems  on the Monks ­
grange  farm,  the first step was to make a thorough  inventory  of the 
soils resources  and to identify  the limiting  factors.  This meant  a 
detailed  survey  of the farm, characterising,  defining  and delinea ­
ting the different  soils occuring.
As can be seen from the soil map made  at this stage (Diagram  1) 
very striking  soil type differences  emerged,  paralleling  practical  
farm experiences  in a rather striking  fashion.  In this connection  
Captain  Orpen had been an accurate  and detailed  observer  and 
recorder  of such differences.  There  were wide variations  in different  
parts of the farm in relation  to suitability  for general  cropping,  
and for grazing  in relation  to such aspects  as earliness  and poach-  
ability.  For instance,  the free draining  soils of the farm exhibited  
a striking  difference  towards  loss of lime compared  to the more  
impeded  soils.
Captain  Orpen was especially  intrigued  that these production  
differences  could be so clearly shown on what the soil augur  
brought  up. Thereafter  he became  a firm convert  to the concept  
of soil definition  and classification  of our soils as a basis for 
development.  He clearly  realised  that the particular  type of farming  
system or systems  were inextricably  linked to the soil or soils 
found on the farm. For us this capacity  of observation  as a basis  
for developing  interpretive  parameters  for different  soils was a 
most important  matter  at this stage.
Diagram  1
Our techniques  of soil classification  were in course  of evolution.  
We realised  that unless  soil classification  could be applied  to the 
solution  of practical  problems,  unless good interpretive  maps  
could be made  for practical  use, soil survey  would  not achieve  its 
potential.  This was obvious  to us from developments  in some  
countries  where soil survey  had been approached  as a more or 
less academic  exercise.
Against  the background  of experience  gained  at Monksgrange  
and similar places,  through  the pilot survey  of the soils of Bansha(5)  
and through  the determination  of the production  characteristics  of 
some of the major soils throughout  the country,  we set about  
establishing  a soil survey  and classification  system.  This, while in 
line with international  systems  and fully scientific,  was to emerge  
as interpretive  with a distinct  practical  function,  geared  to meet  
the requirements  of this country.
Our approach  can be be seen by the manner  in which the 
problem  of defining  cobalt deficiency  conditions  in the country  
was undertaken.  As this matter  has been dealt with fully in a 
number  of publications  (5, 6, 7) I will simply  summarise  here,  
against  the background  of the data in tables 1, 2 and 3.
It was established  that the cobalt  status  of our soils was related  
to such pedogenetic  factors  as parent  material,  weathering,  leaching,  
podsolisation  and drainage,  all of which  are reflected  in the mor­
phology  of the soil profile.  It was thus possible  to classify  the 
problem  in the following  categories:
(a) inherent  deficiency  due to low levels  of cobalt  in the parent  
material  of the soil;
(b) developed  deficiency  due to watering,  leaching  and podzoli-  
sation;
(c) developed  deficiency  related to the moisture  status of the 
soil;
(d) induced  deficiency  resulting  from liming  and other cultural  
practices.
s
•o
IMoti1)
o9a
(T)
a
a
o
ao
a
aa>
13oo
i3
o3da
snIM
C/38888O O Q O rN ^ mm n O <S fS m
edA8888  m f < i c n f < >^ 8 8 8  c n f < ) c n r No © o m in o en ^ in
3uO O O O O O O o o o
o
S V V V V V V V V^ ^ ^
o o o o O O 00 «n »n in
413
fL(w-> «rj O OTf mo o o or- «n fS »om in O cn <N
Z»o »r> O O O O <0 o ^ ^ <sin m o <s (S r-
o 1—1 1—1 »r> »n r- «rj VO On r>* in »n
aQ O O OQ »0 *0 'S I*** r* r*-o o o oO wj ir» ir>O r-
> O »r> O O r** in VN «n88 S?
UO O O fS fS fSO O O O m cn fo rNO in in 
r** On
uN88S8^ ^ <S ^ 8888  ^ fS88gCS cs
VrtO «r» O»-. <S C>l 00O ^n O O ^ fvlin in in
VV V
X)
p^^ ^ ^ ^<s ^ <ss s s ^^ ^ ^ <So o om ^
3»r> lo O »r> ON w-> 
ir> •-«885 !
ao
•a
o
K^ e*
<<pqUM A
<<<^s sU 
-< -< pq
ao1 22£A
o .tsI•d 2oS1- 
5 jqOSSBo,a
•S
2a
10
TABLE  2: Cobalt  status  in relation  to weathering  and leaching.
Soil
Curragh Moor
Horizon Cobalt  ppm Cobalt  ppm
Ai 5-0 00
A, 5-7 2-2
7-2 9-9
B„ 8-7 7-2
c. 2-2 2-6
TABLE  3: Cobalt  status  in relation  to soil drainage  class
Drainage Free Draining  ProfileStrongly  Impeded  Profile  
(very poorly  drained)
Cobalt  (ppm)
Depth
(cm) TotalAcetic
solubleacetic
soluble TotalAcetic
solubleacetic
soluble
0-15 7-25 019 2-6 1-60 016 100
16-30 7-90 016 21 1-66 017 10-2
30-45 8-50 008 0-9 3-83 0-23 60
45-60 7-25 007 0-9 8-52 0-26 3-05
60-75 7 00 010 1-4 — — —
In Table 1 we see three soils in fairly close proximity  with 
different  contents  of trace elements,  e.g. the low levels of cobalt  
and manganese  in Kiltealy  soils as compared  with Qonroche  soils.
In Table  2, the Moor  soil is much more highly  weathered  than 
the Curragh  soil. This is reflected  in the lower  cobalt  levels in the 
surface  horizon.  It can be seen from Table  3 that while the total  
cobalt  content  of the free draining  soil is much  higher  than that of 
the associated  very poorly drained  soil, the solubility  of this 
element  in the latter  soil is much  higher.
Proceeding  in this way it was possible  to delineate  broad areas  
of cobalt  deficiency  and, indeed,  to foretell  where  such deficiencies 
were likely  to occur.  This approach  was highly  rewarding  and has 
been used since in the investigation  of other trace element  
anomalies,  e.g. Manganese,  Boron, Molybdenum,  Copper  and 
Selenium.  It has been extended  since by some of my colleagues  
in a study of the trace element  problems  in European  soils, (s)
11
In this way soil problems  in general  have been approached,  such 
as for instance,  the stock carrying  capacity  of grassland  for which  
a prelminary  interpretive  map has now been attempter  
(diagram  2).
Stock  carrying  capacity  of grassland —preliminary  interpretive  map
I think many  in the audience  will know of the differences  existing  
between  the stock carrying  capacity  at Moorepark  at one cow per 
acre, and Ballinamore  at one cow per two acres.  These  differences  
are, of course, due primarily  to basic soil characteristics  which  
can be scientifically  defined.
As agricuture  intensifies,  this approach  will increase  in import ­
ance. In the development  of agricultural  systems  covering  the chain  
from the soil to the table, as they must inevitably  in a market-  
oriented  environment,  the first link  — that of the soil — is of 
primary  importance.  There  are, of course,  a great many  first links  
as the soils of our country  are so variable.  It is true that under  
extensive  systems  of husbandry,  basic soil characteristics  parti ­
cularly  those of a physical  and physico-chemical  nature,  may not 
seems so important.  However,  as farming  intensifies  and becomes  
more competitive,  and as we have gained  mastery  over the input  
of lime, major nutrients  and, indeed,  trace elements,  these basic  
soil characteristics  largely  determine  soil use.
Today  the knowledge  of our soils is advancing  on a county,  
regional  and national  basis.  We are defining  clearly  the use charac ­
teristics  of our soils for various  national  land use purposes,  whether  
it be the competitiveness  of our soils in terms  of market  situations  
or their use for forestry,  recreational  or related  purposes.  There  is 
a considerable  variation  between  counties  in the extent  of land of 
different  potential  and as can be seen from Table  4, counties  have  
their share  of good as well as poor quality  soils. Four broad  land
TABLE  4. A land classification  for some Irish counties.
County Land Class  (%)
I II ra IV
Carlow 67 4 23 6Wexford ... 60 13 22 5
Monaghan 48 21 18 13Limerick  ... 38 8 43 11
Roscommon 35 38 18 9Mayo 23 20 12 45Cavan 23 53 13 11Sligo 21 41 16 22Clare 14 14 46 26Donegal ... 13 25 2 60
Kerry 10 14 23 53Leitrim 1 2 64 33
13
classes  are shown;  Qass I comprises  those soils with a wide use- 
range capable  of competitive  production  for a variety  of agricul ­
tural enterprises;  Qass II soils are capable  of improvement  to the 
competitive  status,  but for a somewhat  more limited  range  of uses; 
Qass III soils can also be improved  considerably  but would still 
be limited  in use-range  and would not compete  favourably  with 
Qass I and 11; Qass IV soils are very restricted  in use-range  and 
even with improvement  could  not compete economically  in agricul ­
tural production.  However,  soils of restricted  capacity  in economic  
agricultural  production  may have to continue  in agriculture  for 
social reasons  and they may also have very rewarding  uses for 
non-agricultural  purposes.
The physical  condition  of soil
As can be seen from the soil map of Monksgrange,  impeded  
drainage  was a problem  on a sizeable  acreage  of the land. It was 
natural  to expect  then that Orpen  should  have been deeply  con­
cerned  with drainage  problems.  Indeed one of my earliest memories  
of Monksgrange  was being  brought  to the Tubbernagay  Lower  field 
where  the old tile drainage  system  had been identifi^  at a depth  
of four to five feet. It was a matter  of considerable  fascination  for 
him that the seemingly  rather  clear drainage  water  on coming  into 
contact  with the air should show a brown deposit,  which, of 
course  resulted  from the oxidation  of iron from the ferrous  to the 
ferric state, causing  a blockage  in this old tUe drainage  system.
In his approach  to drainage,  Orpen  the engineer,  looked  on it 
basically  as an engineering  problem.  Early on in his exploration  
of the cause of drainage  impedence  the main problem  at Monks ­
grange  was identified  as being  associated  with springs  as a result  of 
seepage  from the adjacent  hill-land  area. At an early stage in the 
development  of the Land Project  a scheme  was prepared  for 
Monksgrange  which  took this origin  of the problem  into account.  
This development  must be seen against  the fact that drainage  
techniques,  evolved traditionally  for the most part, had not 
changed  for a century  or so and were the only methods  available  
to the Project  when it commenced  activity.  These  methods  allowed  
little scope for variation  according  to the nature  of the drainage  
problem.  It must be said to the credit of the Land Project  staff 
that, faced with this position,  they were prepared  to innovate  as 
the circumstances  demanded.  I may say in tribute  to them that I 
have always  found them open to advice and guidance  in this 
respect.  Research,  however,  had not at that time provided  the 
facts. Nor indeed,  in this particular  respect,  is it adequate  yet.
14
It is also of considerable  interest  that the drainage  problem  
identified  at Monksgrange  over twently  years ago occupied  a 
premier  place in the recently  completed  survey  carried  out by our 
research  staff in co-operation  with the Land Project  as shown  by 
Table 5.(®) The survey  was designed  to collect  and analyse  infor ­
mation  on the problems  which made drainage  necessary  and on 
the techniques  used in solving  these problems.
Detailed  information  was collected  from 16,336  schemes  (120.952  
acres).
TABLE  5: Drainage  Survey
Major  problems  encountered Acreage percentage
Seepage  and springs ......................................  37-8
Impervious  subsoil ............... ......................................  31-0
High water  table .............. ......................................  23-8
Impervious  topsoil ............... ......................................  2-0
Hollows  .......................... ......................................  1-8
Impervious  layers .............. ......................................  1-7
Cemented  layers .............. ......................................  0-9
Flooding  .......................... ......................................  0-8
Iron pans .......................... ......................................  0-2
It is of interest  to note that broken  old drains  were found on 
43.2 per cent of the total area. This means  that an existing  system  
of broken  or choked  drains  was found  on over 52,000  acres— many  
of these were, of course,  very old drains.
The records  at Monksgrange  note with interest  that on a visit to 
Johnstown  Castle the staff there “ were now developing  methods  
for the determination  of soil structure  ”. As pointed  out previously  
methods  of drainage  were traditional  and had not changed  for a 
long time. It was appreciated,  however,  that more research  was 
necessary.  In the early 1940 ’s scientists  in Great  Britain,  the United  
States and Russia  had subjected  water movement  in soils to a 
systematic  analysis,  developing  a theory  of waterflow.  This was the 
basis for a new scientific  approach  to drainage  problems.  Since 
those  days our work in this sphere  has proceeded  systematically  if 
somewhat  more slowly.  The situation  has been conditioned  just as 
much by the lack of appropriate  techniques  as by the resources  
available.  However,  progress  has been made. At Glenamoy,  for 
instance,  research  do, n. 12) has set a basis for the understanding  
of the behaviour  of water,  when and how it falls, what happens  
when it reaches  the ground  in terms of permeability,  evaporation  
and the whole balance  of the moisture  regime,
15
Despite  the fact that our climatic  conditions  create  wetness  in 
soils and that in this country  it constitutes  a major  barrier  in land 
use. one might well ask why so little attention  had been devoted  
to this aspect of investigation  until the work at Glenamoy  
commenced.
An understanding of the water-balance  is essential  to the develop ­
ment of a rational  drainage  system.  It varies  from region  to region  
and from soil type to soil type. The work at Glenamoy  has not 
only provided  information  for the Glenamoy  situation  of deep  
blanket  peat per se but has resulted  in the establishment  of a 
methodology  whereby  soil moisture  problems  for the country  as 
a whole can be studied.
I have dealt elsewhere  with the inter-relationships  between  
fertiliser  use and soil moisture conditions'^®)  showing  that fertDiser 
application  can blanket  drainage  effects  to a considerable  extent  
as far as yield is concerned.  This has emerged  in a striking  
way from a recent  report  by Burke'^**)  which,  as can be seen from  
the following  summary  of results,  shows that from a total yield 
aspect,  nitrogen  eliminated  the yield-depressing  effect of a high 
water table.
Four crops, viz. two grasses,  potatoes  and oats were grown  on 
blanket  peat under different  intensities  of drainage:  no drainage,  
1-ft., 2-ft. and 3-ft. Drains  were spaced  at 10-ft. centres.  All crops  
responded  to drainage.  Yields  from drained  plots were higher  than 
those from undrained  plots. However,  with grass, an increase  in 
nitrogen  application  eliminated  the yield reduction  caused by 
high water tables.
This finding  has an application  not only to peat soils but also 
to many poorly drained  mineral  soils. It does not. of course,  
eliminate  the management  restrictions  of high water table due 
to wetness  as such.
As shown  by the results  of the drainage  survey  referred  to pre­
viously  low permeabihty  is a problem  on major areas of Irish  
agricultural  land. It may be as high as 15 to 20 per cent. It is the 
condition  responsible  for infertility  of the poor  lands  of the northern  
Drumlin  belt, of West Limerick  and Qare and sizeable  areas in 
Kilkenny  and Wexford.  This can be seen from the results  of the 
National  Soil Survey.  <i®)
The research  station  at Ballinamore,  Co. Leitrim,  was estab ­
lished in order to develop  information  on these soils. Results  to 
date there have shown clearly  the inefficiency  of conventional  
drainage  methods.  Again,  studies  on water  balance,  drain spacing, 
mole drainage  and the impact  of different  stocking  rates under  
varying experimental  conditions,  have provided  valuable  new 
information.  There  is no short-term  solution  to this problem.  Only  
systematic  studies  can bring  the answer;  even then, farming  under
16
these conditions  will have severe  limitations.
Poaching  is another  important  problem  which  has engaged  the 
attention  of our soil physicists.  It emerges  as a specific  problem  
associated  with the intensification  of pasture  management  which, 
for many of our old pasture  soils, results  in the removal  of the 
surface  mat. With more animals  per acre the problem  may become  
acute in certain  soils. Indeed,  for a wide variety  of our soils, such  
as those  at Ballinamore  because  of their weak structure,  poaching  
is one of the major  problems  limiting  stock-carrying  capacity,  and 
thereby  restricting  economic  farming.  Studies to date on this 
matter —and I must confess  that because  of lack of resources  and 
techniques  they have been very limited —have brough  forward  
interesting  facts. These have been discussed  by Gleeson.
In brief,  it may be said that today  for the first time we are able 
to measure  poaching.  From  the techniques  available,  information  
can be obtained  on the poaching  potential  of soils, its significance 
from the production  aspect and how its worst effects can be 
overcome.  These vary, of course,  for different  soil types and, 
indeed,  in this respect,  I might again emphasise  the significance  
and necessity  of identifying  and mapping  the relevant  soil differ ­
ences.  Referring  to the map of Monksgrange  we can see that there  
is a wide difference,  for instance,  between  poaching  potential  bn 
freely-drained  as compared  with the impeded  soils. This was well 
appreciated  by Captain  Orpen  in his management  approach.
There are many other problems  relating  to the structure  and 
conditions  of our soils which remain  to be explored.  As new 
husbandry  methods  for tillage  crops  develop,  resulting  from modern  
methods  of cultivation,  sowing,  weed  control  and indeed  harvesting,  
the limitations  in our knowledge  relating  to soil structural  con­
ditions  will become  increasingly  obvious.  In this connection,  for 
instance,  reference  might  be made  to the use of selective  weedicides  
for more or less permanent  crops  such as fruit trees and soft fruits  
where weed control  can be effective  with favourable  aspects  on 
surface rooting and crop response.  The question  arose as to 
whether  the constant  use of weedicides  might have a deleterious  
effect  on soil structure.  Bulfin<i7)  using  a micromorphological  tech­
nique showed that while there was a skin effect, this was, if 
anything,  beneficial  to soil structure.  This was a very valuable  
result.
Finally,  it would  be very difficult  to over-emphasise  the import ­
ance  of the structure  of our soils as related  to our climate,  especially  
as we gain more control  over the factors  of production.  After  all, 
every day a farmer  goes out to work in this country  one of the 
main problems  he has to face is that of the weather.
17
Soil fertility  conditions
From  an early stage, Orpen  became  interested  in the possibility  
of soil testing,  i.e., the determination  of the nutrient  status  of soils 
by appropriate  chemical  or other methods.  He had read widely  of 
the success  being achieved  elsewhere  by the application  of such 
methods  and was a foremost  advocate  of their use in this country  
in the early 1940 ’s. With  the establishment  of the soil testing  service 
at Johnstown  Castle  one of the first farms  subjected  to a planned  
system  of soil testing,  through  the medium  of advisory  services, 
was Monksgrange.
Since  those days almost  yearly  records  were kept of lime require ­
ments and nutrient  status —a process  which of itself was of very 
great status at the time as it enabled  not only annual  nutrient  
changes  to be monitored  but also the correlation  of soil test data 
practical  response  effects.  Information  on this was very meagre  at 
the time. These early tests, reflecting  in many ways (apart from  
aluminium)  the national  situaton  at the time (see Table showed 
major deficiencies  of lime, phosphate  and potassium,  and abnor ­
mally high levels of aluminium  (Table  7). Some aspects  of these  
conditions  are now  discussed.
TABLE  6: Changes  in levels of P and K between  1954 and 1965.
Field pHCa P K Al
(expressed  in ppm)
Upper  Kilpark ... 4-9 100 0-5 50 250-1-
Lower  Kilpark ... 4-8 200 0-5 25 200
Moat  Meadow 5-1 200 0-5 25 300
Newtown 5-3 150 0-5 50 250
Sheepwalk  Upper 5-0 100 0 25 200
Carlow  Meadow ... 5-1 400 0-5 25 200-
TABLE  7: Soil analysis  of some Monksgrange  fields 1947-1960.
Year  Percent  of advisers ’ soil samples  classified  as very low in P and K
0-i ppm P 0-25 ppm K
1954 77 66
1957 49 32
1965 0 5
18
Liming  and the acidity  complex
As can be seen from  the early  soil test results  from  Monksgrange,  
a condition  of very severe  lime deficiency  existed  with pH 5.0 and 
extremely  low calcium  levels. It is of interest  in this respect  that 
the more free draining  soil types showed  a higher  degree  of lime 
deficiency  than the more impeded  types.  The condition  of this lime 
deficiency  was reflected  in a practical  way in the fact that it was 
almost  impossible  to grow a barley crop there, very low yields  
being the result,  while in a newly laid down pasture  there was a 
quick die-out  of ryegrass  and clovers  and a rather spectacular  
reversion  to /Igrostw-dominated  swards.  Test plots using ground  
limestone  showed  a very striking  response  from barley  and indeed  
because  of previous  experience  in the whole area in this respect,  
these tests attracted  the attention  of many farmers.  There is 
scarcely  any doubt  that the tests had a major  bearing  on the rapid  
increase  in the use of ground  limestone  in that particular  area.  
This lime-deficient  condition  of the soils at Monksgrange  was no 
better or no worse  than that which  existed  in a large area of the 
soils of the country  at that time. It must be remembered  that we 
were then using about 50,000  tons of lime, that nationally  it had 
been shown  that there was an annual  depletion  of over IJ million  
tons per annum  and that indeed  a very serious  conditon  had been  
reached,  not alone  for non-limeston  derived  soils but also for those  
in limestone  areas.^^l  It may be of interest  to record  here that this 
data set a basis for the subsequent  ground  limestone  scheme.
Further  experience  at Monksgrange  showed  that under  the con­
ditions  there, relatively  heavy  dressings  of ground  limestone  were  
necessary  to obtain the best effect while frequent  liming was 
required.  Subsequent  investigation  showed  that the soil had very 
high levels of soluble  aluminium  and this together  with other  
experiences  elsewhere,  focussed  attention  on what we described  
laterfi®)  as the soil acidity  complex.  To illustrate  what this means  
perhaps  our experience  at that time might  be quoted.  At Johns ­
town Castle  we had identified  a situation  where  excess  manganese  
under  acid conditions  was an important  factor  limiting  the growth  
of a number  of crops such as swedes,  sugar beet, barley,  wheat  
and, in a rather  spectacular  response  effect,  oats. Our later experi ­
mental  work at Johnstown  Castle  showed  that this effect  could  be 
counteracted  not only by high liming  but also by drilling  phos ­
phate  and, for swedes,  by the application  of molybdenum.  In other  
words,  a complex  condition  existed.  At Monksgrange,  very high 
levels  of readily  soluble  aluminium,  later shown  to be in the region  
of some  750 lb per acre,  were  found.  On the other  hand at Cushins-  
town not very far distant,  satisfactory  crops of barley  were grown
19
at a pH level exactly  the same as that at Monksgrange.  Here then 
were three distinctly  different  response  conditions  at similar  levels  
of soil acidity  as such. Later  work showed  that these  acidity  factors  
such as aluminium  and manganese  determined  to a very consider ­
able extent  the quantity  of lime which  should  be applied.  As an 
extreme  one can quote ground  limestone  requirements  of 5 to 6 
tons per acre at Monksgrange  at a pH of 5.0 and of li tons per 
acre for the peat soil at Glenamoy  at a pH of 4.5 in both cases 
necessary  to achieve  optimum  effects.  In the latter,  of course,  there  
were no toxic elements  present.
From  these  various  experiences  our work  and concepts  developed  
relating  lime requirements  to soil conditions,  taking  into account  
the specific  factor  concerned— in one place manganese,  in another  
aluminium  and in other cases molybdenum/manganese  balance  
effects on calcium,  with boron  relationships  also coming  into the 
picture.  I have described  this situation  elsewhere so I will not 
repeat  the details  here except to point out that these particular  
experiences  and studies  laid a basis for our whole approach  to 
liming  against  the background  of soil types and ecological  factors.
Subsequent  experimental  work has continued  to advance  our 
knowledge  in this sphere.  For instance,  the question  of fineness  of 
grinding  of limestone  was of importance  because  with coarser  
grinding,  costs were considerably  lower. It was shown  that even 
relatively  coarsely  ground  limestone  was reactive.  In view of the 
decrease  in the solubility  of a number  of trace elements  under  high 
liming  conditions,  the question  of the quantity  of lime to apply  
became  important.  Again,  it has emerged  that this is basically  a 
matter  of soil type relationship.  For instance,  on some strongly  
leached  Old Red Sandstone  soils where manganese  has been 
removed  from the surface  soil, relatively  low dressings  of ground  
limestone  can give rise to manganese  deficiency  in crops. On the 
other hand, our experimental  work has shown  that on some soils,  
dressings  of ground  limestone  even up to 32 tons per statute  acre 
give a significant  response  effect.
While  in early years our liming  requirements  were based on the 
consideration  of only pH and calcium,  we now know that status  
of the soil, the improved  knowledge  of soil conditions  and of the 
factors  involved  in this complex  has resulted  in the development  of 
more  specific  methods  of lime requirement  determination.  These  in 
turn have resulted  in recommendations  involving  rather higher  
dressings  giving increased  efficiency.
Today  for the first time it is possible  to say that the inputs  of 
lime are equal to, or exceed  slightly,  the annual  losses incurred  
through  crop uptake  and leaching.  Well limed soils are still the 
bedrock  of soil fertility.  There is much that we still require  to
20
know about soil acidity  factors  to ensure  continued  efficiency  in 
this process.  The role of aluminium,  for instance,  which was so 
spectacularly  brought  forward  by the experience  at Monksgrange.  
is still not clear but it is now apparent*^®)  that acidity  in clays,  for 
instance,  is related  to aluminium  and not to hydrogen  ions at pH 
ranges  of normal  soils as was thought  at one time. We have as yet 
no clear  measure  of aluminium  activity but the work  of Coulter^®®)  
in recent years has done much to elucidate  some of the com­
plexities  of the position.  We are now probing  deeper  into these  
problems.
Phosphonis
Apart from the very striking  position  with regard to lime 
deficiency,  the next most notable  feature  of the soils at Monks ­
grange  was the extremely  low level of phosphorus,  as shown  by 
soil tests. This was supported  by crop response  effects with the 
appearance  of symptoms  of extreme  phosphorus  deficiency  where  
no phosphorus  was applied.  In our interpretation  of the soil con­
ditions  at the time, it was also considered  that because  of the high 
level of aluminium,  high iron activity  in the free draining  soils 
and low calcium  levels, conditions  were present  for rapid phos ­
phorus  loss through  reversion.
These  low phosphorus  levels  were  not, of course,  a special  feature  
of the soils at Monksgrange.  They were a distinct  reflection  of the 
national position  at the time  <21 > which  showed  in extreme  symptoms,  
phosphorus  starvation  in both plants  and animals  in a number  of 
places.  It must be remembered  that World  War 11 was just behind  
us, a period during  which the national  phosphorus  balance  had 
shown a substantial  deficit between  the years 1940-1945. ^
Subsequent  experience  at Monksgrange  showed  that there was 
little, if any, residual  effect from the application  of phosphates  
except  for the manuring  of sugar beet where a positive  increase  
in test results  was reported.  The experience  over some years gave 
rise to a number  of questions  as to the best form in which  to apply  
phosphorus,  and the best method  of applicaton.  To examine  these  
problems  a series of experiments  were undertaken  (including  work  
at Monksgrange),  with different  types of phosphatic  fertilisers  such 
as semsol,  reverted  phosphate,  ground  mineral  phosphate,  super ­
phosphate  and others  in which  we were then interested.  It emerged  
from this work that the best effect was obtained  by the use of 
readily  soluble  phosphate  and that a “ little and often ” technique  
was the one to follow.  It was clearly  shown that penetration  into 
the soil from surface  applications  of phosphorus  was extremely  
slow and that indeed  any phosphorus  applied  could be located  in 
the surface  quarter  inch of the solum. Incidentally,  ths finding  in 
turn gave rise to the need to sample  pasture  soils on the immediate
21
surface  in order to facilitate  a recommendation  with regard to 
fertiliser  application.  It had emerged  that at Monksgrange  where  
deeper  sampling  had taken place there was a reaction  during  the 
testing  procedure  between  the phosphorus  containing  surface  soil 
and the remainder  which  very much diluted  the phosphorus  test 
result.
The placement  of phosphorus  for cereals  through  drilling  with 
the grain from which spectacular  effects  had been obtained  had 
just previously  been investigated  at Johnstown  Castle.  (2®) The 
efBcacy  of this procedure  was clearly  illustrated  at Monksgrange  
and reinforced  our thinking  that with the extra low level of phos ­
phorus  in our soils, the best way was to feed the plant  and not the 
soil. To a considerable  extent  this approach  has persisted.  It may 
be of interest  that the more recent soil tests from Monksgrange  
have shown  a substantial  change  in the position,  with generally  
higher  test results  all round,  and this is the national  position  also.
Out of the experiences  at Monksgrange  and elsewhere  a number  
of important  questions  with regard  to the phosphatic  status  of our 
soils arose.  To meet this situation  an experimental  programme  was 
commenced  which, with appropriate  variations  as knowledge  
developed,  is still in operation.  I will deal with a few aspects  of 
these results.
From  observations  of many  old pastures  throughout  the country,  
it was a matter  of considerable  interest  to understand  why some 
soils appeared  to have a higher  capacity  than others  to sustain  the 
phosphorus  levels of pasture  plants.  This was especially  so in con­
nection  with some  old pastures  in Meath.  Tipperary,  Limerick  and 
elsewhere.  In order  to explore this matter  McDonnell  and Walsh  
studied  the position  with regard  to phosphorus  in different  particle  
size fractions  from a range of soils. For instance,  in the clay 
fraction  there was a very distinct  difference  between  the various  
soils, especially  in the organic  phosphorus  level. An old pasture  
soil from Co. Meath  which had received  no phosphatic  fertiliser  
for years was found  to have a satisfactory  phosphorus  status and 
it was postulated  that its capacity  to provide  this element  for plant  
growth  was due to the mineralisation  of organic  phosphorus  during  
the normal  Wological  cycle in the soils. There was, in fact, an 
accumulation  in the organic  surface  3 in. indicating  a stabilisation  
of phosphorus  in that zone. There  was a very striking  difference  
between  Wexford  tillage soils and Meath pasture  soils in this 
respect.
Other studies showed that phosphorus-supplying  power was 
related  not only to the amount  of phosphorus  in the soil but to 
the release  capacity.  This position  is well shown in Diagram  3.
22
-□ Meath  I
-O Meath  IIA-------- A Louth  I
-------- A Wexford  I
Diagram  3
Phosphorus  release  on successive  extraction  with Morgan ’s solution
This led to a definite  advance  in soil testing  interpretative  pro­
cedures  with an understanding  that the method  used should be 
evaluated  as an intensity  measurement  rather  than a capacity  index.
Another  important  advance  arose from a study on the phos ­
phorus  status of some organic  soils by comparison  with mineral  soils. It was shown  that the phosphorus  in organic  or peat soils 
was much more available  and more easily extractable  and that 
there was a striking  drop in the amount  extracted  on continuous  
extraction  from such peat soils by comparison  with mineral  soils.  
This can be seen from Diagram  4.
23
Diagram  4
Successive  extraction  showing  the P status of an organic  
and a mineral  soil
Later this was clearly  shown  again by the results  of the work  
at Lullymore  and Glenamoy  <25, 26) where  there has been a much  
higher recovery  rate—some 80 percent —from the phosphorus  
applied  to the peat soils than in the case of inorganic  soils where  
the recovery  rate is somewhere  about 30 percent.  In interpreting  
these results  for our soils in general,  it must be realised  that the 
surface  layer  of practically  all our old pasture  soils has a relatively  
high level of organic  matter.  From the knowledge  now available  
this would explain  the much greater  recovery  of applied  phos ­
phorus  than we thought  possible  at one time. This organic  matter  
relationship  may, in fact, also supply  a clue as to why there has 
been such a relatively  rapid build up of readily  available  phos ­
phorus  in our soils, particularly  in some old pastures,  the phos ­
phorus recycling  through  the organic  matter in the immediate  
surface  of the solum.
Subsequent  work by Hanley  <^7) and by Hanley,  McDonnell  and 
Murphy  (2®) have verified  these  earlier  findings  and in addition  has 
brought  forward  much  new information  with regard  to the different  
forms  of phosphorus  in our main  soils. A survey has shown  that 
on average  our soils contain  some 751 ppm total phosphorus  and 
that some 57 percent  of this may be in the organic  form. The
24
finding  that aluminium  phosphates  in our soils may constitute  an 
important  source  of phosphorus  for crops is quite different  from  
earlier knowledge  in this respect.  Yet this finding has clearly  
emerged  from a depletion  study on six important  soils involving 
15 harvests  of ryegrass,  Agrostis  and white  clover.ft  is also of 
significance  that the form in which  phosphorus  is found  is related  
to soil type.  (28) An understanding of  the constituents  in which  phos ­
phorus  is found in the organic  form in soils is very important  in 
view of the relatvely  high proportion  of phosphorus  present  in 
many of our soils in this form. This, as indicated  previously,  is of 
special  importance  in relation  to the use of phosphorus  on grass ­
lands.
All this information  is now playing  a highly  important  part in 
the rational  use of phosphatic  fertilisers  as a key element  in soil 
fertility^ —building.  There has been a striking  change  in the test 
values  for samples  submitted  to the soil laboratory.  Just about  a 
decade  ago some 90 percent  of our soils showed  extremely  low 
values.  Today,  the position  is reversed  with only about 10 percent  
in this category,  (table  6). In a major  series  of field experments  now 
under way, phosphorus  and other nutrient  relationships  are being  
investigated  in depth as a basis for developing  the best possible  
information  to meet future needs.
Potassium
One aspect  of soil fertility  on which  the work at Monksgrange  
focused  special  attention  was that of soil-potassium-sward  rela­
tionships.  To put this succintly,  I can do no better than quote  
from Captain  Orpen ’s own observations  concerning  this matter.  (*o)
“ On the foothills  lying  below  the granite  mountains  of Wicklow  
and Wexford  the farmer,  in days gone by, was told that an insuffi ­
ciency of lime and phosphate  was the probable  reason  for low 
productivity  on these lands. Furthermore  it was thought  that the 
likelihood  of any potash  deficiency  was remote  because  the type of 
feldspar  in this granite contains  sufficient  potassium  to meet  
normal  needs. Although  some improvement  followed  the appli ­
cation of lime and phosphates,  the results on the whole were  
disappointing  and scarcely  warranted  the expenditure  involved. 
This was most apparent  on grassland  where the more productive  
species  soon succumbed  to competition  from Agrostis  which re­
established  itself  with astonishing  rapidity.
In 1948, following  the development  of a soils advisory  service, 
it was suggested  that most of these soils suffered  from an acute  
shortage  of available  potash  and that the broken  down potassic  
feldspars  contributed  very little to the amount  of potash  required  
by plant life. At Monksgrange,  in 1948, a direct sowing  down to
25
grass was laid out in replicated  potash  strips of ^ cwt, 1 cwt and 
2 cwt of 40 per cent Potash  Salts. For the first time clovers  began  
to grow, if not vigorously,  at Jeast in sufficient  strength  to indicate  
acute  potash  deficiency  even at the highest  level of the dosage.
The following  autumn  a further  application  of 2 cwt of potash  
was superimposed  across  the strips over half the field. Now at last 
something  began  to happjen;  clovers  became  vigorous  and in places  
even luxuriant.  Observation,  subsequently  confirmed  by tissue  
analysis,  seems to indicate  that at sowing  some 3 cwt of Potash  
Salts should  be sufficient  to start growth,  and provided  adequate  
replacements  of P and K are given annually,  high production  can 
be maintained  even on p)oor hill land. To what extent  productivity  
can be raised  has not yet been determined,  nor what the level of 
maximum  profitability  may prove to be on this typ)e of land. At 
last, however,  it does seem  technically  possible  to double the output  
from grass, and at the same time improve  the feeding  quality  of 
the herbage.
One field at Monksgrange  sown direct  in 1950 is still in a state  
of high production,  yet so far it has not received  any bag nitrogen,  
and we presume  that what  N it requires  is derived  from the clovers. 
This field has given two cuts each year for either  ensilage  or hay 
and has been grazed  as well, and although  it shows  no build up 
of N in the soil at present,  it seems  to be able to stand up to this 
treatment  ”.
The questions  raised  at Monksgrange  on the basis of the above  
experience  were of particular  interest.  While we were aware<®i>  
of the extent  of petasslum  deficiency  on limestone  derived  soils 
and the “ fixation ” reaction  between  illitic type clays and potas ­
sium, the occurrence  of this very severe potassium  deficiency  on 
granite-derived  soils was something  new. However,  from a national  
balance  sheet  t®®) we were of course  aware  of the overall  position.  
The pwtassium  status  of our soils had been severely  depleted  over 
many years and indeed at no time from the beginning  of the 
century  had sufficient  px)tassium  been applied.  The first significant 
fact to emerge  at Monksgrange  was the rapid dying  out of clover  
in sown swards.  Soil tests showed  a clear difference  between  some 
areas where the clover persisted  and those where dying out had 
taken place,  as shown  by Table 8.
TABLE  8 :
pH Ca P K
(Pounds  per acre)
Good  grass  ............. 60 2,000 1 50
Poor  grass ......................... 60 2,000 0-5 0
26
These and other similar tests for Middle Kilpark  showed 
extremely  low levels  of potassium  as a common  factor  in all cases. 
This position  was checked  by tissue  tests which  were  then  developed  
and here again  a condition  of deficiency  was clearly  shown.  Indeed  
there was one instance  at Monksgrange  where  there had been an 
ingression  of red fescue —an indicator  of potassium  deficiency  in 
pasture  swards —and here one of the lowest  potassium  levels ever 
in grass herbage,  i.e. 0.2 per cent, was found.
Differences  in the potasium level in the herbage  is again  shown  by 
table 9.
TABLE  9
Na K Ca
(results  expressed  in ppm)
Good  grass 
Poor  grass ...•42
•461-84
1-13012
0-160-66
0-56
These tissue tests clearly  showed  that under the extreme  con­
ditions  of potassium  deficiency  clovers  always  contained  a lower  
level of potassium  than the grass components  of the sward— a 
reflection  of the fact that grasses  have a higher  extractive  capacity.
In order to explore  this matter more thoroughlly  the plots  
referred  to in the foregoing quotation  were laid down  with varying  
application  rates of potassic  fertiliser.  The response  was quite  
spectacular.  Diagram  5 shows  the position  regarding  tissue potas ­
sium.
It is of considerable  interest  that Open  in his own conclusions  
on this matter,  proposed  that the potassium-sodium  ratio might  be 
of significance  with the occurrence of a very wide  ratio at potassium  
deficiency  levels,  and noted that in grasses  the potassium-sodium  
ration  increased  to the 2.5 to 3.0 range  as potassium  applications  
increased,  while in clovers  the ratio remained  constant.  It was 
noticed  also that as the potassium  levels in the herbage  increased,  
sodium  decreased  somewhat —an important  fact because  of the 
nutritional  sgnificance  of sodium.
The results  of this work can only be summarised  here. It can be 
clearly  stated that the experience  did much  to set a basis for the 
use of tissue testing  in our approach  to assessing  the potassium  
requirements  of pastures,  in giving  information  on the competition  
between  grass and clovers  for this nutrient,  and, in general,  forming  
a policy  in relation  to the use of potassic  fertilisers.
27
Diagram  5
K response  in relation  to herbage  content  in mixed  grass-clover
It is of considerable  interest  that Orpen in his notes on this 
phase of the work included  two very important  observations:  
(1) that considerable  care must be taken  in interpreting  tissue  tests 
for potassium  as there  was a seasonal  variation,  and (2) that there  
was a stage-of-growth  variation  also as shown  by the data obtained  
from monitoring  the position.  These  were highly  important  deduc ­
tions from the Monksgrange  experiments  and are still valid.
Later  experiments^®®^  and expjerience  showed  the highly  extractive  
nature of silage, hay and dried ^ass on soil potassium  with a 
quick  depletion  of the readily  available  level in some soils. It was 
found  that there was a very substantial  difference  in the capacity  
of soils  to meet  potassium requirements  and also^®^)  that the process  
of potassium  release  was intimately  bound  up with the presence  of 
certain  clay minerals,  such as degrading  illites, in our soils, the 
content  of which  varied  quite widely  from one soil to the other.
On the basis of experience  at Monksgrange  and elsewhere,  it 
was possible  to propose  principles  (®^) on which the potassium  
nutrition  of plants could, from a practical  point of view, be 
determined  as follows:
(a) that level which can be regarded  as the threshold  point  
below which a lowering  in potassium  is accompanied  by a series  
of physiological  disturbances  affecting  crop growth;
(b) that level above  which  no further  increase  in crop response  
either in terms of yield or quality  takes place, i.e. the threshold  
luxury  level.
28
For this purpose  clovers  and grasses  have dilferent  values  and it 
may be added  that while  the threshold  luxury  value for grasses  is 
in the region  of 2 per cent, dried  grass and hay samples  have often  
been found  to contain  up to twice  this level resulting  in an extrac ­
tive procedure  from luxury consumption  and with consequent  
nutrient  loss.
In some recent work at Johnstown  Castle,  in which some 24 
pasture  soils representative  of major areas of the country  have  
been exhaustively  cropped  by a succession  of ryegrass  crops,  there  
has come to light much  new information  in relation  to the potas ­
sium-supplying  power  of our soils. This work has shown that 
only five of the soils examined  could  readily  supply  the potassium  
necessary  for a good crop of silage  while  a number  of soils could  
supply  only a small quantity.  Some could supply  a considerable  
proportion  of the required  amount  from the more slowly  available  
mineral  source  in the soil while others could not do this to any 
extent.  This capacity  to release  potassium  is related  to fundamental  
soil characteristics  in terms  of clay and other minerals  present  and 
is being studied  further.  As with phosphorus  this work  has clearly  
emphasised  that not only is the quantity  of exchangeable  potassium  
important,  but so also is the intensity  or relative  potassium  concen ­
tration  in the soil solution.  The relationship  between  these two 
parameters —the potassium  buffering  capacity —is very important  
in considering  the uptake  of potassium  by crops.
The result  of this work is that today  we are well on the road to 
establishing  better diagnostic  methods  for potassium  fertiliser  
requirements.  The practical  outcome  of the work from a national  
point of view is, of course,  that today  potassium  is being  supplied  
at much greater  levels than in those early days of our work at 
Monksgrange,  and these  applications are taking  place  on a scientific 
basis. I think the results  are obvious  to anybody  associated  with 
grassland  development.  We have, however,  in this respect  reached  
a critical stage,  especially  where  the intensive  manuring  of grassland  
is concerned.  Now more than ever, scientific  methods  of diagnosis  
as a basis  for advice  are necessary  if efliciency  in the use of potassic  
fertiliser  is to be ensured-
Nitrogen
The work at Monksgrange,  and indeed  our work in general  at 
that time, was so dominated  by the extent  of phosphorus and  potas ­
sium deficiencies  that the role of nitrogen  was not given equal  
attention.  This arose  from the fact that the economics  of grassland  
production  were bound  up with making  the maximum  use of the 
nitrogen-fixing  capacity  of clover  in swards —clover  growth  being
29
dependent  on adequate  levels  of lime and nutrients.  We did not, in 
fact, have very much  information  on the amount  of nitrogen  which  
could be fixed by clovers under our conditions.  The nitrogen  
requirements  of crops other than grassland  were thought  to be 
Satisfied  by the release  of nitrogen  from soil organic  matter on 
tillage, supplemented  by farmyard  manure,  and relatively  small  
amounts  of nitrogeneous  fertilisers  were applied.  Nitrogen  balance  
studies  at the time had, moreover,  shown  a more  satisfactory  overall  
position  than for phosphorus  and potassium.
It is clear, however,  that all was not well as judged  by yields  
obtainable  and looking  back I am now conscious  of the fact that 
nitrogen  deficiency  symptoms  were evident  in many places.  Very  
often these symptoms  were  attributed  to poor biological  conditions.  
Indeed,  Orpen  suggested  in the early 1950 ’s that microbiological  
study might be carried  out to explain  some of these effects.  At 
Monksgrange  a particular  feature  was the very slow decomposition  
of old pasture  sod in tillage—a  reflection  of inhibited  biological  
activity.  Some such tests were indeed undertaken.  It was shown 
that the soil at Monksgrange  had a very low nitrification  rate of 
35 mg per cent compared  to a normal  100. It is of interest  also 
that the total nitrogen  status of the soils there was relatively  low 
at 0.20—0.30 per cent.
Since those days considerable  advances  have been made in our 
knowledge  of the nitrogenous  manuring  of crops generally  and of 
pastures  in particular.  I am not going to dwell on the latter here 
as I have discussed  it recently  elsewhere, while  my colleagues  
have presented  a number  of papers on the subject  before this 
Association  in recent times.
Today  we realise  fully that a dressing  of 1 cwt. nitrogen  is too 
low for practically  any crop and that while  for normal  production  
of pastures  under our economic  conditions,  main reliance  must  
still be on clover nitrogen,  fertiliser  nitrogen  has much to offer 
through  the flexibility  it provides  in tailoring  pasture  to meet  
specific needs such as early and late grass for silage, hay or 
dried grass and to give us more control  over seasonal  production  
peaks and troughs.  We now have a number  of the facts which  
enable  us to make  use of this potential,  and further  exploit  nitrogen  
systematically  in order to achieve  specific  production  and market  
targets.  There are, however,  one or two matters  of interest  which  
our research  work has thrown  up and in which  I am sure Orpen  
would have been especially  interested.  For instance,  it has been  
clearly  established  from experiments  in the Castle  field at Johns ­
town Castle  and subsequent  work there and at Monksgrange,  that 
under good conditions  of fertility  the clovers  in normal  pastures  
can fix about 120 lb nitrogen  per acre per annum.
30
A rather interesting  aspect of this work in relation  to nodule  
bacteria  in peat is that when clovers are introduced  without  
inoculation,  very effective  populations  of these bacteria  become  
established  and this situation  continues  as long as fertilising  is 
maintained.  If nutrient  supply is stopped  the effectiveness  of the 
bacteria  declines  rapidly  and ineffective  bacteria  dominate.  (^7. ss)
Another  line of work which  is being pursued  and is proving  of 
interest  is that concerned  with defining  enzyme  pathways  in the 
process  of nitrogen  fixation.  Enzymes  involved  with some of the 
main processes  have been identified.  An important  application  of 
this work is that strains  of Rhizobium  can sometimes  be typed  
providing  a useful tool in the investigation.  If the process  of 
nitrogen  fixation  can be identified  a rich prize awaits  as even a 
relatively  small increase  in nitrogen  fixing capacity  could achieve  
valuable  economic  advantages.  Furthermore  if the process  of fixing  
nitrogen  artificially  with low energy input could be mastered  
following  these studies,  there could be a major step forward  in 
food production.
It is especially  interesting  that the nodule  organisms,  which  were 
a constant  source  of wonder  to Orpen  and about  which  he had read 
so much,  are themselves  responsive  to some of the same fertility  
and environmental  conditions  as the plant, i.e. as levels of lime, 
nitrogen,  phosphorus  and potassium  are raised  so is there a direct  
beneficial  effect on the activity  of the nodule  bacteria.  This can be 
seen from Diagram  6 which  also emphasises  the inhibiting  effect  
of wetness  on Rhizobium  activity.
31
wet dry dry dry wet
Diagram  6
Soil conditions  affect root nodule  bacteria  of legumes
Another  aspect of iiuportance  emerging  from our work is that 
the effect of high dressings  of nitrogen  on pasture  which,  of course,  
either reduces  or eliminates  clover  growth,  is only transitory  and 
that quick recovery  is possible.  This has been clearly  shown  from  
experimental  work  in the Castle fieid at Johnstown.  See Table  10.
32
TABLE  10: Effect of nitrogen  fertiliser  on percentage  
clover in sward
No 16 cwt fertiliser/st.  ac.
Year nitrogen s'
19640 08th year of fertiliser  application  ... ... ll-5j
196513-2 19-2Nitrogen  fertiliser  witheld .............. ... 16-6
is=sulphate  of ammonia.  c=calcium  ammonium  nitrate.
'percentage  clover  in sward  in August.
I cannot  leave this subject  without  mentioning  another  aspect  
which I feel would have especially  intrigued  Orpen.  One of his 
particular  interests  was the inoculation  of clover seeds with 
variable  strains of Rhizobium.  Indeed, some experiments  were  
carried  out on this subject  at Monksgrange  with, however,  I fear,  
little positive  result. Following  similar experiences  elsewhere, 
Masterson(39)  noted that when active Rhizobia  are brought  into 
contact with the seeds  of clovers  these  Rhizobia  were, in fact, killed,  
similar  observations  had been made  with other strains  of legumes  
elsewhere.  When  this matter  was pursued  it  was found  that
the seed coats of many legume  species  contained  a material  which  
was toxic to Rhizobium  and that while there were a number  of 
such toxins the main one was myricetin,  a naturally  occurring  
phenolic  compound.  It was further  discovered  that the toxic effect  
of seed extracts  could be reduced  by the addition  of metal salts, 
salts of vanadium  being especially  effective.  Molybdenum  and 
cobalt were also effective  and iron less so. These results  are of 
considerable  interest  in view of the effects reported  from time to 
time of some of these elements  in stimulating  clover  growth.
Finally,  this work has led us closer  to the goal, i.e the elabora ­
tion of suitable  soil tests to diagnose  the nitrogen  status  of soils— 
at present  a major  deficiency.  We are now getting  much closer  to 
the achievement  of that objective.
Grassland
In this lecture  so far I have been concentrating  to a considerable  
extent on problems  concerned  with grassland,  referring  to some 
of the individual  components  concerned  in the grassland  manage ­
ment complex.  It can be gathered  from what has been said that 
there must be an understanding  of the weakness  and strength  of 
our soils, of how to manage  nutrients,  how nutrients  can act as
33
substituting  factors  and how flexibility  can be ensured  through  
nitrogen.  In our work at Monksgrange  we were, in fact, looking  
at these different  components  in an individual  way in relation  to 
systems  of farming  at that time which was more or less attuned  
to subsistence  needs —systems  of relatively  low purchased  inputs  
and high labour  content.  Indeed  this approach  has been expressed  
very well by Orpen himself  when he notes that “... it is only 
when a farm is studied  as a complete  unit of production,  rather  
than as a patchwork  of separate  items, that we can discover  
whether  the programme  adopted  is achieving  the most satisfactory  
results  from the financial  point  of view  ”. We were  not thinking  so 
much in terms of business  farming  systems.  We were merely  
looking  at the different  parts of the jigsaw.
Later  in looking  at factors concerned with the optimum economic  
use of fertilisers  (''2) and the nature  of the problem  against  the back ­
ground  of the many  factors  involved,  the need emerged  to quantify  
the factors  not only as they operate  singly  but in interaction  with 
one another.  It is inevitable,  of course,  that farming  systems  should  
be complex  because  of the variety  of physical,  environmental,  
economic,  marketing  and social factors  involved.
The approach  to grassland  management  at the time our work  
commenced  at Monksgrange  was dominated  by the plough-up  
policy  for old pasture  swards.  At Monksgrange  this process  was 
undertaken  with none too satisfactory  results,  despite  the use of 
some of the best seeds available.  Indeed,  Orpen  entered  into quite  
a controversy  with some of the grassland  management  pundits  in 
a neighbouring  country  on this matter.
I have already  mentioned  the very rapid reversion  of pasture  
under  conditions  existing  at Monksgrange.  Since then the position  
has changed  materially.  Our research  work,  based on an ecological  
approach  and against  the background  that each particular  nutrient  
has its own specific  ecological  effect, and that there is an inter ­
action  between  the soil, its manuring,  liming  and the composition  
and management  of the sward,  has shown  that old pastures  such 
as the /^gros'rw-dominated  pastures  at Monksgrange  can be 
improved  in a relatively  short time to the point where they are 
almost as good as newly laid down, well fertilised  leys. This is 
particularly  well shown  by the work at Ballintubber  where,  from a 
base of very poor /4graj//j-Fescue  pastures  of low stock-carrying  
capacity,  high producing  pastures  have been developed.  This can 
be seen from the improvement  profile (Diagram  7).
34
2
CD
CO
O'
UJ
CQ
CO3 a
bOc3
KOO
*0O
CS
10ocs
oCN<
CO
sajOD 09 sjiun >|DO|seA[i
35
Another  aspect  of our investigations  which  has not as yet been  
worked  out to any great extent  is that of the cycling  of nutrients  
in pastures.  The fact that different  systems  of management  can 
have a striking  effect on the nutrients  extracted  is clearly  shown 
by the work of Murphy, Orpen ’s notes in this respect  have a 
special  relevance  under the demands  of the intensive  systems  now 
being developed.  He wrote: “ Fuller  trials are required  to show 
whether  our present  allowance  of nutrient  replacement  is sufficient  
to maintain  output  at a satisfactory  level, bi the meantime  there  
is a lot to be learned  about  grassland  management,  which  becomes  
progressively  more difficult  as the intensity  of growth  increases  ”.
A research  project  to take care of this aspect  of soil' fertility  
is now under way.
Many of my colleagues  have presented  their findings  on the 
management  and development  of grassland  in modem  farming  
systems  before  this Association  and consequently  I do not propose  
to deal further  with this matter  which  I have  covered  elsewhere.
I do, however,  wish to stress  again  that our present  approach  is to 
synthesise  our findings  on different  components —^the “ separate  
items  ”—taking  into account  the whole spectrum  of factors  from  
the soil to the market so that market-oriented,  methodically  
developed  systems  can be offered  for a variety  of environments  
and needs. I would  like to present  a picture  of these systems  as 
consisting  of a number  of links about  each of which  we must have  
specific  quantified  information.  The initial link in this chain is 
the soil, with each soil type determining  its own specific  require ­
ments,  and the terminal  and motivating  link is the market.  Our 
research  work,  covering  a wide field in the production,  processing,  
economic,  marketing  and social areas, is now quantifying  the 
individual  components  or links. I believe that this systematic  
approach  to developing  market-oriented  systems  can bring  us with 
confidence  into a future of grassland  management,  which will 
enable  the potential  of our soils and grasslands  to be fully realised  
to the national  advantage.
The Future
Ita the foregoing  I have attemted  to deal with some  of the topics  
which  were of special  interest  to Orpen,  as far as I could person ­
ally judge.  This does not cover  his sphere  of interest  by any means. 
I know  that he had an intense  interest, for example,  in co-operation  
and what co-operation,  if it were operated  effectively  and applied  
to all appropriate  areas of agricultural  activity,  could do to make  
the farmers  way of life a better  one. I know  he had no illusions  
about  rural fundamentalism  as such but he understood  fully that a
36
better  way of life on the land should  come  basically  from a better  
return  from the land. His interest  in these affairs  could very well 
make the subject  of another  lecture.
I thought,  however,  I might conclude  by attempting  to take a 
short look into the future,  a hazardous  venture  at any time. In the 
early days of our work at Monksgrange,  main concentration  was 
on production,  on activities  which ended at the farm gate. The 
whole position  has now changed  in line with the requirements  of 
the nation ’s Economic  Expansion  Programme.  There  is now a need  
for information  to meet new market  objectives,  to have facts as a 
basis for adjustment  and to permit  innovation,  not only in produc ­
tion economics,  but also in management,  merchandising,  processing  
^and marketing.  In the context  of these changes  the farm gate 
barrier  has disappeared.  It is apparent  that these developments  
would  involve  consequential  social  adjustments,  requiring  research  
guidance.  It has been a feature  of agricultural  development  since  
those early days at Monksgrange  that the increasing  efficiency  in 
agriculture  was releasing  manpower,  which  could have been taken  
up if the industrial'  sector  had been in tune with developments  in 
agriculture,  in the context  of balanced  economic  expansion.  This,  
of course,  was not so.
Orpen,  as is apparent  from his contributions,  placed  consider ­
able hope in a future  where  the work of the Agricultural  Institute  
would  play a significant  part. He was a main protagonist  in the 
discussions  leading  up to its formation.  This Institute  has developed  
a national  research  programme in which  the goals  have been clearly  
defined.  The programme  is flexible  to meet new needs.  It has been  
developed  in a logical  way, by reaching  a consensus  at many  levels  
through  discussion  and argument  conducted  in an atmosphere  
of mutual intellectual  confrontation  among research  workers,  
advisers,  the users of research  in general  and farmers  in particular.  
It is hoped  that to date Orpen ’s aspirations  have been fulfilled.
As we look forward  there are, of course,  a number  of factors  
of which you are all well aware and which condition  the way 
research  must move. These  can be summarised  as follows:
1. At home there is little, if any, dietary  inadequacy,  con­
sequently  any extra food which  we produce  must be sold outside  
the country.
2. Markets  outside  the country  have quite specific  require ­
ments to be met, quality  and price-wise.  They are hard markets  
where competition  is intense.  Some of them we have lost in the 
past or have not been capable  of meeting.  There  is little point in 
^king  at newly emerging  nations  as a source  of markets  since 
in these countries,  government  policies  indicate  that the expansion
37
of their own agriculture  is a basic element  in their economic  
advancement.
3. Increased  production  in Ireland,  must, therefore,  be closely  
and systematically  geared to meet the requirements  of specific  
markets  abroad;  the chain from soil to saleable  product  must be 
closely  integrated.
4. To face the future competitively,  the Irish farmer  must be 
concerned  with this whole chain and must be equipped  techno ­
logically  and managerially  to meet the position.  TTiis calls for an 
increase  in the operation  of business  management  techniques  in the 
agricultural  industry  as a whole. We live in an age of rapid  
advances  in technology  with our competitors  injecting  major  
resources  into research  as a basis for further development.  As 
farmers  increase  their business  capacity,  they will wish to use 
more and more the fruits of this technology  for their economic  
advancement,  and will expect  research  to provide  the answers.
5. The various  factors  of production,  transport  and marketing  
must be harmonised,  the resources  for production  must be clearly  
understood,  the balance  between  the forces  of production  as they 
change  under  the impact  of development  must be  clearly  monitored  
and guided.  This could involve  major  changes  in the structure  of 
the agricultural  industry  at farm level, e.g. in terms of farm size, 
if demands  are to be met.
6. The expertise  to engage  in agriculture  must be developed  
through  the appropriate  educational  and training  programmes.
7. The need for adjustment  to meet change— economic,  social  
and structural —not only within  agriculture  itself but also between  
agriculture  and the rest of the economy,  must be met. This will 
entail changes  which will penetrate  right into the structure  of 
farms and local communities,  into the social and behavioural  life 
of people  both in the rural and urban areas. Agriculture  cannot  
be separated  or looked  upon as a sector  apart  from the remainder  
of the economy.  Because  of the required  increases  in the strictly  
industrial  side of our economy,  expanding  at a 5 or 6 per cent level 
in comparison  with agriculture ’s 2 per cent, major tensions  may 
be created  unless  appropriate  steps are taken  to meet the situation.
Orpen,  in his time, understood  these  conditions  very well. Indeed,  
he was a man much  before  his time. He said that the farmer  wants  
a blue-print  “drawn  up jointly  by the economic  forecasting  expert  
together  with the agricultural  adviser  acquainted  with the capabi ­
lities of both farm and farmer  with perhaps  the bank manager  
as an observer.
“ After  all, the farmer ’s job is to grow  the crop  or animal,  and in 
a world market  fluctuating  rapidly  from year to year and month  
to month  no farmer  is in a position  to judge  of the future  even on
38
the home market,  let alone overseas,  as he cannot  possibly  assess 
in time just what his competitor  proposes  to grow that year.
“ Therefore,  if agriculture  is to expand,  it must have access  to 
the necessary  information  both scientific  and economic  and this 
information  must come in time to make  the required  adjustments.
“While it is true that in the post-war  years very substantial  
technical  progress  has been made on quite a large number  of 
farms  in Ireland,  the financial  reward  is still deplorably  low. It is 
customary  to regard  this state of affairs  as due in the main to the 
stupidity  and lack of initiative  of our farmers.  This, of course,  is 
nonsense. ”
Consequently,  a research  programme,  if it is to meet farming  
needs must provide  the necessary  facts as a basis for appropriate  
technological  developments —^facts on the production  of crops and 
animals,  on storage,  on processing  and marketing,  on the use of 
resources,  on the economics  of the agricultural  industry  in the 
total context  and on social and other  changes.  Such research  must  
avoid  rigidity  in thinking  or structure.  It must be conducted  within  
the framework  of a national  programme  of agricultural  research  
to meet the needs  of the agricultural  industry,  and it must proceed  
far beyord  the farm gate.
The organisation  and implementation  of a research  programme  
are only part of the problem.  The question  of the dissemination  
and use of research  results is equally  important.  It should go 
without  saying  that results  of research  should  be disseminated  and 
integrated  into agriculture  as rapidly  as possible.  Orpen  was fully  
aware  of the problems  involved  and has noted(^o)  that “one of the 
most difficult  problems  which faces the farmer  of today is how 
best can the findings  of the scientists  and research  workers  
ultimately  reach the farmer.  Quite obviously  this process  is long 
and complicated  and must at every stage be subjected  to test 
checks  and qualifications.  It is all too easy to bypass  some diffi­
culty and jump to some conclusion  not altogether  justified  by the 
evidence.
“Presumably  when we have the Institute  of Agriculture  in 
operation  some watertight  scheme  of flow from research  worker  
to farmer  will be set up which  works  quickly  and without  faults. ”
We have tried to approach  this question  in the most sympathetic  
way possible.  We have tried, through  the medium  of develop ­
mental research,  through  our farmlet  experimental  technique,  
through  field stations,  economic  test farms  and a research-extension  
approach,  to present  our work in such a way that it can be used 
by advisory  officers.  The latter have the difficult  task of ensuring  
that the work  is integrated  into practice  at farm level. They should  
have the results of research  made available  to them in a form
39
which  they can readily  put into practice.  No longer  can the bits 
and pieces  ” method  in the application  of research  be used as a 
basis for raising  the productivity  of commercial  farming.
I would  like to stress  again particularly  our present  work aimed  
at synthesising  quantified  components  into viable  farming  systems 
so that alternative  programmes,  designed  to meet environmental  
and market  variations,  are available  to the adviser.  Through  this 
approach  the speculative  element in dissemination  is being  
removed.  In addition,  it should  be possible  to adjust  such systems 
rapidly  as new information  becomes  available.  In all this work the 
computer  can play a major part.
Looking  back on the days of our work at Monks^ange,  carried  
out in close association  with the local instructor  in agriculture,  
I feel we were asking  too much of farmers  in expecting  them to 
integrate  new information  into their farming  programmes  in a 
piece-meal  fashion.  While men like Orpen, because  of intense  
and innovative  capacity,  accepted  the risks involved,  I wonder  how 
many of the young  business  farmers  of the future  would accept  
the possibility  of failure  inherent  in this approach.  For these  young  
people  we must put the pieces  together  into economically  viable,  
worthwhile  systems.
While  I have stressed  the need to integrate  research  results  into 
the agricultural  industry  as quickly  as possible,  there are other  
aspects  of research  and its results  which  I would  like to emphasise.  
Research  itself is creative  of new ideas and of a progressive 
outlook. In this process contact between research workers,  
advisers  and farmers  is most important.  Orpen  was well aware  of 
this. Research  workers  must have the capacity  and opportunity  to 
penetrate  deeply into the subject  matter  of their work and not 
always  with the immediate  application  of their research  results  
in mind. There must be a constant  stream  of new facts available  
for practical  adoption.  This involves  a process  from basic  scientific 
work,  through  applied  and developmental  research,  to the industry.  
If new techniques  are to be developed,  people  engaged  in applied  
research  must have the opportunity  of proceeding  beyond  imme ­
diate needs.  To do this they must have the necessary  motivation  
and intellectual  equipment.
Orpen was undoubtedly  a man before his time. He was a 
prototype  of the farmer  of the future —the farmer  with a high 
level of technical,  managerial  and economic  skills,  who will require  
great expertise  and top class performance  from those to whom  he 
will look for help in the operation  of his enterprise.  It is to meet 
the requirements  of such a farmer  that we must gear our develop ­
ments in the educational,  agricultural  research  and advisory  
services  of the future.
40
Edward  Richards  Orpen  was a man eager  for new information,  
challenging  the best in the research  worker  and adviser.  Because  of 
his own special  intellectual  and technological  capacity,  he was 
prepared  to to apply  new findings,  to take risks,  to understand  that 
research  workers  and advisers  were only human  in their know ­
ledge and capacity.  He was prepared  to be optimistic  and to look 
forward  to an agriculture  in continual  progress  providing  a better  
way of life for people  on the land. He did everything  he could to 
see that this better way was secured.  To us he was a research  
oriented  farmer,  a model  for the future.
I am certain  that as farmers  increasingly  follow  his way in the 
future,  the more prosperous  will be the people in rural Ireland  
and in the community  as a whole.
It was a privilege  to have known  him and worked  with him, 
and to have benefited  from his advice  and help.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to express  my thanks  to Mr. John Richards  Orpen  for 
providing  the records from Monksgrange  farm, the Edward  
Richards  Orpen  Trust  for providing  the forum  for this lecture  and 
to the members  of the staff of An Foras Taluntais  for their co­
operation  and assistance.
REFERENCES
1. Walsh,  T., Ryan, P. F., and Kilroy,  J. 1956-57)  J. Stat. soc
Inq. soc. Ire, 19: 104.
2. Gallagher,  P.H. and Walsh,  T. (1942).  Characteristics  of Irish
Soil Types —Part I. Proc. R. Ir. Acad.  Ser. B. 47. No. 8.
3. Brickley,  W. D. (1941).  M. Agr.Sc.  thesis.  National  University
of Ireland.
4. Spain,  H. (1949).  Ph. D thesis.  National  University  of Ireland.
5. Walsh,  T., Neenan,  M. and Ryan. P. (1953-54).  J. Dept.
Agris. Rep. Ire. 50: 44 and 76.
6. Walsh, T., Fleming,  G. A., Kavanagh,  T. J. and Ryan. P.
(1955-56),  J. Dep. Agric. Rep. Ire., 52: 56.
7. Walsh,  T., Ryan, P. and Fleming,  G. A. (1956).  Trans. 6th
Int. Confr. Soil Sci, Paris, 2: 771.
8. Ryan. P., Lee, J. and Peebles,  T. F. (1967).  Trace element
problems  in relation  to soil units in Europe.  FAO World  
Soil Resources  Reports  No. 31, Rome.
9. Galvin,  L. F. (1966).  Ir. J. agric. Res. 5: 79.
10. Burke,  W. (1965).  Res. Rep. Soils Div. An Foras  Taluntais,  
Dublin
41
11. Burke, W. (1968).  Trans. 2nd Int. Peat Congr. Leningrad,
1963, 2: 809.
12. Galvin,  L. F. and Hanrahan,  E. T. (1967).  Highw.  Res. Rec.
No. 203: 77.
13. Walsh,  T. (1968),  “ Utilisation  of Grass  for Meat and Milk ”,
Devon  County  Agricultural  Association  Lecture,  Seale-  
Hayne  Agricultural  College,  Devon.
14. Burke,  W. Ir. J. agric. Res. (In Press).
15. An Foras Taluntais,  Dublin.  General  Soil Map of Ireland
(In Press).
16. Gleeson,  J. (1969),  Ir. Grassld.  Anim.  Prod. Assoc.  J., 4: 20.
17. Bulfin,  M. (1967X  Ir. J. agric. Res., 6: 189.
18. Walsh.  T. (1967).  OEEC  Report.  “ The effective  use of ferti­
lisers including  lime ”. Paris.
19. Brogan,  J., Personal  Communication.
20. Coulter,  B. S. and Talibudeen,  O. 1968),  J. Soil Sci., 19: 237.
21. Walsh,  T., Mannion,  L. and Ryan, P. F. (1950),  Trans.  4th
Int. Congr.  Soil Sci, Amsterdam,  3: 111.
22. Department  of Agriculture  Research  Group (1951-52),  J.
Dep. Agric. Rep. Ire. 48: 81.
23. McDonnell,  P. M. and Walsh,  T. (1957),  J. Soil Sci 8: 1.
24. McDonnell,  P. M. and Walsh, T. 1956), Trans 6th Int.
Congr.  Soil Sci., Paris, Vol. B: 787.
25. Cole, A. J., Proc. Int. Peat Congr..  Quebec,  1968. (In Press).
26. Grennan.  E. J. (1968), Res. Rep. Soils Div., An Foras
Taluntais,  Dublin.
27. Hanley,  P. K. (1962),  Ir. J. agric. Res., 1: 192.
28. Hanley,  P. K., McDonnell,  P. M. and Murphy,  M. D. (1965),
Ir. J. agric. Res. 4: 81.
29. Hanley,  P. K. Unpublished  data.
30. Orpen,  E. Richards.  Unpublished  data.
31. Walsh, T., McDonnell,  P. M. and Ryan, P. (1957) Agro-
chimica,  1: 4.
32. Department  of Agriculture.  Dublin.  Unpublished  data.
33. Walsh,  T., Kilroy.  J. and McDonnell  P. M. (1957-58),  J. Dep.
Agric. Rep. Ire. 54: 44.
34. Walsh,  T. (1954).  Potassium  Symposium,  International  Potash
Institute.  Berne: 327.
35. Moss,  P. Personal  Communication.
36. Walsh,  T. (1967),  Proc. Fertil. Soc., No. 97, London.
37. Masterson,  C. L. (1969). West Donegal  Resource  Survey.
Part 2. An Foras  Taluntais,  Dublin.
38. Masterson,  C. L. (1968), Trans. 9th Int. Congr. Soil Sci.
Adelaide,  2: 95.
39. Masterson,  C. L. (1962),  Ir. J. agric. Res. 1: 343.
42
40.
41.
42.
43.Fottrell,  P. F., O’Connor,  S. and Masterson,  C. L. (1965),  
Ir. J. agric. Res. 3: 246.
Masterson,  C. L. (1965).  Annls.  Inst. Pasteur,  Paris,  109: 216. 
Walsh,  T. and McDonnell,  P. M. (1966),  ECE/FAO  Sympo ­
sium on Economic  Aspects  of the use of Fertilisers,  
Geneva.
Murphy,  W. E. (1963),  Proc. Regional  Conf. of Int. Potash  
Institute,  Wexford;  155.
43
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the knowl ­
edge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modified,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good 
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modem grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their 
ideas; it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary,  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you.-vm
UnURNI
