Irish Grassland  
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal
1999 VOLUME  33
Irish  Grassland  Association  
CORPORATE  MEMBERS  1999
AIB
Bank  of Ireland  
Bord  Bia
Dairygold  Co-operative  Society  
Dawn  Meats  
Glanbia
Greencore  Agribusiness
I.A.W.S.  Group  pic 
Irish Dairy  Board  
Irish Famers  Journal  
Irish Fertilizer  Industries  
Irish Charolais  Society  
Kerry  Agribusiness  
Merial  Animal  Health  
Premier  Molasses  Co. Ltd. 
Town  of Monaghan  Co-Op.  
Wexford  Milk  Producers  Ltd.
Teagasc  - Advisory  and Training  Services
Ballyhaise  Agricultural  College  
Cork  East  
Cork West
Kildalton  Agricultural  College  
Kerry  
Laois  
Limerick
Regional  Office  South,  Kildalton  
Regional  Office  North,  Grange  
Roscommon  
Tipperary  North
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 33 1999
Edited  by
SEAN  FLANAGAN
ISSN 0332-0588
Primed  by Wicklow  Press Ltd.. Wicklow
CONTENTS page
D. A. McGilloway, The  potential  for grassland  based ruminant  production
E. O’Riordan  systems  beyond  20003
D. H. Hides Maximising  the potential  of farm-produced  forage 
with new varieties17
I. A. Casey,
P. G. Dillon,Developments  to enhance  sward  intake  and 
quality  (mid-season)27
J. Maher, The  effect of level of daily grass allowance  on the
G. Stakelum  performance  of spring-calving  dairy cows
B. Buckley,  P. Dillon36
G. Ryan Grazing  management  of autumn  calving  cows 48
S. & A. Leonard Improving  cow performance  with increased  use of 
grazed  grass59
T. M. Butler Role of partnerships  in the future  of Irish dairy farms 64
P. B. Sprensen Trends  within  Danish  dairy farming 68
P. Baker Key factors  in growing  a business 85
J. Roskam Innovative  practices  to increasing  farm net worth 91
J. van der Poel Achieving  growth  in an unregulated  environment  - 
Principles  and lessons  for any environment94
A. Donovan
J. P. HanrahanArtificial  insemination  of sheep - Current  status and 
possible  developments99
D. L. Kelleher Genetic  evaluation  of sheep breeds  for meat traits 107
J. F. Quinlan Some observations  on animal  disease,  ill thrift 
and infertility119
D. J. O’Brien Ectoparasites  of sheep 122
W. McLauchlan Producing  quality  beef for the market 125
M. Drennan Breeding  policy  for the suckler  herd 132
A. Boon Marketing  beef in Holland 140
COUNCIL  1999/2000
President  : P. McFeely  
Vice-President  : J. Dwyer  
Past-President  : M. Dempsey
P. Baker,  B, Barnes,  J. Claffey,  N. Culleton,  B. Earley,  C. Hurley, 
M. Magan,  J. Maher,  D. McGilloway,  J. O’Brien,  M. O’Brien,  M, 
O’Donovan,  P. O’Keeffe,  F. O’Mara,  T. Pettit, P. Walshe.
Hon. Secretary/Treasurer  : S. Flanagan  
Irish Grassland  Association,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Tel: +353 91 845835 Fax: +353 91 845847 e-mail  mfg@iol.ie
2
The Potential  for Grassland  Based  
Ruminant  Production  Systems  Beyond  
2000
D. A. McGilloway  and e, O’riordan
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath
Grassland  in all its variety  and forms represents  one of Ireland ’s most  
important  national  resources.  From an agricultural  perspective  it provides  a 
low cost renewable  feed source  of high nutritional  value  and is the corner  stone  
on which our ruminant  production  systems  are based.  A range of diverse  
grassland  farming  systems  exists  but typically  they have in common  pasture  
grazed  in situ accounting  for the greater  portion  of the animals ’ diet. Such  systems  
comprise  four components;  a physical  resource  (the environment  upon which  
the production  system  depends),  a forage  resource,  an animal  resource  and a 
management  system.  The three resource  levels are interactive,  the degree  of 
interaction  being  strongly  influenced  by the system  of management  (Figure  1). 
How the system  and its individual  components  might  change  and evolve  in the 
post  millennium  era will form  the basis of this paper.  The  production,  harvesting,  
ensilage and  feeding  of conserved  grass in the form of silage,  although  important  
to the overall  system,  will not be dealt with in this paper.  Here, our attention  
will be focused  exclusively  on grazing.
Physical  resource
Ireland  occupies  a total land area of 6.89 m ha, of which  agriculture  and 
forestry account for  approximately  92% of the total.  Of this, grassland  and rough
Fig. 1 - A hierarchical  structure  of grassland  systems
Source:  Sheath  & Clark. 1996
Fig. 2 - Estimated  starting  
dates of the grazing  season  
in Ireland
Source:  Brereton,  1995
grazing  combined  occupy  81% (C.S.O., June 1998).  The dominance  of grassland 
Ts due in the main to the suitability  of the climate  for producing  grass.  In terms 
of physical  resources  we have few natural  advantages  over our EU neighbours  
who are favoured  with more agreeable  cereal and forage  maize  growing  
conditions,  but our temperate  humid  climate,  modified  as it is by North  Atlantic  
currents,  confers  significant  grass production  advantages  (Jones  and Carter, 
1992). Climate  largely  determines  the start and end of the grazing  season,  
beginning  in late February/early  March  in the more favoured  south-west  and 
becoming  progressively  later the further  north  and east the location  (Figure  2).
Even with the application  of all available  technologies,  there exists  at least 
a 3-week  gap between  north and south.  This gap is also present  at the end of
Fig. 3 - Model  estimates  of 
annual  dry matter  grass  
production  (t ha ')
Source:  Brereton,  1995
the grass growing  season,  where  again the south-west  has up to a 3-week  
advantage.  Thus,  for similar  soil types,  the effect  of geographic  location  means  
that annual  grass yields  range  from in excess  of 15 t DM ha ‘ in the south-west  
to less than 11 t DM ha ‘ in the north-east  (Figure  3). In terms of feed costs,  
the effect  of location  results  in costs  ranging  from  £37 in the south-west  to £52 
t DMD  (digestible  dry matter) in the north-east  (O’Kiely,  1994;  Brereton,  1995).  
Weather  can cause  huge variation  in year to year annual  grass production  (i.e. 
+ or - 20% difference  from the long-term  average)  and can alter production  
costs from £42 in the best grass growing  year to £63 f' DMD in the worst  
(Table  1). Soil wetness  can also increase  production  costs  from £47  on dry free 
draining  soils to £56 r‘ DMD on wet heavy  clay soils.
Table 1
Effect  of location,  weather  and soil type on grass production  costs
£f‘ digestible  dry matter
Location £37  in SW 
£53 in NE
Weather £42 in best grass growing  season  
£63 in worst grass growing  season
Soil type 347  on dry well drained  
£56 on wet poorly  drained
Source:  O’Kiely, 1994; Brereton,  1995
In effect therefore,  climatic  variation  means  that the farmer  cannot  know  
the quantity  or quality  of grass that will be produced  over the grazing  season  
or the conditions  that will prevail  for utilization.  With the exception  of soil 
drainage,  there  is little that can be done to control  these  factors.  However, whilst  
we have little hope of manipulating  the effect  of climate  and location  at farm 
level, the possibility  that our climate  itself  might  be changing  cannot  be ignored.
There  is now  a considerable  body  of scientific  data  to support  the hypothesis  
that a significant  change  in world  climate  is taking  place.  Whether  this is due 
to a natural  cycle  or is a result  of increased  concentrations  of greenhouse  gases  
is much  less clear. Carbon  dioxide  is the most important  of these greenhouse  
gases  and its concentration  in the atmosphere,  although  small,  is thought  to be 
increasing  by 0.5% per annum  of the total carbon  dioxide  concentration.  In 
Ireland  it is predicted  that by the middle  of the next century  the average  annual  
temperature  will increase  by 2°C and precipitation  will increase  by 5-10%  in 
winter  but decrease  by 5-10%  in summer.  (The average  global surface  
temperature  in 1998 set a new record,  surpassing  the previous  record  year of 
1995 by 0.2°C,  the largest  increase  ever recorded).  The effect  of such changes,  
principally  temperature  and rainfall  on crop production,  can be simulated  using 
a range  of crop climate  models.  Some  of the predictions  from  a range  of models  
are summarized  in Table 2.
Simulated  changes  in dry matter  yield of grassland  in a changed  climateTable 2
Model Climatic Soil % Yield Source
Condition Type Change
WATCROS Temperature  rise (3°C) Sand +5 Olesen  (1990)
Temperature  rise (3°C) Loam +2
Rainfall  increase  (30%) Sand -1-20
Rainfall  increase  (30%) Loam -f8
Hejmdal Temperature  rise (3°C) - -27 Olesen  (1990)
Rainfall  increase  (30%) - -1-32
COj increase  (325 ppmv)  
Temperature  rise (2°C)- -1-54
Hurley - -6 Thornley  et al (1991)
Pasture
ModelCOj increase  (250 ppmv) — -h65
Johnstown Temperature  rise (1°C) - + 12 McWilliam  (1991)
Castle Temperature  rise (3°C) - -1-38
Model and rainfall  increase  (30%)
Source:  Jones and Carter, 1992
As can be seen, the majority  of models  are predicting  DM yield increases  
from 2 to 65%.  An increase  (at modest  levels)  in total annual  DM production  
is to be welcomed  but how will this be distributed  over the year?  The winters  
will be wetter;  soil type will not change,  so utilisation  on many  Irish farms  will 
continue  to be a problem.  It is also possible  to envisage  a situation where  summer  
droughts  become  a regular  feature  on many grassland  farms  and maize  silage  
(grown  nation-wide)  acts to bridge  the summer  feed deficit!  For many  farmers  
cereals  either  grown  on farm or purchased  may offer a better  alternative  than 
silage,  but how then do we control  the massive  burst of spring  growth  which 
the ensiling  process  captures?
Exploitation  of physical  resources  from  a grassland  perspective is increasingly 
coming  under  pressure  from  environmental  interests.  For example,  when  cattle  
graze paddocks  either  late in autumn  or early in spring,  they can cause  treading  
damage  which  displaces  surface  soil and reduces  infiltration  rates.  As a result, 
the potential  for increased  water  runoff  and sediment  contamination  of waterways 
is increased  (Lambert  etal, 1985).  Sustainable  eco-friendly systems of the future  
will not countenance  such practices  if proven  to be environmentally  unsound. 
Similarly,  amenity  and tourism  groups  exert  considerable  financial  and political  
pressure  (witness  the proliferation  of golf courses  around  the country  and the 
designation of specific  areas of conservation  (SAC)). In the not too distant  future  
it can be envisaged  that increasing  emphasis  will be placed  on the protection  
and even expansion  of such areas.  This will very likely occur  at the expense  
of developed  grasslands
Forage  resources
Forage  resources  occupy  the second tier in the hierarchy  of interacting  levels.
The yield potential  and estimated  proportion  of grassland  suitability  classesTable 3
Suitability Yield Potential Ireland EC- 10
Class (t DM ha-‘) (proportion  grassland  area)
A 10 - 12 0.32 0.09
B 8 - 10 0.13 0.19
C 5 - 8 0.21 0.26
D 3 - 6 - 0.22
E 1 - 5 0.34 0.24
'Ranking  scale from A to E:
Source:  Lee, 1984A = well suited  for grassland;
E = very poorly  suited  to grassland
There  is little ‘natural  grassland ’ in Ireland.  What  exists  has been  brought  about  
by the activity  of man who cleared  forests  and cultivated  land for crops.  
Subsequent  development  of grassland  (including  moorland)  and its maintenance  
by centuries  of biotic  influence  has resulted  in the dominance  of the landscape  
by a range  of ‘artificial ’ vegetation  types.  A dated  but still useful  classification  
of grassland  types  is that presented  by Lee (1984)  who used climatic  and soil 
data to classify  the soils of Europe  into 5 suitability  classes.  These  ranged  from  
A = well suited  for grassland  to E = only poorly  suited  to grassland  (Table  3).
Three  soil or land properties  were assumed  to be of major  importance;  (i) 
soil moisture  availability,  (ii) poaching  susceptibility  and (iii) accessibility  to 
machinery.  Ireland  with 0.32 Class  A land has the highest  proportion  of this 
land category  in Europe.  Land in classes  A and B combined  represents  0.45 
of total grassland  in Ireland  and is considered  to be free from  major  limitations  
to production.  These  classes  compare  with 0.28 for the EU-10.  In addition,  the 
proportion of Irish  grassland  classified  under  Categories  D and E is considerably  
less than that of the EU-10  (0.34 compared  with 0.46). Grassland  in these  
categories  have a low yield potential  between  1-5 t DM ha ' annum  * due to 
unfavourable  soil climatic  conditions  and are not suitable  for mechanisation.
It takes  no great  insight  to appreciate that this resource  exists  within  a dynamic  
environment  in which  species  competition  and  quality  is related  to environmental  
factors  and the system  of management  imposed.  It is important  to appreciate  
that botanical  composition  is not in itself  a prime  determinant  of productivity  
but rather  it is the means  by which  the production  potential  of a given sward  
is realised.  Species  and varieties  have different  inherent  yield potentials.  All 
will be most productive  on warm,  humid  highly  fertile  soils but for any given 
site with a particular  combination,  temperature,  fertility  and management,  only 
one or two pasture  species  will be capable  of expressing  the full site potential.  
This is an important  consideration  since  in less favoured  situations  species  other  
than Loliumperenne  (perennial  ryegrass)  may prove  to be more  suitable.  Under  
simulated  grazing,  several  secondary  grass species  have been shown  to out- 
yield Lolium  perenne  at 0 and low N levels (Table  4).
Annual  dry matter  yields  (second  year) of a range  of secondary  grass species  
under  simulated  grazing  at different  N rates (kg ha ')Table  4
N rate (kg ha'‘) 0 120 480 0 120 480
Grass  species  (Lolium  = 100) DM DOM
Lolium  perenne  (L) 100 100 100 100 100 100
Agrostis  stolonifera  (L) 140 93 77 71 79 68
Cynosurus  cristatua  (L) 149 82 84 81 76 80
Festuca  rubra (L) 134 100 91 70 92 84
Poa pratensis  (L) 87 81 96 43 70 88
Holcus  lanatus  (L) 217 100 90 115 92 85
Source:  Frame  and Tiley, 1988
Lolium  with  a higher  OMD%  was superior  in DOM  yield  when  N was applied.  
The quality  of secondary  species is also known to decline  rapidly in early season.  
Given  a future  scenario  of low input extensive  grassland  farming  (REPs  etc.) 
on one hand and intensive  grassland  utilisation  (driven  by N) on the other, it 
can be expected  that secondary  grass species  will attain greater  prominence  
relative  to Lolium  (or some  ‘new ’ primary  grass?).  Factors  of animal acceptability 
and ease of grazing  management  will require  consideration  - the challenge  being 
to maintain  secondary  grasses  in a young  tillering  state - new sward height  
guidelines  may be required.
An increasing  reliance  on grass/clover  swards  can also be anticipated  in 
situations  where extensive  grassland  management  is practised.  Grass/clover  
swards  can reduce  production  costs  by savings  made  on N fertiliser  and improved 
growth  rates  due to the higher  feeding  value  of the clover.  Under  cutting,  grass 
and clover  swards  have been shown  to give DM yields equivalent  to 
monocultures  of grass  receiving  200 kg N annum  ' (Morrison,  1981).  How  these 
advantages  can be incorporated  into grazing  systems  still requires  work. For 
many,  systems  based  on grass/clover  are seen as carrying  high levels  of risk, 
with year to year variations  in herbage  and livestock  production  greater  than 
that from N fertilised  swards.  However,  Davies  et al. (1992)  have shown  that 
over 6 years at Bronydd  Mawr  (Wales),  lamb production  from grass/clover  
pasture  varied  from 80-114%  compared  with  75-125% for  grass  swards  receiving 
200 kg N ha-‘.
Poor growth  of grass/clover  swards  in the spring  is also a major  constraint  
limiting  production  at present.  Longer  term (with  climate  change?),  an increase  
in mean  soil temperature  will go some  way to easing  this problem.  However,  
in the short to medium  term there is much  that can be done with strategic  use 
of N fertiliser  and the inclusion  of more N tolerant  clover  varieties.  Progress  
has also been  made  in breeding  for improved  winter  hardiness  and spring  growth 
(Rhodes  and Webb, 1993).
The impression  amongst  many is that to opt for extensive  systems, technology
is ‘thrown out the window’ . The opposite  is in fact the case and a greater  degree  
of technical and  management  skill is required  to successfully  manage  a grassland  
system  based  on clover  as opposed  to N fertiliser.  In the future  we can expect  
clover-based  systems to evolve which  incorporate  both  continuous and rotational  
grazing,  swards  being  continuously  grazed  in the spring  and early summer  in 
order  to encourage  clover  development,  and then rotationally  grazed  in order  
to efficiently  utilise  the resultant  supply  of herbage.
On intensive  grassland  farms  Lolium  will continue  to be the predominant  
species  of choice,  principally  because  it is highly  productive  in response  to N 
fertiliser,  has high acceptability  to stock,  is relatively  persistent  if soil fertility  
is high,  is tolerant  of intensive  grazing  and cutting,  exhibits  rapid establishment  
and has good tillering  ability.  Under  non-limiting  conditions  of light, soil, 
moisture  and temperature,  potential  biomass  production  from  Lolium  dominant  
swards  has been  shown  to be in the order  of 65 t DM ha‘‘ (Parsons,  1988;  Gordon,  
1996). However,  because  of loss processes  associated  with respiration  and 
senescence,  harvestable  yield is only 20% of potential  at 13 t DM ha‘‘ (Table  
5). There is clearly  huge scope for reducing  losses.
Table 5
The potential  within  a Lolium  dominated  sward  defoliated  at intervals
t DM ha-'
Total photosynthesis 65.0
Respiration
Shoot -27.6
Roots (including  growth) -8.1
Shoot decay -16.3
Harvested  yield 13.0
Source:  Parson,  1988; Gordon,  1996
In Ireland,  under  optimum  conditions,  production  from grass  swards  can be 
very high. Culleton  and Murphy  (1987)  recorded  DM yields  of 17.5 t ha ‘ from  
Lolium  multiflorum  while Collins  (1985)  has obtained  17.2 t DM ha ' from  
Lolium  perenne.  At farm level,  production  is significantly  less than this, varying  
from 15 t DM ha ' in the extreme  south-west  to less than 11 t DM ha ' in the 
north-east  (Brereton,  1995).  The potential  for improvement  is great. For the 
best farmers  using  modern  technology,  a realistic  target  is likely  to be near 20 
t DM ha ' (Leafe,  1978).
Is there scope to increase  harvestable  yield?  Grass output  has been  near  static  
for decades.  The best  yielding  maturing  variety  on the 1998 Irish  Recommended  
List is the tetraploid  Anaconda  which,  relative  to the highest  yielding  variety  
in 1994 Bastion,  increased  production  by 0.41 f' DM ha or 0.03 t DM ha' 
annum  ' over the intervening  period,  hardly  a dramatic  increase  in production  
(Table  6).
Relative  increase  in annual  yield (t DM ha') of highest  yielding  early  
perennial  ryegrass  variety  on 1998 Irish Recommended  ListTable 6
Year Variety t DM ha *
’84’ Bastion 16.70
’95’ - ’98’ Anaconda  (T) 17.11
Source:  Irish Recommended  list, 1984-1999
A similar  story exists  with  regard  to late heading  varieties.  In terms  of overall 
system  production  costs, yield of DM ha * is important  and if it cannot  be 
improved  by conventional  means,  alternative  methods  such as genetic  
manipulation  or biotechnology  should  be investigated.
Other  criteria  are also important.  Ulyatt  (1981)  suggested  that an ideal plant  
would  have:-  “high  protein  content,  particularly  increased  sulphur  amino acids; 
high levels  of soluble  carbohydrate;  some features  such as thicker  cell walls  
in the soft tissues  or presence  of tannins  that would  either  slow the release  of 
soluble  protein  or render  it less soluble;  an easily  ruptured  epidermis,  vascular  
tissue  that is sufficient  to maintain  agronomic  merit but is fragile  to terms of 
(sheer)  strength; concentrations  of minerals  sufficient  to maintain  animal  health. ”
Add to this  a canopy  architecture  that affords  easy prehension  to the grazing 
animal  and the problem  would  be solved.  If only! We are now 18 years  further  
on and still awaiting  significant  progress.  However, there  are several  interesting  
developments  in the pipeline,  whilst  not necessarily  enhancing  the role of grass, 
should  ensure  its long-tenn  survival  in our systems  of production.  Research  
at IGER  has found  that some grasses  and forage  crops contain  high levels  of 
polyunsaturated  fats and that feeding  cattle  on these  crops  causes  the beef  itself  
to contain  higher  levels  of these healthier  fats. Green  plants  are a rich source 
of these  beneficial  acids  and early studies  show  that a small but useful  amount 
of forage  is absorbed  by the cattle and appears  in beef. Collaborative  work 
between  IGER  and Teagasc  Grange  is ongoing  in this area.
A major  problem  with our current  statutory  herbage  evaluation  system  is
Table 7
Cattle  grazing  preference  among  20 ryegrass  cultivars
Cultivar Heading  date Ploidy Preference  ranking*
Condessa Late Tetraploid 1
Bastion early Tetraploid 3
Hercules Late Diploid 7
Respect Mid Diploid 19
*l=highest  preference;  20=least  desirable 
Source:  O’Riordan,  1996
10
Table 8
Varietal  effects  on short-term  intake
Variety
A B sem
Sward  height  (mm) 238 243 4.4
Live leaf (%) 64 61 3.6
Intake/bite  (g DM) 0.8 0.9 0.06
Biting  rate (btes min ') 48 52 2.9
Intake/hour  (kg DM) 2.3 2.7 0.12
that it is based  on assessment  under  a cutting  regime.  For varieties  to sell and 
make money  for the breeder,  they have to be submitted  for evaluation  and 
essentially  found to yield better than the current  control  variety,  have high 
digestibility  and reasonably  persistency.  Nowhere  in our current  evaluation  
process  does the end-user  have anything  to say about  the quality  on offer. We 
are all familiar  with  the concept  of the customer  having  the final  say with  regard  
to quality,  real or perceived.  Why therefore  do we not apply  the same  rational  
to our four legged  brethren?  Some  work  caiTied  out in Grange  a few years  ago 
clearly  showed  animal  preference  for some varieties  over others  (Table  7).
What  are animals  displaying  here?  Call it preference,  choice  or palatability,  
but they are making  definite  choices.  It is not practical  or financially  viable  
to run  statistically  robust  animal  grazing  trials  to determine  the intake  potential  
of all varieties  submitted  for testing.  We need an alternative  approach:  how to 
gather  affordable  and repeatable  measurements  of animal  intake  for a range  of 
species,  varieties  or sward states?  An experimental  protocol  developed  to 
measure  short-term  intake  (1 hour) may offer some potential  if the results  in 
the short-term  can be correlated  with daily intakes  (Table  8).
Under  experimental  conditions,  variety  B had a significant  higher  intake  
potential  than variety  A. There  is a need to confirm  that differences  in intake  
bite ' also apply over the longer  term but in due course,  grasses  will be bred 
for increased  intake  at grazing.
Animal  resources
The animal  component,  our third tier in the system  hierarchy,  determines  
the demand  which  will vary for animal  type, genotype,  sex and physiological  
state.  Forage  resource,  location  and management  will all impact  on the success  
of the farmer  in providing  for the demand  of the animal.  Without  dwelling  unduly  
on this resource,  it is pivotal  to the system  and without  ruminants  to convert  
grass DM to animal  product,  grass would  have little value.
In terms of ruminant  livestock  numbers,  Irish  grassland  supports  in the region  
of 7.8 m cattle,  the vast majority  of which  are found  in beef  enterprises.  Sheep  
account  for approximately  8.3 m individuals  and others  such as horses,  deer,  
and goats  approximate  to 0.112  m (Table 9). In terms  of L.U. equivalents,  cattle
11
Table 9
Ruminant  livestock  numbers  in Ireland  June 1998
'000 head L.U. Equivalent
Cattle 7795 5646
Sheep 8373 1587
Others 112 80
Total 16280 7313
National  stocking  rate = 0.6 ha/LU (1.5 ac/LU)
Source:  CSO, June 1998
account  for 5.6 m compared  with 1.6 m sheep.  This equates  to a stocking  rate 
on the grassland  and rough  grazing  component  of utilised  agricultural  land of 
0.6 ha/LU  or 1.5 ac/LU."
Ruminant  production accounts  for 0.92 of gross  agricultural output  equivalent  
to £3 billion.  More  than half of this is accounted  for by beef, followed  closely 
by dairy  and lastly  sheep (Table  10). These  data  serve  to illustrate the importance  
of grass to the competitiveness  and sustainability  of our production  systems.
Table 10
Ruminant  production  as % of gross agricultural  output  1998
% Total*
Dairy
Beef
Sheep34
49
9
92 (=£3 billion)
*estimate
Source:  Fingleton  and Cushion,  1998
I would  argue  that over  the last 10-15  years,  researchers  and leading  farmers 
have focused  more on the animal,  looking  to breed  type and genetic  potential  
to make  a contribution  to overall  farm profitability.  In the dairy industry,  high 
genetic  merit  cows  have been introduced  which  are very efficient  at producing  
milk.  Arguably,  these animals  are of an extreme  type with  a high-energy demand  
and perhaps  less suited to low input systems  than the more traditional  cow. 
Certainly  there appear  to be fertility  and longevity  problems  associated  with 
these  animals.  Relative  to existing  standards  they  have the potential  to produce  
an extra  5 1 milk  day',  i.e. a 16% increase  in milk  yield  (Table  11). Such animals  
have an increased  intake  demand  which  has to be met from  grass. In the main 
this is achieved  by providing  increased  allowance  of high quality  feed.
In truth this has been achieved  by exploiting  existing  potentials  within  the 
grass crop, not by increasing  the grass potential  per se. Put differently,  we are
12
Table 11
Increasing  genetic  merit  - what happens?
P1N*,5  £9 vs PIN,, £61
Milk yield -1- 16% (5 litres/day  more milk)
Food intake + 4.2%
Milk yield/unit
food consumed + 11%
Liveweight  change
(kg/day;  150 days) +0.34 vs -0.02
* Profit index
so busy trying  to service  the increased  animal  potential  that nobody  is able to 
step back and look critically  at our raw material  with regard  to increasing  the 
potential  of the grass crop itself! In general  it would  appear  that the genetic  
potential  of breeding  stock in all grassland  systems  of production  is set to 
increase,  be it yield  of milk,  beef  or lamb.  It is therefore  likely that in the  future  
there will be increased  specialisation  of breed type for specific  purposes  and 
that the great  diversity  (inconsistencies)  witnessed  in our beef  herd will become  
a thing of the past.
Management  system
It is outside  the remit of this review  to address  specific  and detailed  
management  issues.  However,  certain  management  practices  may well change  
and evolve  in the times to come and so it is relevant  to at least consider  the 
essentials.  Management  system  is the uppermost  tier in our pyramid  which  can 
be sub-divided  into system  design and grazing  management.  A profitable  system  
will be a compromise  between  the feed demand  of the grazing  animal  and the 
pasture  supply  pattern  (+supplementation?).  Grazing  management  is the fine 
tuning  mechanism  and relates  to the day-to-day  decisions  such as ‘where  and 
when to move the grazing  animals ’.
It is a tall order  to develop  efficient  grassland  systems  that consume  cun'ent  
growth  when  approximately  60-79%  of annual  production  occurs  in 4 months.  
Consequently, systems  have  evolved  to the stage where  decisions  on oversupply  
(and deficit)  have to be made and implemented.  However,  the difficulty  lies 
in the fact that within  grassland  systems  there  are fewer  options  available  than 
in the more complex  production  systems  that use a range  of inputs,  produced  
either on the farm or produced  from outside  sources.
In simplistic  terms,  inputs  into grazing  systems  can be distilled  into stocking  
rate, nitrogen  (clover),  rotation  length  and severity  of defoliation.  These  are 
the factors  under  farmer  control.  By balancing  these inputs  the farmer  has to 
satisfy  3 basic objectives:
1. To achieve  the correct  balance  between  the land resources  available  and 
stock numbers  on the farm. Nitrogen  is the controlling  factor  here,
2. To ensure  that sufficient  silage is produced  for the winter  period.
13
3. Adjust  stocking  rate during  the season  to keep feed demand  and supply 
in the grazing  area in balance  as herbage  growth  rates change.
The land resources  available  and stock  number  on the farm are fixed.  These  
factors  in conjunction  with N determine  stocking  rate. High stocking  rates can 
only be sustained  with high levels  of N fertiliser  (@ 400 kg ha ') but at low 
stocking  rates a much  reduced  input of N or increased  dependence  on clover  
will suffice  (Table 12).
Table  13 summarises  the current  situation  existing  within  the EU in relation  
to legislation  enacted  or pending  to regulate  fertiliser  inputs.
Table 12
Stocking  rate and Nitrogen  requirement
Stocking  rate
L.U./haNitrogen  
kg ha '
1.5 0
2.1 100
2.4 225
2.8 300
3.0 390
Sample  of legislation  enactedTable 13
or pending  to regulate  fertiliser  input
Country
Norway Environment  tax on N fertiliser
Sweden Environment  tax on N fertiliser
NetherlandsLevy on Cadmium  in phosphate  fertilisers  
Mineral  balance  administration  system
Belgium Mineral  balance  administration  system
Ireland Cork County  Council  - restrictions  on N & P
Result  - long term downward  pressure  on inputs
From the grass farmers ’ perspective,  N inputs,  one of the few tools at his 
disposal  to control  grass supply,  is likely  to become  restricted  to a greater  or 
lesser  extent.  It will therefore  be important  to increase  the efficiency  of use 
of fertilisers,  organic  manures  and slurries.  Techniques  for rapid  in-field analysis 
of soil mineral  N have  been developed,  which  enable  fertilisers  to be used only 
in the amounts  required  to supplement  soil supplies  of nutrients  in relation  to 
herbage  production  targets.  Potentially  there  are savings  of up to 40% of fertiliser 
N use in intensive  systems  with no loss in production  and major  environmental  
benefits.  The impact  of GATT,  CAP, Agenda  2000 and general  consumer  
perceptions  must also be considered.
Aside from the input of N, there are not many input variables  left at the
14
farmer ’s disposal.  In terms  of a daily budget,  sward  height  and rotation  length  
are the main control  parameters.  Certainly,  some  of our current  guidelines  will 
alter depending  on the intake  requirements  of any particular  group  of animals.  
High merit cows at grass require  access  to tall leafy pasture  and cannot  be 
forced  to graze  as tightly  as current  recommendations  suggest  without  adversely  
affecting  performance.  Leaving  a high residual  herbage  mass  will cause  its own 
problems  with regard  to sward  quality  and will have to be removed.  This may 
necessitate  a second  group  of animals  behind  the leading  group  to clean out 
swards.  This is simple  in theory  but will further  complicate the grassland systems  
of the future.  Aids to increase  the precision  management  of grassland  farming  
in the future  will include  increased  use of strategic  and decision  support  models,  
equipment  for rapid analysis  of forage  quality  and ensiling  potential,  and for 
the assessment  of herbage  yield and green leaf mass for grazing.
Conclusions
We must look beyond  management  issues to sward genetics  to afford  
significant  progress  in grassland  production  systems, the objective  being  to raise  
the genetic  quality  and potential  of the grass  crop. In the short  to medium  term,  
factors  outside  farmers ’ control  are going  to dictate  the curse and direction  of 
change  with emphasis  being placed  on animal  welfare  and the environment  
before  the economics  of ruminant  production  at farm scale.  Grassland  systems  
have in the eyes of the public  a green  clean image  and perhaps  this will allow  
the product  to attract  a premium  price over and above other more intensive  
systems of production.  It is difficult  to envisage  major  changes  with our systems  
given the relatively  few input variables  at farmers ’ disposal.  Consequently,  it 
will be up to the breeders  and nutritionists  to ‘design ’ the herbage  varieties  of 
tomorrow.  However,  it is the responsibility  of the grassland/grazing  researcher  
to set the targets  - tell the breeder  what  is required.  To do this requires  a vibrant  
and visionary  research  programme  that is adequately  funded.
References
Brereton,  A. J. (1995).  Regional  and year-to-year  variation  in production.  In: Irish 
Grasslands  their biology  and management  (Eds. D. W. Jeffrey,  M. B. Jones and 
J. H. McAdam).  pp. 12-22. Royal Irish Academy,  Dublin.
Collins,  D. (1985).  Forage  production  in temperate  climatic  zones.  Research  Report  
1984. An Foras Taluntais,  Dublin.
C.S.O.,  June (1989).
Culleton,  N., and Murphy,  W. F. (1987).  Effects  of seeding  rate and of mixtures  of Lolium  
multiflorum  Lam.  and Lolium  perenne  L. on productivity.  Irish  Journal  of Agricultural  
Research  26, 93-104.
Davies,  D. A., Fothergill,  M. and Morgan,  C. T. (1992).  Assessment  of contrasting  
perennial  ryegrass,  with and without  clover,  under  continuous  sheep  stocking  in the 
uplands.  4. Animal  performance  in years  4-6. Grass  and Forage  Science  47, 245- 
258.
Fingleton,  W. A., and Cushion,  M. (1988). Irish  Agriculture  in Figures.  Rural  Economy,  
Teagasc.
15
Frame,  J. and Tiley,  G. E. D. (1988).  Herbage  productivity  of secondary  grass species.  
Proceedings  of I2th General  Meeting  European  Grassland  Federation,  Dublin  
Ireland,  pp. 189-193.
Gordon,  F. J. (1996).  Potential  milk production  from grass and limiting  factors. Irish 
Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association  Journal.  30, 103-114.
Jones,  M. B. and Carter,  T. R. (1992).  European  grassland  production  in a changing  
climate.  Proceedings  of 14tli General  Meeting  European  Grassland  Federation,  pp. 
97-110.  Lahti, Finland.
Lambert,  M. G,, Devantier,  B. P., Nes, P. and Penny,  P. E. (1985).  Losses  of nitrogen  
phosphorous  and sedimentary  run-off  from hill country  under different  fertilizer  
and grazing  management  regimes.  New Zealand  Journal  of  Agricultural  Research.  
28, 371-379,
Leafe, E. L. (1978).  Physiological,  environmental  and management  factors  of importance  
to maximum  yield of the grass crop. In: Maximising  yields  of crops. ADAS-ARC  
Symposium,  Harrogate,  H.M.S.O.,  London.
Lee, J, (1984).  Suitability  and productivity  of land resources  of EC-10  for grassland  
use. A study carried  out on behalf  of the European  Community,  pp. 101-131.  
Johnstown  Castle  Research  Centre.  An Foras Taluntais,  Dublin.
Morrison,  J. (1981).  The potential  of legumes  for forage  production.  In: Legumes  and 
fertilisers  in grassland  systems.  Winter  Meeting  1981, British  Grassland  Society,  
Hurley,  U.K. pp. 1-10,
O’Kiely,  P. (1994).  The cost of feedstuff  for cattle.  Technical  bulletin  No. 6. R&H Hall, 
151 Thomas  St.. Dublin,  Ireland.
O’Riordan,  E. G. (1966). Cattle  grazing  preference  among  ryegrass  cultivars.  Agriculture  
Research  Forum,  UCD, Dublin,  pp. 49-50.
Parsons,  A. J. (1988).  The effect of season  and management  on the growth  of grass  
swards.  In: The Grass Crop (Eds. M. B. Jones and A. Lazenby).  pp. 129-177.
Rhodes,  1. and Webb,  K. J. (1993).  Improvement  of white  clover.  Outlook  on Agriculture  
22. 189-194.
Sheath,  G. W, and Clark, D. A. (1996).  Management  of grazing  systems:  Temperate  
pastures.  In: The ecology  and  management  of  grazing  systems  (Eds.  J. Hodgson  and 
A. W. Illius).  pp. 301-323.  CAB International,  Wallingford,  U.K.
Ulyatt,  M. J. (1981).  The feeding  value of herbage:  can it be improved?  New Zealand  
Journal  of Agricultural  Science  15, 200-205
16
Maximising  the Potential  of Farm-  
Produced  Forage  with New Varieties
D. H. HIDES
Institute  of Grassland  and Environmental  Research,  Plas Gogerddan,  
Aberystwyth,  Ceredigion  SY23 3EB.
1) INTRODUCTION
Herbage  plant  breeding  has made  a significant  contribution  to the profitability  
of grassland  agriculture  and ruminant  production  and the Welsh Plant  Breeding  
Station,  now the Institute  of Grassland  and Environmental  Research  (IGER),  
founded  by Sir George  Stapledon  in Aberystwyth  in 1919, has played  a major  
role in this success.  The long term nature  of plant breeding  programmes  
necessitates  that breeders  plan well ahead  when setting  breeding  targets.  This 
is made  difficult  because  political  pressures  and policies  over the last 80 years  
have had more  impact  on grassland  agriculture  than changes  brought  about  by 
the industry  itself.  The development  of forage  plant  breeding  can therefore  be 
looked  at in three distinct  phases:
a) Breeding  in an era of increasing  production
For the first fifty years  after  the founding of the Welsh  Plant  Breeding  Station,  
plant improvement  was targeted  towards  providing  varieties  which  would  
increase  ruminant  output  per hectare.  This resulted  from the need to increase  
food  production  during  and after  the Second  World  War. Breeding  concentrated  
primarily  on increasing  dry matter  yield  (Breese,  1968)  and this generally  gave  
varieties  with high growth  potential  up to flowering.  Research  in the 50’s and 
60’s showed  that ryegrass  species  were the most useful  in temperate  regions  
because  they produced  good yields  of high quality  forage  (Raymond,  1969;  
Walters,  1975) and responded  well to nitrogen  fertilizer.  Therefore,  from the 
mid 60’s onwards  there was a rapid decline  in the use of other  species  and at 
present  over 90% of the grass seed sown in the UK is made up of perennial  
ryegrass,  Italian  ryegrass,  and hybrids  between  these  two species  (MAFF  1997).
b) Breeding  in an era of overproduction
Over production  of ruminant  products  from the early 70’s onwards  has led 
to a major  change  in breeding  objectives.  Current  targets  aim at increasing  the 
efficiency  of ruminant  production  to maintain  farm profitability  without  
necessarily  increasing  output.  While  a good dry matter  yield is still necessary,  
traits like nitrogen  use efficiency  (Wilkins  etal, 1997),  quality  (Wilkins,  1995;  
Humphreys,  1996) and an extended  growing  season  have become  the major  
targets.
c) Breeding  in an era of agricultural  sustainability
Present  thinking  on the future  direction  of grassland  farming  suggests  that 
there will be an increasing  emphasis  of sustainable  production  systems  where
17
both the output  of agricultural  products  and the development  of the rural  
countryside  will be given  equal  consideration.  A sustainable  grassland  agriculture 
will encompass  the whole  range of fanning  systems  from low to high input  
and all of these will rely increasingly  on farm produced  feed. Plant breeding  
objectives  must therefore  endeavour  to develop  new varieties  which  satisfy  all 
these requirements.
2. RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS  IN GRASS  VARIETY  PRODUCTION
Grass varieties  currently  emanating  from breeding  programmes  at 
Aberystwyth  reflect  the emphasis  placed  on improving  the efficiency  of 
production  of ruminant  products.  The multidisciplinary  approach  to plant  
breeding  at Aberystwyth  has enabled  a wide range of breeding  objectives  to 
be considered.  Basic research  on genome  mapping  and genetic  engineering  
provides  the know how and material  for selecting  for novel traits while the 
ruminant  nutrition  group  has enabled  breeders  to give increased  attention  to 
traits which  influence  the efficiency  of the ruminant  animal.
a Nitrogen  use efficiency  (NUE)
Nitrogen  is a key requirement  both for plant  growth  and as a building  block  
for plant proteins.  Making  more efficient  use of nitrogen  both inorganic  and 
organically  fixed  by white clover  will both lead to cheaper  fodder  and hopefully  
reduce  nitrogen  leaching  thereby  assisting  with environmental  protection.  One 
approach  to improving  nitrogen  use efficiency  (NUE)  is to even  out the normal  
seasonal  growth  curve  of ryegrass  to give increased  early spring  and autumn  
production  whilst  maintaining  high yields  for conservation.  AberElan,  the first 
variety to  be developed  from  this programme  shows  improved  nitrogen  recovery  
at low and high levels of inorganic  nitrogen  application  and improved  grass  
clover  compatibility  (Fig. 1). The latest  variety,  AberDart,  combines  high  yields  
of good quality  forage  with significantly  better  spring  and autumn  production  
than other comparable  varieties  (Fig. 2).
Grass  only With white  clover  
■ Talbot  BCondesa  □ Jumbo  □ AberElan  
Figure  I - Improved  nitrogen  recovery  of AberElan
b) Herbage  quality
During  the last thirty years,  breeders  have concentrated  on improving  the 
energy  value  of forage  and the value  of this to the ruminant  animal  is a product  
of intake x digestibility  x utilisation.  Research  in the 60’s and 70’s (Green,
1994
■ AberDart  □ Talbot
Figure  2 - Seasonal  yield  of AberDart
RvP - Leaf —■- Bb1277  - Leaf 
■ RvP - Stem —M ■ Bb1277  - Stem  
Figure  3 - Decline  in % D.M.D.
19
HIGHER  QUALITY  
MEANS  MORE  MILK!
Results  from an independent  trial over  2 years  on 6 commercial  farms
□ RvP BTribune
Dry
Maner
Digestibiitty75
65
55
Spring
Extm  milk 
per cow 
daily  
from
TRIBUNE
Vy pintSummer
1 Vj pint 1 pint
OVERALL  = 6% MORE  MILK FROM  TRIBUNE
Figure  4 - Milk  production  from  Tribune  and RvP
1968) established  that digestibility  declined  as yield increased  and breeding  
would  therefore  need  to look  at the balance  between yield  and quality.  Laboratory 
based  pepsin-cellulase  techniques  were  developed  enabling  cheap  and repeatable  
measurements  to be made  on breeding  material.  It was also found that the water  
soluble  carbohydrate  content  (WSC)  of grasses  is an important  element  of 
digestibility  being the readily  digestible  component  of the plant cell. Present  
breeding  programmes  have had considerable  success  in using  these  techniques  
for improving  nutritive  value of perennial,  Italian  and hybrid  ryegrasses.
In Italian  ryegrass,  material  collected  in the Po Valley  region  of Italy  (Bp  1277) 
was found  to have high levels of stem digestibility  and WSC combined  with 
high autumn  yield, rapid regrowth  and good persistency  but had poor  
conservation  yield,  poor disease  resistance  and low cold tolerance.  It was also 
found that the high stem digestibility  which  is so important  for good silage  
production  was slower  to decline  than in other comparable  varieties  (Fig 3). 
A concentrated  breeding  programme  using  this material  had led to three  varieties 
which  are currently  on UK Recommended  Lists (Tribune, Trajan,  AberComo).  
Tribune,  the first of these,  was tested  on six commercial  dairy farms  and gave 
significantly  higher  milk yields  than a commercial  variety  used widely  at the 
time (Fig. 4). This information  has helped  to confirm  the benefits  of high DMD 
& WSC  and has led to the development  of the other  two varieties.  These  varieties 
have been a significant  step forward  in providing  a long  grazing  season  combined 
with high conservation  yields of high quality  forage.
Perennial  ryegrass  material  collected  in Switzerland  and Hungary  was found  
to have  high levels of WSC  but poor  disease  resistance  and work  at IGER  (Munro  
et al, 1992) showed  clearly  this material  had the potential  to improve  Iamb  
production  (Fig. 5) giving breeders  the incentive  to develop  these  lines.  Breeding
20
Lamb  
production 
(Kg/ha  
2 year mean)
350
High Low 
WSC WSCHigh Low 
WSC WSC
Lowland  Upland
(Morfa  Mawr) (Bronydd  Mawr)
Figure  5 - Lamb  production  from  perennial  ryegrass  with contrasting
WSC  content
aimed  at improving  dry matter  yield and its distribution  and disease  resistance  
whilst  maintaining  the high WSC levels  has led to the development  of a late 
flowering  diploid  ryegrass  variety  which  is currently  in official  trials  in the UK. 
An experimental  variety  of perennial  ryegrass  exhibiting  high levels  of WSC  
throughout  the growing  season  is currently  being  fed to dairy cattle  in a zero 
grazing  trial at IGER  in a project  funded  by MDC,  MAFF  and Germinal  
Holdings.  Early results  (Table 1) are extremely  encouraging  showing  
significantly  higher  milk production  from this variety  than the IGER  variety  
AberElan  which  has the best simulated  grazing  yields  on the NIAB recommended  
List. This work  has also shown  that dairy  cattle  have  greater  intakes  on the high 
WSC material  than AberElan  and are converting  more of the plant protein  
into milk as shown  by the reduced  production  of ammonia  and N in the urine
Table 1
Mean  effect of treatment  on feed intake,  diet, dry matter  digestibility,  milk 
yield and milk consumption,  adjusted  for covariate
Grass Variety: AberElan AberDove s.e.d. Sigf
Forage  DM intake,  kg/d 10.8 12.5 0.65*
Diet DM digestibility,  g/g 0.64 0.71 0.014 **
Digestibility  DM intake,  kg/d 9.16 11.31 0.381 **
Milk yields,  kg/d 12.6 15.3 0.87*
Milk yield/digestibility  DM 1.38 1.35 0.065
Intake,  kg/kg
tSignificance  of effect: *=P<0.05,  **=P<0.01
21
Table  2
Mean  effect  of treatment  on N partitioning
Variety: AberDove AberElan s.e.d. Probability
N intake,  g/d 268 278 14.2 0.530
N output,  g/d 
Urine 71 100 5.0 0.001
Faeces 103 113 10.9 0.400
Milk 82 69 6.2 0.075
Total 256 282 9.4 0.035
N balance,  g/d 12 -4 10.3 0.180
(Table  2). This early finding  has important  implications  for future breeding  
objectives  where  the target  of improved  rumen efficiency  is now a viable option. 
A new variety,  AberDart  (Fig. 6), which  combines  high levels  of digestibility  
and WSC  with high  dry matter  yield and a long  growing  season  will be available 
in the UK in 20(X).
c) Hybrid  ryegrass
Hybrid  ryegrasses  are relatively  new species  where  the aim has been to 
combine  the best attributes  of perennial  and Italian  ryegrass.  Italian  ryegrass  
possesses  considerable  growth  potential  with a long growing  season  but its 
persistency  in response  to grazing  and climatic  stress  is limited,  while  re-growth  
is often  stemmy  and of low quality.  Perennial  ryegrass  is more  leafy,  persistent  
and shows  better  environmental  stress  tolerance  but does not have the growth 
potential  of Italian  ryegrass  for conservation.  The aim is therefore  to provide  
flexible  varieties  suitable  for both  grazing  and conservation with  improved  stress
1994
■ AberDart  □ Talbot
Figure  6 - Seasonal  trends  in digestibility
22
Dry Matter  
YieJd  in t/baGround  CoverMid-Season  D 
value  
□ ROBERTA  
B ABEREXCEL
Figure  7 - Performance  of AberExcel  in 4th harvest  year
tolerance  giving  a life span of between  4 and 6 years.  The first varieties  developed  
at IGER  were closer  in type to the Italian  ryegrass  parent  and Augusta,  which  
has been widely used  for a number  of years,  showed  improved  intake  and quality  
leading  to improved  beef  live weight  gains  compared  to diploid  Italian  ryegrass  
on six commercial  farms.  New  hybrids  being  developed  at IGER  are a significant  
improvement  on Augusta  and combine  the best traits of the two parent  species.  
The newest  of these, AberLinnet  and AberExcel,  have recently  been  
recommended  for use and combine  high  mid-season  ‘D’ value and  WSC  content  
with a long growing  season,  high conservation  yields and good persistency  
(Fig. 7). At present  ryegrass  hybrids  are being underutilized  and there are 
considerable  opportunities  in the dairy sector  where a long grazing  season  
combined  with high quality  conservation  is essential.
4) FUTURE  DIRECTION  AND OPPORTUNITIES
There are some exciting  but increasingly  challenging  opportunities  for 
herbage  breeding  in the new Millennium  with an increasing  emphasis  on 
agricultural  sustainability  and the consequent  increased  dependency  on home  
produced  ruminant  feed.
a) Efficient  use of forage  production
A key element  in the efficiency  of these systems  will be to optimise  the 
protein/energy  balance  in the rumen.  While  breeders  have made significant  
advances  in improving  the energy  value  of grasses  through improved  digestibility  
and water  soluble  carbohydrate  (WSC) content,  recent  developments  following  
the BSE crisis and the reduced  public  acceptance  of using  feeds  like fishmeal  
suggest  that there  is now an urgent need to produce  more  on-farm  plant  protein.  
Increasing  the usage  of legume  protein  is one method  of satisfying  this demand
23
Highly  soluble  
Plant  Proteins
Urea
Urine
HemicellulosefnemiceuL  Mainly {cellulose
Figure  8 - Ruminal  N metabolism
but sustainable  systems  of ruminant  production  are impeded  by generally  low 
utilisation  of forage  protein.  Up to 40% of the dietary  nitrogen  (N) in fresh  
forage  may be lost as ammonia  because  of the inability  of rumen  microbes  
to capture  the non-protein  nitrogen  (NPN)  release  during  the proteolysis of plant  
proteins  (Fig. 8). Leaf proteins  are rapidly  attacked  by plant and microbial  
proteases  on ingestion.  If release  of NPN and energy  in the rumen  are 
asynchronous,  large quantities  of ammonia  may be absorbed  before  microbe  
assimilation  into protein  occurs.  Significant  improvements  in the use of forage  
protein  can be made  by providing  additional  energy  to increase  the N capture  
by rumen  microbes.  The development  of high WSC accumulating  gasses  
(Humphreys,  1989)  has, to some  extent,  achieved  this but further  potential  to 
increase  utilisation  of forage  protein  by breeding  to reduce  protease  activity  
may also exist. The important  role that plant  proteases  can have  in rumen  protein  
degradation  has only  recently  been appreciated  (Theodorou  etal, 1996),  although 
proteolysis  mediated  by plant enzymes  during  ensilage  is well documented  
(Wetherall  etal, 1995).  Breeding  grasses  to modify  plant  protease  activity could 
therefore  have  far reaching  consequences  in terms  of efficient  use of N in animal 
production.  For example,  a naturally  occurring  mutant  gene  has been  transferred  
from meadow  fescue  to ryegrass  which  reduces  the normal  breakdown  of 
chlorophyll  binding  protein  during  leaf  senescence  and thus reduces leaf  protein  
degradation  (Thomas  & Smart,  1993).  The combination  of high energy  (WSC, 
digestibility)  with reduced  protein  degradation  in one variety  is an exciting  
prospect.
b) Healthier  ruminant  products
At present  the consumption  of ruminant  products  is suffering  severely  in 
the aftermath  of the BSE crisis with a need to demonstrate  that meat and milk 
are safe, healthy  products.  Supermarkets  and consumers  are increasingly  
dictating  the quality of the product  they require  so breeders  must  begin  to develop
24
Figure  9 -Linolenic  acid levels  in grass  species
new and novel  breeding  objectives.  For instance,  ryegrass  species,  especially  
Italian ryegrass,  contain  high levels  of unsaturated  fatty acids  which  could  help  
reduce  blood cholesterol  levels through  their incorporation  into ruminant  
products (Fig. 9). Thus, plant  breeders  are currently  developing  selection  criteria  
for increasing  the levels of omega-3  linoleic  acid in their breeding  material.
c) Improved  ruminant  intake
Having  increased the yield  and quality  of grasses and lengthened  the growing  
season,  plant  breeders  would  dearly  like to increase  the intake  of the ruminant  
animal to improve  utilisation.  Breeding  for intake has, however,  been hampered  
by a lack  of knowledge  about  the traits  that control it. Grazing  behaviour  research  
both  at IGER  North  Wyke  (Penning  et al, 1998)  and in Ireland  is giving a  valuable  
insight  into these  factors  that influence  variation  in intake  by ruminant  animals.  
In the near  future we should be able to determine  which  plant  traits  are important  
and therefore  begin  to actually  improve  this important  component  of ruminant  
production.
CONCLUSION
Plant breeding  has and is making  a significant  contribution  to maintaining  
the profitability  of the grassland  sector. Future  changes  in CAP  payouts  and 
consumer  preferences  will dictate  that farmers  will have to rely increasingly  
on home-produced  ruminant  feed  to remain  viable.  As Ireland  probably  has the 
best climate  for forage  production  within  the EU and certainly  some  of the best 
farmers  then this should  pose no major  challenge.  There  is however  a need to 
give grass a true status as a crop which  forms the cornerstone  of ruminant  
farming.  To maximise  the potential  of this crop farms  should  have a realistic  
reseeding  policy to ensure  that they keep up with the developments  being  
introduced  into new varieties  by plant breeders.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Herbage  plant breeding  programmes  at the Institute  of Grassland  and
25
Environmental  Research  (IGER)  are funded  by the Ministry  of Agriculture,
Fisheries  and Food (MAFF)  and Germinal  Holdings  Ltd.
References
Breese,  E. L. (1968).  Improving  Britain ’s grassland  output.  SPAN II, 3.
Green,  J. O. (1968).  Yield  and digestibility.  Grass  Conservation  Handbook.  Nat. Grass.  
Cong. Conference,  Bristol 1967, 22-30.
Humphreys,  M. O. (1989).  Water-soluble  carbohydrates  in perennial  ryegrass  breeding.  
II. Cultivar  and hybrid  progeny  performance  in cut plots.  Grass  and Forage  Science,  
44, 37-244.
MAFF  (1977).  Seed Traders  Annual  Return  Summary.
Miller,  L. A., Neville.  M. A., Baker,  D. H., Evans,  R. T, Theodora,  M. K., MacRae,  
J. C., Humphreys,  M. O. and Moorby,  J. M. (1999).  Milk production  from dairy  
cows offered  perennial  ryegrass  selected  for high water soluble  carbohydrate  
concentrations  compared  to a control  grass.
Munro,  J. M. M., Davies,  D. A., Evans,  W. B. and Scurlock,  R. V. (1992).  Animal  
production  evaluation  of herbage  varieties.  I. Comparison  of Aurora  with Frances, 
Talbot  and Melle  perennial  ryegrass  when grown  alone and with clover.  Grass & 
Forage  Science,  47, 259-273.
Penning,  P. D., Gibb,  M. J., Parsons,  A. J., Orr, R. J. and Harvey,  A. (1998).  Behavioural  
and physiological  factors  limiting  intake  by grazing  ruminants.  In: Extensification 
of Beef and Sheep  Production  on Grassland.  Occasional  Publication  No. 3, EU 
Concerted  Action  CT93-0947,  Dublin,  Sept. 1996.
Raymond,  W. F. (1969).  The nutritive  value of forage  crops.  Advances  in Agronomy,  
21, 1-107.
Theodorou,  M. K., Merry,  R. J. and Thomas,  H. (1996).  Is proteolysis  in the mmen  of 
grazing  animals  mediated  by plant enzymes?  British  Journal  of Nutrition,  75, 507.
Thomas,  H. and Smart,  C. M. (1993).  Crops  that stay green.  Annals  of Applied  Biology,  
123, 193-219.
Walters,  R. J. K. (1975).  Variation  between  grass  species  and varieties  in voluntary  intake.  
Proc. 5th Gen. Meeting,  European  Grassland  Fed., Uppsala,  1973, 184-192.
Wetherall,  J. A., Armstrong,  D. G., Finlayson,  H. J. and Rooke,  J. A. (1995).  Reduction  
of proteolysis  during  ensilage  of perennial  ryegrass  by protease  inhibitors.  Journal  
of the Science  of Food and Agriculture,  68, 497-505.
Wilkins,  P. W. (1995).  Independence  of dry matter  yield and leaf yield among  perennial  
ryegrass  varieties  differing  in seasonal  yield distribution.  Grass & Forage  Science,  
50, 199-208.
Wilkins,  P. W., MacDuff,  J. H., Raistrick,  N. andCollison,  M. (1977). Varietal  differences  
in perennial  ryegrass for  nitrogen  use efficiency  in leaf  growth following  defoliation:  
performance  in flowing  solution  culture  and its relationship  to yield  under  simulated  
grazing  in the field. Euphytica,  98, 109-119.
26
Developments  to Enhance  Sward  Intake  
and Quality  (Mid-Season)
I. A CASEY  and P. G. DILLON  
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fennoy,  Co. Cork.
1) Introduction
Prior  to the introduction  of milk  quotas  in Ireland,  the objective  on intensive  
dairy farms was to maximise  sales from the farm. This was achieved  by 
increasing  cow numbers  and milk yield per cow. This strategy  resulted  in very 
rapid growth  in milk quota  in Ireland  (55 per year) and this rate of increase  
was higher  than in other  European  countries.  The introduction  of milk quotas  
resulted  in quota  size rather  than land area being the limiting  factor  on many  
dairy farms.  The blueprint  for efficient  dairying  in Ireland  recommended  from 
Moorepark  changed  to reflect  this new reality.  Profit is now maximised  by 
cashing  in more on grass.  This has been achieved  on spring-calving  herds by 
(1) calving  cows closer  to the start of the grazing  season  i.e. Lebruary/March  
calving,  (2) Turning  cows  out earlier  to spring  grass,  (3) Reduced  stocking  rate, 
thereby  increasing  the supply  of grass efficiently  in spring  and autumn.
This has resulted  in an increase  of 72% to 85% of total milk produced  from  
grazed  grass.  The level  of milk  production  as well as improved  milk  composition  
is important  in maximising  profit.  Milk  protein  and composition  will be largely  
influenced  by the quantity  of grass eaten/cow/day.  Therefore  the factors  that 
influence  daily herbage  intake  will be important. The main  factors  are the intake  
and quality  of grass supply.  To enhance  performance  further  we must  continue  
to improve  these factors.
The paper  will examine:  (1) the need to improve  the intake  and quality  of 
grass  supply  and the work  ongoing  to achieve  this, (2) The links  that have  been 
established  between  the industry,  production  research  and plant breeders  to 
achieve  this objective.
The need to increase  intake
The intake  requirements  of the dairy cow are increasing  and we will have  
to enhance  our swards  to suit this. The increase  in intake  requirements  of cows  
at Moorepark  clearly  illustrate  this (Tables  1 and 2).
The demand  of the animal  is controlled  by the drive of the animal  to feed.  
This drive  is controlled  by the breed,  age and reproductive  stage  of the animal.  
This has been highlighted  with the work on high genetic  merit animals  at
Table 1
Daily grass intake  (kg DM/cow)  measured  at Moorepark  for cows at various  
levels  of milk yield (May to .luly period)
Milk yield (kg/cow  4,681  5,617  6,553  7,490
Dry matter  intake  (kg DM/cow/day)  15.2 16.8 18.6 20.3
27
Table 2
Intake  requirement  for cows with different  yield potential  on a grazed  pasture
(mid-May  period)
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 25 30 35 40
Liveweight  (kg/day) 540 545 550 555
Liveweight  change  (kg/day) +0.2 +0.2 +0,2 +0.2
M.E. requirement
Maintenance 57 58 58 59
Milk yield 128 154 179 205
Weight  change 7 7 7 7
Total (MJ) 192 219 244 271
DM1 (kg/day) 16.0 18.2 20.3 22.6
Moorepark  where  the requirements  and demands  of the high genetic  animals  
have been shown  to vary. The results  show  that the high genetic  merit  animals  
have a higher  intake  which  was achieved  with a higher  biting  rate rather  than 
an increased  grazing  time (Table  3). The potential  of these  animals  to increase  
biting rate suggests  a high potential  to increase  intake in optimum  sward  
conditions.  These  optimum  conditions  must  be understood  in order  to maximise  
the potential  of this increased  animal  demand.  The programme  at Moorepark  
is currently  addressing  these issues.
RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS  TO INCREASE  GRASS  INTAKE
1. Precision  management
In the past, emphasis  was on the quantity  of the grass supply  and animal 
performance  was assessed  using  milk yield. Recently  significant  progress  has 
been made  in bringing  the feeding  of herbage  by grazing  to the same level of 
precision  and control  as can be achieved  indoors. The use of a precision  feeding  
at pasture  has overcome  the control  of quantity  of grass reaching  the animal 
(O’Donovan  and Dillon  1997).  The development  of precision  management  of 
this kind means  that irrespective  of periodic  fluctuations,  herbage  production  
potential  is fully exploited.  These  developments  were  explained  in detail  at the 
1998 Spring  conference.
Table 3
The effect  of cow genetic  index on grazing  behaviour
High RBI Medium  RBI
Grazing  time (hrs) 10.2 10.2
Biting  rate (No/min) 54.5 48,7
Grazing  bouts (No) 5.5 4.8
Ruminating  (% of time) 26.4 21.0
O’Connell  el al, 1999
28
2. Identification  and control  of sward  structural  factors  affecting  intake
We have now a method  to manage  grass supply  (precision  management).  
We need to also ensure  that the sward  is presented  in a manner  that can optimise  
intake.  This for example  could allow the increased  demand  of higher  genetic  
merit  animals  to be fully exploited.  An understanding  is required  of what  these  
optimum  sward  conditions  are, and what  effect  their  link to intake  is? This must  
be achieved  to optimise  the potential  of different  animal  feed demands.  In the 
past there was inadequate  information  on the traits that could  enhance  grass  
intake and utilisation  so as to overcome  these restrictions.  This type of 
information  is critical  for plant breeders.
Would  an increase  in height  or density  of the sward increase  intake?  Recently  
production  research  work at IGER  in the UK, at Crossnacreevy  in Northern  
Ireland  and at Moorepark  is helping  to gain an understanding  of the plant-animal  
interface  in detail  and so address  these issues.  It has allowed  the identification  
of the relationship  of sward  structural  features  to grass intake.  The work has 
resulted  in an understanding  of the grass canopy  structure  and height  suitable  
to optimise  the relationship  between  herbage  offered  and herbage  intake.  Also, 
techniques  have evolved  that allow the assessment  of different  varieties  of 
varying  structure.  This approach  has led to a clearer  understanding  of plant  
structural  features  that limit intake  and utilisation  (Casey,  Brereton,  Laidlaw  
and McGilloway  1997).  This level of detail has indicated  that the leaf density  
of a sward  has a direct  effect  on bite size.  A decrease  in all sward  bite dimensions  
also occurred  with decreasing  leaf density  (Table  4).
However, the height  of the sward  has been  shown to  have  a greater  influence.  
Using  these  techniques  the effect  of stem and other  structural  features  can also 
be explored. At mid-season  there  is likely  to be increased  selective  grazing  due 
to the presence  of stem. The identification  of, and control  of these midseason  
structural  features  that effect  intake  should  therefore  also enhance  utilisation  
at this  time of year. Consideration  of the control  of these  structural  differences  
was also examined  by detailed  leaf  development  work  (Casey,  Brereton,  Laidlaw  
and McGilloway  1999).  The potential  for selecting  for sward  structural  character  
is also being explored.
Table  4
Technique  to assess  the effect  of sward  leaf density  on bite size
High Leaf Intermediate Low Leaf
Sward  bite (g DM) 1.27 1.14 0.66
Fistulate  bite (g DM) 1.21 1.04 0.95
Bite depth (cm) 13.3 12.4 10.4
Bite area (cm^) 67 60 59
Bite volume  (cm^) 918 749 610
HL = High Leaf Density
IL = Higher  Intermediate  Leaf Density
LL = Lower  Leaf Density
29
This work  is leading  to the understanding  of the structural limitation imposed  
by the sward.  This information  has been urgently  needed  by plant breeders  so 
that they can consider  plant structural  traits of importance.  Information  on the 
structural  features  that affect  intake are important  to avoid  any knock-on effects  
on sward utilisation  and regrowth  potential  when selecting  grasses  of high 
digestibility.  This issue has been emphasised  and this has highlighted  the 
importance  for information  in this area (Laidlaw  and Reed 1993).
3. Restriction  due to sward  structure  at farm level
An example  of the restriction  on intake  due to structure  is given here. In 
general  a low grazing  height  was much  more  evident  on farms rather  than high 
post-grazing  height  (O’Donovan,  Dillon  and Stakelum,  1998).  Severe  grazing  
at pasture  obviously  results  in a restricted  intake,  but also even at normal  
recommended  grazing  intensities  intake  is restricted  (Figure  1).
This is due to the physical  restriction  imposed  on the animal  by the structure  
of the sward  (Figure  2). Not only does this arise due to decreased  quantity  of 
leaf and reduced  height  as the sward  is depleted  but it is also due to increased  
time  spent  selectively grazing  against  stem.  Although  recommended  tight  grazing 
at pasture  may have beneficial  effects  for regrowth  it has a negative  effect  on 
intake.
£30
25
M 20
T)
« 15I
"O
O)•oaa>
X
lU10
0 1
days resident
Figure  1 - The restrictions  on intake  as the sward  height  is depleted
30
Figure  2 - The reduction  on intake  associated  with increased  residence
time on pasture
The need to optimise  quality
An optimum  quality  sward  is one that suits the nutritional  requirements  of 
the animal.  The quality  of the sward  has been shown  to directly  effect  the milk  
yield of the cow. This work at Moorepark  has highlighted  that the sward  must  
have a suitable  dry matter  digestibility,  water  soluble  carbohydrate  and crude  
protein  content  (Table  5). There  is a need  to more  objectively define  the chemical  
qualities  required  to suit the nutritional  demands  of the animal.  For example  
increased  rumination  was observed  in high genetic  animals.  A decrease  in 
rumination  time may be possible  if quality  to enhance  digestion  in the rumen  
was more clearly  defined.  This would  allow more time for grazing.  More
Table 5
The effect of grass organic  matter  digestibility  on (OMD)  intake
High Medium Low
OMD (%) sward 79.6 77.1 74.4
DMI kg/cow/day 19.8 14.3 12.6
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 19.5 18.3 17.2
Stakelum  and Dillon, 1989
31
emphasis  recently  has been placed  on increasing  efficiency  of ruminant  
production  by enhancing  sward  quality.  This issue has been highlighted  by the 
industry,  particularly  at mid-season,  when alterations  in milk quality  are 
particularly  associated  with a reduction  in sward  quality.
Recent  developments  to enhance  quality
1. Identification  of factors  affecting  sward  quality
Variation  in the morphological  and chemical quality of the grass swards  needs 
to be considered.  Morphological  variation  occurs  because  there are two types  
of tiller, leafy vegetative  and stemmy  reproductive.  At mid-winter  there is a 
mass conversion  of tillers from the vegetative  to the reproducing  stage. Not 
only is there a difference  in nutritional  quality  between  these tiller types but 
also the reproductive  tillers increase  the time spent selectively  grazing  and 
thereby it affects grass intake.  Work  carried  out by Dillon  and Stakelum  indicated  
that defoliation  at the correct  time  should  overcome  this problem, by decapitating  
reproductive  tillers. However  year to year variation  in weather  conditions  in 
spring  influences  both the rate of tiller recruitment  and the duration  of tiller  
recruitment  with the result  that the amount  of reproductive  material  in summer  
is variable.
2. Controlling  sward  quality  
A. Morphology
Work is ongoing  to examine  the relationship  of reproductive  tiller  
development  and tiller appearance  to spring  temperature.  The aim of the work  
is to allow herbage  growth  and quality  in mid-season  to be predicted  and to 
develop  a management  programme  that will overcome  the problem  of late 
flowering  tillers.  This information  will allow farmers  to predict  and control  
summer  grass  quality.  This information  could  be incorporated  into the Teagasc  
growth  model so that grass growth  and quality  can be predicted  and action  
taken to minimise  adverse  effects  of a high proportion  of reproductive  tillers.  
The relationship  is different  for different  varieties.  The work is expanding  to 
examine  variation  under real grazing  conditions  to avoid bias caused  by 
examining  swards  under  simulated  grazing  conditions  alone.
To complement  this work  area, Aberystwyth  has indicated  that it is possible  
to breed a variety  that does not head. A research  programme  is targeted  at 
developing  varieties  that have improved  vegetative  growth  (Wilkins and Davies,  
1994).  A knock-on  effect  on dry matter  yield  must  be avoided.  The development  
of these vegetative  grasses  in conjunction  with the model above are 
complimentary  and should  allow more control  over morphological  variation  
in mid-season.
B Chemical  composition
Improving  the actual  digestibility  of the tillers  has generally  been reported  
to increase  the drymatter  intake.  The water soluble  content  of the grass has 
been shown  to be an important  element  of digestibility  (Figure  3).
There  is a positive  correlation  between  the water  soluble  carbohydrates  and
32
milk  production.  This  is associated  with  the higher  carbohydrate  energy  available  
which  enhances  protein  utilisation  and reduces  nitrogen  losses  in the rumen.  
It is, however,  insufficient  to select  for this trait alone as this increased  water  
soluble  carbohydrate  must also be accompanied  by enhanced  cell wall 
digestibility.  This is required  as increased  carbohydrate  levels  decrease  rumen  
pH, reducing  the ability  to breakdown  cell walls.  The leaf development  work  
on sward structure  has begun  to show how the quantity  of these chemical  
components  are likely  to be influenced  by management  and variety.  Cell structure  
of the leaf responds  to different  environment  conditions  (Casey,  Brereton,  
Laidlaw  and McGilloway,  1999).  This is also likely  to affect  the contribution
Figure  3 - The effect  on time of year  on the water  soluble  carbohydrate  
content  of grasses,  estimated  using  the Parson  and Thornley  model  of
grass  growth
33
of components  such as water soluble  carbohydrates  to the plant. The 
environmental  conditions  under  grazing  are quite  different  to simulated  grazing  
and therefore  the levels  of these traits need also to be assessed  under  grazing.
3. Sward  quality  under  grazing
In conjunction  with the developments  above  new grass varieties  are now 
being  examined  under  grazing  under  Irish conditions  at Moorepark.  Very little 
information  is available  in this area although  some studies  have been carried  
out in Holland  (Table  6). These  trials will involve  detailed  sward  measurement  
and the measurement  of water soluble  carbohydrates.  The detailed  sward  
measurement  will be carried  out in conjunction  with animal  production  trials 
at farmlet  and production  scale to assess if desirable  traits are transferred  in 
a grazing  situation.  The realistic  gain from these traits can then be monitored  
in terms  of milk production.  Management  may need to be refined  to optimise  
the expression  and subsequent  profit  from these  new traits. This is the beginning  
of a far larger  programme  in this area to ensure  the transfer  of the full potential  
of recent  developments  in plant breeding  to profit at farm level.
Future  developments
The problems  associated  with seasonality  of production  is also an issue  that 
is continually  being  discussed  by the industry.  One aim in this area is to produce  
the same production  in the second-half  of the season  as in the first-half  of the 
season.  Spring  growth  is restricted  by temperature  rather  than light while in 
autumn  light is the limiting  factor.  Recently  genetic  material  may be available  
to overcome  these limitations.  Although  breeding  for varieties  out of season 
is a high possibility,  sward  damage  and poor utilisation  cannot  be overlooked.  
A combination  of traits will need to be carefully  explored  if this is to occur  
successfully.  The Nitrogen  use efficiency,  regrowth  and winter-hardiness  are 
areas  where  there  is great  potential.  The next  issue  must  be to assess  the efficiency 
of these varieties  in grazing  conditions  and to monitor  their  efficiency  carefully. 
There  is a very large potential  for improving  our grass supply  with the wide 
range  of genetic  material  that is available.  There  is sufficient  genetic  variation  
in many traits to justify  breeding  for them. The identification  of the critical  
traits however  is an essential  part of this work.  In the future  climate  of demand
Table 6
Effect  of cultivar  on intake  and cow milk production
Wendy  (D)Cultivar
Condesa  (T)
Daily herbage  intake 17.1 17.6
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 28.4 29.6
Milk protein  (%) 3.39 3.48
WSC protein  {%) 9.9 83.0
digestibility  (DMD  %) 83.0 83.0
34
for lower  inputs  and high  quality and  change, we will need  to continually  consider  
our options. Ruminant  nutritionists,  agronomists  and production  researchers  
can only provide  the links to do this successfully.
Summary
In the future,  emphasis  is more  likely  to be placed  on the quality  of product  
and efficiency  of production  rather  than quantity  of product  output.  Considering  
that we have successfully  developed  precision  management  to enhance  quantity  
of supply  we now need to link with breeders  to optimise  efficiency  by seeking  
a grass supply  that is of high physical  nutritional  character,  a long growing  
season  and rapid regrowth.  In the past it has been a serious  omission  that we 
could  not tell farmers  the difference  in quantitative  terms  between  the realistic  
production  of grass  varieties.  To achieve  this requires  the co-operation  of plant  
breeders,  animal nutritionists  and production  research. The goal is the beginning  
of a longer  term  co-operation between production researchers and plant  breeders.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Dr. A. J. Brereton  and Dr. S. Crosse  for their helpful  
contributions.
References
Casey,  I. A., Brereton,  A. J., Laidlaw,  A. S., McGilloway,  D. A. J. 1997. Assessment 
of methodology for  short term grazing  behaviour  of cattle.  Proceedings  of the British  
Grassland  Society  England,  45-51.
Casey,  I. A., Brereton,  A. J., Laidlaw,  A. S., McGilloway,  D. A. ]. 1997. The effect  of 
sheath  tube length  on the leaf development  of Lolium  perenne.  Annals  of Applied  
Biology  (in press).
Laidlaw,  A. S. and Reed, K. F. M. 1993.  Plant  improvement.  The evaluation  and extension  
processes.  Proceeding  of the XVII International  Grassland  Congress,  Palmerston  
North, 1993, pp. 385-392.
O’Donovan, M. and Dillon, P. 1997,  Using  pasture  measurements  to monitor  performance  
on intensive  dairy farms. Proceedings  of Irish Grassland  Association,  Dairy  
Conference  Limerick,  p. 21-34.
O Donovan,  M. Dillon,  P. and Stakelum,  G. 1998. Grassland  management:  the effect 
on animal  herd performance.  Proceedings  of Irish Grassland  Association,  Dairy  
Conference  Limerick,  p. 39-54.,  167-175.
Smith, K. F., Reed,  K. F. M. and Foot,  J. Z. 1997.  An assessment  of the relative  importance  
of specific  traits for the genetic  improvement  of nutritive  value in dairy pasture.  
Grass  and Forage  Science  52, 167-175.
Stone,  B. A. 1994. Prospects  for improving  the nutritive  value  of temperate  perennial 
pasture  grasses.  New Zealand  Journal  of Agricultural  Research.  37, 349-363.  
Wilman,  D., Goa,  Y. and Altimimi,  M. A. K. 1996. Differences  between  related  grasses, 
times of year and plant parts and digestibility  and chemical  composition.  Journal  
of Agricultural  Science,  Cambridge.  127, 311-318.
Wilkins,  P. W., Davies,  R. W. 1994. Progress  in combining  high dry matter  yield with 
reduced  flowering  and improved  digestibility  in perennial  ryegrass,  Proc. Eucarpia  
fodder  Crops Section  for 1994, 247-252.
35
The Effect  of Level of Daily Grass  
Allowance  on the Performance  of 
Spring-calving  Dairy  Cows
J. MAHER,  G. STAKELUM,  F, BUCKLEY  and P. DILLON  
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Introduction
The main effect of Agenda  2000 for the Irish Dairy sector  will be the 
considerable  reduction  in milk prices  at farm level. Euture  expected  changes  
will continue  to remove  the relatively  high level of protection  engaged  by the 
EU countries.  Market  forces  are likely to determine  producers  returns  much  
more  in the future.  Therefore,  with lower  milk  prices  likely,  Irish dairy  farmers  
will have to become  more efficient  producers  of milk. Grass when grazed  
efficiently  is by far the cheapest  feed available  on the dairy farm (Dillon  et al, 
1991).  Since  grazed  grass  is the most  cost-effective  feed available  on the farm, 
greater  emphasis  has to be placed  on achieving  high performance  at pasture  
by dairy cows.  This is achieved  by high intakes  of high quality  grass by cows  
as a very  strong  relationship  exists  between  the amount  of grass  eaten  and daily 
milk production.  However,  O’Donovan  etal (1997)  monitored  performance  of 
grazing  diary  cows  on intensive  dairy  farms  and found  that many  dairy  farmers  
are not achieving  the potential  performance  from their  cows  on grazed  pasture.
This paper  highlights  how to  achieve  high  intakes  of grazed grass and  thereby 
ensuring  high performance  from grazing  dairy cows.  The consequence  of this 
will be to reduce  the costs  of milk  production  and increase  returns  by improved  
milk yield and composition.
Grazing  management
The supply of feed in the form  of grazed  grass  matches  or exceeds the demand 
for feed by spring  calving  dairy cows from mid-April  to mid-September  for 
systems  of milk production  generally  recommended  in Ireland  (Dillon  et al, 
1995).  Major  grass budget  decisions  are made  with regard  to overall  stocking  
rate, nitrogen  input and conservation  management  that help to ration  grass on 
a long term  and medium  term  basis.  This  is because  there is a limit  to the quantity 
of grass grown  each year on a farm and its growth  pattern  is very unevenly 
distributed  across  the year. The objective  in grazing  cows is to achieve  high 
intakes  of high quality  grass every day if possible.  This is achieved  firstly  by 
keeping  an adequate  supply  (1600-2000  kg DM/ha)  of high  quality  grass  ahead  
of the cows.  Monitoring  the supply  of grass  by walking  the farm on a regular  
basis as outlined  by O’Donovan  et al (1997)  will enable  the farmer  to have 
high quality  grass  in front  of the cows  throughout  the grazing  season.  Surpluses  
(or deficits)  in grass  supply  are established  at an early stage  and can be tackled  
before  supply  goes out of control.  Secondly,  enough  grass must be offered  to 
the herd each day (or over a 2-3 day period)  so that the herd can consume
36
enough  grass  to sustain  their yield of milk. However,  because  of the tendency  
of grass to deteriorate  in quality  (digestibility),  it is also extremely  important  
to avoid offering the herd  too much  (i.e. leaving  too high a residue  in paddocks  
when moving  on to the next paddock.)
Intake  of grass
The grass intake  i.e. the amount  of grass eaten by dairy cows is affected  
by factors  which  relate  to the animal and  pasture/management.  The animal factors  
determine  the herd  demand  for grass.  The pattern  of feed demand  is determined  
by the date of calving  and calving  spread.  The cow factors  influencing  the herd 
demand  relate  to size of the animal,  its potential  production  in terms  of yield,  
stage  of lactation (see Dr. Ryan ’s paper)  and body  condition  at calving  (Grainger  
et al, 1982).  However,  the two main factors  that determine  how much grass  
cows need are as follows:  Firstly,  the bigger  the size of the cow, the more  feed 
she needs  to maintain  herself.  As size of cow increases,  demand  increases  by 
1.5-2.0  kg DM/100  kg liveweight  (Stakelum  and Connolly,  1987).
Secondly,  a cow ’s genetic  potential  will determine  her ability  to produce  
milk. A cow yielding  6.5 gallons  of milk  per day will consume  more  grass  than 
a cow yielding  4.5 gallons  of milk at the same stage of lactation.  This factor  
is discussed  further  later  in this paper.  A complicating  factor  is the loss of weight  
by cows in early lactation  and the gain in weight  by cows from mid-lactation  
onwards.  When cows lose weight  in early lactation,  they are in effect  
supplementing  their intake  of feed in order  to assist  milk production.  They  can 
by this mechanism  produce  high  yields  than  is possible  from  their  dietary  intake  
of grazed  grass.  Additionally,  when cows are preparing  for the next lactation  
and gaining  in weight,  they require  more  intake  of feed than is required  by their  
output  of milk and maintenance.
Management/Pasture  factors  affecting  intake  of grass
Three  important  factors  impact  on the ability  of the cow to eat enough  grass.
1. How much grass is offered?
2. What is the quality  (digestibility)  of the grass?
3. Ground  conditions  during  grazing.
Grass  quality
When  the quantity  of pasture  available  is not limiting,  the primary  factor  
influencing  the intake  of grass by cows relates  to the digestibility  of the grass  
consumed  (Hodgson  et al, 1977).  The rate of passage  of ingested  material through  
the rumen  increases  as the digestibility  of the feed improves.  The digestibility  
of the grass exhibits  a characteristic  pattern  during  the year. Spring  grass has 
the highest  digestibility  and summer  grass  has generally  the lowest  digestibility.  
The changes  in digestibility  are generally  associated  with changes  in the 
concentrations  of green leaf, mature  stem and dead material,  and therefore  
influence  the feeding  value  of the herbage  (Ulyatt,  1981),  Green  leaf is highly  
digestible.  Grass  will be low in digestibility  when it has a lot of stem, flower
37
heads and dead material  through  the pasture.  The problem  with this type of 
pasture  is that intake  will be low because  cows  don ’t like the material  offered. 
They  find it difficult  to graze  and they digest  it less, i.e. they extract  less nutrients 
from it.
Grass  allowance
The single  most  important  factor  influencing  the intake  and performance  of 
grazing  dairy cows is amount  of pasture  offered,  i.e. Grass Allowance.  Daily 
grass allowance  is basically  the utilisable  grass in a paddock  divided  by the 
number  of cows grazing  on that paddock  and then divided  by the number  of 
days the herd stays in the paddock.  It is a very important  concept  in grazing  
management.  The amount  of pasture  available  to cows is controlled  to some 
degree,  by forcing  them to graze  close to ground  level. If the allowance  is too 
low, the herd intake  will also be low. The herd will graze out the paddock  
extremely  well. Therefore,  as daily allowance  is reduced,  intake  falls and the 
amount  of grass left behind  in the paddock  after  grazing  also falls. In addition,  
the opportunity for  the cows  to select  from  pasture  is reduced  and the digestibility 
of the herbage  consumed  may also be depressed.  In practice  grass allowance  
is dictated  to a large  extent  by the stocking  rate. Recent  assessment  of grazing  
management  on farms  (O’Donovan  et al, 1998)  suggests  that many dairy  farms 
are highly  stocked  especially  in the April - June period.  As a result cows are 
not allocated  enough  grass,  cows graze  very tight and intake  is low. This may 
also occur  in periods  of poor growth  as the farmer  tries to maintain  a 21-day 
rotation  with little or no supplementation.
The Moorepark  research  programme  on the feeding and management  of dairy  
cows  focuses  heavily  on achieving  very high  performance  from cows on grazed 
pastures.  The key to this is to ensure  that high intakes  of high quality  grass 
are achieved  on a daily basis. During  1995 and 1996 a series of experiments  
were carried  out to examine  the effect  of daily grass allowance  on dairy cow 
performance.  Daily  grass allowance  is defined  as the quantity of grass dry matter  
(DM)  offered  to a cow on a daily  basis  above  a height  of 4 cm. The  DM content  
of grass varies  across  the grazing  season.  Initially  in early spring  (February/  
March)  grass DM content  is very high (18% to 25%),  much lower  in April- 
June (14% to  17%),  in July-September  (15% to 19%)  and in October-November  
(13% to 15%). Grass  availability  is defined  as the quantity  of grass available  
above  a height  of 4 cm as it is almost  physically  impossible  for cows  to graze 
below  this height.
Different  groups  of Spring-calving  (February/March)  cows were allocated  
Low (16-17  kg DM/cow/day),  Medium  (20 kg DM/cow/day)  or High (23-24 
kg DM/cow/day)  levels of grass allowance  on a daily basis.  The experiment  
began  in early May but terminated  early in late August  because  of a drought. 
The cows  grazing  in 1995 had a RBI ’95 of 107 and in 1996 a RBI ’95 of 113.
The quantity of grass immediately ahead  of each herd  of cows was determined  
on a regular  basis. The DM of the grass was also established.  The DM yield  
was calculated  and each herd was allocated  a grazing  area on the basis of this
38
yield  and particular  allowance.  Temporary  electric fences  were  erected  to allocate  
grass to cows. All grazed  areas were topped  to prevent  any sward  quality  
imbalances  arising  in future  rotations.  An example  of how the grazing  area is 
calculated  is shown  as follows.
Amount  of grass DM per ha (10,000m-  = 1,600 kg DM/ha
Grass allocation  (DM) per cow = 20 kg DM
Grass allocation  (DM) per 40 cows = 800 kg DM (Herd  Demand)
Area to be given to 40 cow herd
= Herd Demand  (kg DM)
Amount  of grass per ha (kg DM)
= 800 
1600
= 0.5 ha (1.25 acres)
The following  series  of tables  show both the quantity  and quality  of grass  
offered  and the resulting  cow performance  from it. The amount  of grass left 
behind  is also shown.
Table 1
Results  from 1995 experiment
Effect  of grass allowance  on cow performance  (May ’95 - August  ’95)
Grass Allowances
Low Medium High
Grass allowance  (kg DM/cow) 16 20 24
DM intake  (kg) 15.3 16.5 17.1
Milk yield (gals) 4.4 4.8 4.9
Fat % 3.83 3.84 3.75
Protein  % 3.25 3.28 3.36
Average  bodyweight  (kg) 572 574 575
Condition  score 2.17 2.32 2.33
Chemical  composition  (%) of grass offered  (May ‘95- August  ’95)
Grass  Allowances
Low Medium High
Crude  protein  17.7 18.4 17.4
Ash 9.0 9.1 8.6
MAD fibre 19,6 19.8 19.7
OM digestibility  82.3 82.3 81.8
Yield (kg DM/ha)  and height  (cm) of grass offered  and residual  pasture
Grass Allowances
Low Medium High
Yield of grass grazed 2316
Height  of grass grazed 18.4
Post-grazing  yield  310
Post-grazing  height  4.42420
18.1
464
5.52481
18.1
591
6.5
39
These  series  of experiments  were  true grass  allowance  experiments  as cows  
in all treatments  were  presented  with swards  of similar  DM yield  (Tables  1 and
2), sward  height  (Table 1) and chemical  composition  (Tables  1 and 2).
Table 2
Grass  yield (kg DM/ha)  & digestibility  (OMD%)  of grass offered  during  ’96
LowGrass  Allowance 
Medium High
Late Spring/Early  Summer: OMD
Grass yield
Late Summer/Early  Autumn:  OMD
Grass yield
Late Autumn/Early  Winter: OMD
Grass yield84.9 84.8
1899 1991
82.7 82.5
1886 2045
81.2 80.9
2776  276184.3
1955
83.2
2099
81.1
2789
Table 3
Cow performance  during  1996
Effect  of grass allowance  on cow performance  (May ’95 - August  ’95)
Grass  Allowances
Low Medium High
Milk yield (gal/cow/day) 5.2 5.3 5.6
Fat % 4.16 4.10 4.04
Protein  % 3.41 3.46 3.43
Effect  of grass allowance  inlate Spring/early  Summer  ’96
Grass  Allowances
Low Medium High
DM intake (kg) 15.2 16.5 16.8
Milk yield (gal/cow/day) 3.6 3.9 3.9
Fat % 4.69 4.68 4.56
Protein  % 3.47 3.54 3.62
Effect  of grass allowance  inlate Autumn/early  Winter  ’96
Grass  Allowances
Low Medium High
DM intake  (kg) 15.1 15.6 16.1
Milk yield (gal/cow/day) 2.0 2.0 1.9
Fat % 5.38 5.09 5.45
Protein  % 4.08 4.11 4.23
40
Cow intake  and milk production
The series of experiments  outlined  above  demonstrate  the effect of grass  
allowance  on DM intake  and milk production.  There is a strong  positive  
relationship  between  grass  intake and  daily  milk  production. Cows  with a genetic  
index  of RBr95  of 110 -115  need  to be allocated  21-23  kg Dm/cow/day  (above  
4cm) (Table  3) to optimise  performance  from grazed  grass in early lactation.  
This will allow the cows to consume  17-18 kg of grass DM/cow/day.  As the 
lactation  progresses,  the demand  of the cow is reduced.  Therefore  allocating  
20 kg DM/cow/day  will allow the cow eat 16-17 kg of DM/cow/day  (Table 
1 and 3) which  is adequate  to meet her metabolic  requirements.  Although  the 
level of milk production  is low in late lactation,  intake  of grass is reasonably  
high at approximately  15-16  kg DM/cow/day  (Table  3). Firstly,  this is because  
cows  are gaining  in body condition  and advancing  in pregnancy.  Secondly,  the 
energy  value  of autumn grass is low even  though  the digestibility  of it is relatively 
high (Givens,  1993)  therefore  the cow has to consume  more DM to obtain  an 
adequate  ME (or NE)  intake.  This is one of the reasons  why the best responses  
in milk production  to concentrate  supplementation  are achieved  in the late 
autumn  period  despite  spring-calving  cows  being  in late lactation.  Throughout  
all of the above  experiments,  grazing  cows  to a height  of 6 cm  will enable  cows  
to perform  very close  to their  genetic  potential  from  a diet of grazed  grass.  This 
will ensure  that the cow is well fed. However,  little is known  of level of intake  
being achieved.
Table 4
Effect  of grass allowance  on post grazing  height  (cm)
Low Medium High
Late Spring/Early  Summer: 4.7 5.5 6.6
Late Summer/Early  Autumn 5.1 5.8 6.7
Late Autumn/Early  Winter: 4.4 5.3 5.9
Milk composition
Throughout  all the experiments,  there was no significant  effect of grass  
allowance  on milk fat content.  However,  a very obvious  trend  was evident.  As 
grass allowance  increased,  milk fat content  was reduced.  This is most likely  
due to a combination  of reasons.  Firstly,  that the digestibility  of the pasture  
selected  is generally  lower  and fibre content  higher  as cows graze  tighter  into 
the sward.  A greater  proportion  of stem and dead material  exists  in the lower  
strata  of the sward structure.  Secondly,  intake and  therefore  milk  yield  improved  
as grass allowance  increased.  This suggests  that the concentration  of fat would  
be diluted.
The milk content  improves  substantially  as grass allowance  increases  
particularly  in the summer/autumn  period.  Cows allocated  a high pasture  
allowance  will graze  lax and therefore  will eat more  but also consume  a greater  
proportion  of leaf than either  stem or dead material.  The digestibility  of the 
pasture  consumed  is improved  thereby  enhancing  energy  intake.  This effect  
was evident  but very small when analysed.  It is therefore  more likely  that the
41
higher  level of intake  (Bryant,  1979) rather  than the higher  energy  intake  has 
a greater  influence  on milk  protein  content.  Therefore,  offering  cows  generous  
amounts  of grass  (i.e. grazing  cows  laxly) may  not result  in significant  increases  
in milk yield. However  the protein  content  of the milk will be substantially  
improved.
Cow liveweight  and body condition
Many  other  experiments  have shown  allowance  effects  (Bryant,  1980;  Glassey 
et al, 1980)  and intake  effects  (Hodgson  and Wilson,  1967)  on cow liveweight  
and body  condition.  These  experiments  demonstrate  little or no effect  of pasture  
allowance  on liveweight  gain or cow body condition.  However  the levels of 
intake  achieved  were high and therefore  cows were reasonably  well fed unlike  
other experiments.
Post-grazing  sward  height
Sward  height  has been advanced  as a major  tool in controlling  grazing  
management  in order to optimise  cow performance  from pasture.  The results  
of these experiments  and previous  research  (Stakelum  and Dillon, 1990) at 
Moorepark  clearly  show major  advantages  to grazing  to a residual  sward  height  
of 6 cm particularly  in the April  to June  period  without  affecting  milk  production  
and thereby  optimising  cow performance  from pasture.  A post-grazing  height  
of 6 cm implies  that a mosaic  of well and not so well grazed  areas will appear  
on the paddock.  These  tall and short  grass  areas are the inevitable  consequence  
of cow grazing.  Cows  will graze  the areas around  the dung  deposits  less severely  
than the clean areas.  To attempt  to graze the paddock  so as to force the cows  
to eat out all of the tall grass  areas  will severely  depress  intake. The  compromise  
is to leave the paddock  grazed  to a degree  where  the tall or partially  rejected  
areas comprise  around  20-25%  of the paddock  area and are reasonably  well 
grazed.
Although  cow performance  may improve  somewhat,  offering  high daily  
allowances  of grass  or grazing  laxly  (>7cm)  will result  in a higher  residual  yield  
or sward  height.  As a result,  the nutritive  value of the pasture  will be reduced  
in subsequent  grazings  to the extent  that cow performance  also declines  (Stakelum 
and Dillon,  1990).  However,  removal  of high  residual  yields  by topping  pastures  
after  grazing  will eliminate  the adverse  effects of lax grazing on cow performance  
(Stakelum  and Dillon,  1990).
Genetic  merit
The average  herd demand  for grass in Ireland  is around  16-18  kg DM daily,  
depending  on genetic  potential.  The national  RBI is around  105-110.  Top dairy  
farmers  are closer  to 115 and their herd demand  is likely  to be about 18 kg of 
grass DM daily/cow.  However  the rate of gain in the genetic  merit  of the national 
dairy herd in Ireland  is now quite rapid (about 1.5%/yr).  Studies  from New 
Zealand  have shown  that cows of high genetic  merit  at pasture  consume  more  
grass (5-20%),  produced  more  milk (20-40%)  and were  more  efficient  converters  
of food into milk (10-15%)  than cows of lower  genetic  merit  (Holmes,  1988).
42
Table 5
The pedigree  index of the two genotypes  being compared
Genotype RBI 95 Milk
(kg)Fat
(kg)Protein
(kg)Fat
(%)Protein
(%)
HGI 134 620 23 20.5 -0.02 0.00
MGl 117 120 10 7.1 +0.09 +0.05
In the autumn  of 1994, two contrasting  groups  of in calf-heifers  were  
assembled  at Moorepark.  The pedigree  index of the two groups  is shown  in 
Table  5. The animals  of high genetic  index  (H.G.I.)  had an RBI ’95 of 134 and 
medium  genetic index  (M.G.I.)  an RBI ’95 of 117. It should  be noted  that average  
RBI '95 for first lactation  animals  in 1995 nationally  was 104 (IDRC).
Three  different  feeding  systems  were compared  with each genotype.  The 
Moorepark  feeding  system  (System  A) incorporates  high stocking  rate 2.54 
cows/ha),  high nitrogen  input (440 kg N/ha) and a planned  concentrate  input  
of 500 kg/cow  (Dillon  et al, 1995).  System  B had a similar  stocking  rate and 
nitrogen  input to System  A, but twice  the level of concentrate.  System  C had 
a similar  level of concentrate  and nitrogen  to System  A but with unrestricted  
levels  of high  quality grass  throughout  the year.  To maintain System  C, achieving  
second-cut  silage was not a priority.  The feeding  systems  were applied  from  
mid-April  to end of November.  A total of 48 H.G.I.  and 48 M.G.I.  animals  were 
used. Excess  grass was harvested  as wrapped  baled silage  to maintain  grass  
quality.  Grass was considered  to be in excess  when pre-grazing  yields were 
greater  than 2000 kg DM/ha.  In 1996, a total of 3.2 ha in System  A, 3.8 ha 
in System  B, and 4.8 ha in System  C were harvested  in this manner.  Table  6 
shows  the milk  production  for both genotypes  (averaged  across  the three feeding  
systems).
Table 6
Effect  of cow genetic  index on milk production  (1996)
M.G.I. H.G.I.
Milk (gallons/cow) 1,465 1,659
Fat % 4.02 3.89
Protein  % 3.43 3.41
Source:  F. Buckley  and P. Dillon
The H.G.I.  cows  produced  significantly  more  milk (-1-194  gals) with similar  
protein  content.  The average  daily milk production  for M.G.I.  and H.G.I.  cows  
was 4.8 gals and 5.5 gals per cow over the lactation.
Grass  allowances,  intake  measurements  and post-grazing  heights  are shown 
in Table 7. During  the 3 measurement  periods  (June to September),  cows on 
feeding  Systems  A and C were on grass only while cows on feeding  System  
B received  3 kg of concentrates  daily per cow. The H.G.I.  had higher  intakes
43
Table 7
Effect  of cow genetic  index  and feeding  system  on grass allowance,  intake  and
post grazing  height
Feeding  systemABC
H.G.I. M.G.I. H.G.I. M.G.I. H.G.I. M.G.I
Grass allowance  (kg DM/cow/day 26 24 23 21 29 27
Grass DM intake  (kg) 20.3 18.6 19.6 18.3 20.7 19.2
Total DM intake  (kg) 20.3 18.6 22.2 20.9 20.7 19.2
Grazing  height  (cm) 5.8 6.1 6.4
and were allocated  greater  daily allowances  of grass  to achieve  these intakes.  
Supplementation  with concentrates  at pasture  (System B) significantly  increased  
total dry matter  intake  and milk yield (Table  8) with only a small reduction  
in grass dry matter  intake.  Allocating  larger amounts  of high quality  grass  
(System  C) improved  intake  on average  by 0.5kg  DM per cow per day. However, 
this extra intake  resulted  in improved  milk protein  content  rather  than an 
improvement  in milk yield.  This is similar  to earlier  observations  in this paper  
with  cows  of lower  genetic  merit.  Similarly,  grazing  cows of high genetic  index  
to a height  of 6 cm (Table  7) will enable  the cow to perform very  well at pasture.
How to estimate  the level of intake  achieved  in a paddock
Very many  Irish dairy farmers  cannot  judge  how much  pasture  is available  
for grazing and how much  was  eaten  in a particular  paddock.  In order  to improve  
the ability  of the farmer  to feed the cows properly  at pasture,  those two basic  
points  need to be learned.  This can only be taught  and demonstrated  in the field 
and if the farmer  wants  to increase  his skills  in this regard  he must  spend  more  
time studying  his paddocks  and assessing  grass supply.  Experience  and 
participation  in one of the 235 Teagasc  Dairy  Discussion  Groups  will improve  
your ability.
Establishing  the level of intake  being achieved  is a simple  sum when the 
grass yield level before  and after grazing  in a particular  paddock  in known  or 
is estimated.  An accurate  procedure  for estimating  the amount  of grass  available
Table 8
Effect  of cow genetic  index and feeding  system  on milk production
Feeding  system
H.G.I. M.G.I. H.G.I. M.G.I. H.G.I. M.G.I
Milk yield (gal/cow) 1630 1405 1739 1543 1606 1450
Fat % 3.76 4.11 3.97 3.96 3.96 4.03
Protein  % 3.37 3.39 3.41 3.45 3.45 3.45
44
(above  4 cm) was outlined  by O’Donovan  et al (1997).  This method  was 
developed  because  of much  lower  potential  errors  associated  with it as compared  
to the plate  meter  or grass  probe.  The procedure  is also  based  on yield  of available  
grass i.e. the yield above  4 cm.
When  establishing  the intake figure,  it will be more  meaningful  if done  across 
a number  of paddocks  (say 5-6), as any error will be evened  out somewhat.  
If the intake  is very much  out and is not a meaningful  figure,  it is very likely  
that the estimation  of pre-grazing  grass yield is inaccurate.  In most cases the 
post-grazing  yields  will be estimated  much better.  A knowledge  of how daily 
milk yields  are progressing  will indicate  gross  inaccuracies.  A less likely  cause  
is that the paddock  area is wrong. However,  an accurate  measurement  of paddock 
areas is a help.
The following  is an example  of how intake  can be calculated  based  on yield 
assessments.
1) Pre-grazing  = 2000 kg DM/ha  (above  4 cm).
2) Post-grazing  = 300 kg DM/ha  (above  4 cm).
3) Paddock  size = 0.81 ha (2 acres).
4) Residency  time in the paddocks  = 2 days (4 grazings).
5) Herd size = 40 cows.
Then intake/cow/day  can be calculated  as (1-2) x 3
eg-4x5
(2000-300)  X 0.81 = 17.2 kg DM
2 X 40
Wet ground  conditions
Soft ground  conditions  are quite  anatagonistic  to good  utilisation  of pastures  
(Wilkins  and Garwood,  1985) and these conditions  are more prevalent  at the 
beginning  and at the end of the grazing  season.  Even where  cows  have enough  
pasture,  intakes  are often  low because  grass  becomes  soiled  due to walking  and 
poaching.  Deposition  of soil on pasture  renders  grass  less palatable  and thereby  
reducing  cow intake.  In these  conditions,  the aim is to minimise  damage,  reduce  
soiling  and maintain  cow performance.  A lot of time and money  is spent on 
developing  facilities in the farm  yard.  However,  cows  spend  most  of their  lifetime  
at pasture.  Having  a good network  of farm roadways,  adequate  if not multiple  
access  to paddocks  and plenty  of drinking  points will greatly  improve  the 
potential  to utilise  grass especially  when grazing  conditions  are difficult.  
Different  grazing  techniques  are shown  in Fig. 1 that aid grass utilisation  in 
early spring/late  autumn  or at any other time when grazing  conditions  are 
marginal.  All of these  techniques  may be useful  under  different  circumstances  
and conditions.  Cow Walks  (A) have been used to great  effect  on the Wetland 
Research  Farm at Kilmaley,  Co. Clare where  grazing  conditions  are often  
marginal  and are also in use on the Dairy  Farm  at Kildalton  Agricultural  College,  
Co. Kilkenny.  When  grazing  silage  ground,  the Spokes  of Wheel  (B) technique  
may be useful  in early spring  especially  when there is only a single  drinking
45
point (normally  at the entrance).  During  periods  of poor grazing  conditions,  
cows should  be allocated  freshydean  grass after every milking  if out fulltime  
or every  day if out by day only. Cows  should  not walk over previously  grazed 
areas. All these techniques  (Fig. 1) try to facilitate  this objective.  However,  
cows in early lactation  will give an economic  response  (milk  production  and 
reproductive  performance)  to concentrate  supplementation  when  the supply  of 
grass is poor and/or  when difficult  ground  conditions  prevail  (Dillon,  1996).
Conclusions
In the future successful  dairy farming  will remain  very dependent  on the 
efficient  conversion  of grass into milk. Grazing  management  must succeed  in 
keeping  the cow well fed throughout  the grazing  season.  High performance  of 
cows at pasture  can only be achieved  by having  high quality  grass in front of 
the cows  but more  importantly  by offering  enough  grass  to the herd on a regular  
basis. Grass  can be allocated  to cows after every milking,  on a daily basis or 
over 2 days but they must be offered  enough.  In summary,  the amount  of feed 
(as grazed  grass)  the herd (RBr95  105-115)  will need each day will be about  
16-18  kg DM/cow. Therefore,  20-23  kg of grass  DM/cow  must  be offered daily.  
If there is insufficient  grass available  and/or  poor ground  conditions  to allow  
for an intake figure of this magnitude  then supplementary  feeding  may be 
necessary.  Cows  of higher  genetic  merit  (RBr95  120-t-)  must be offered  more  
grass as more  needs  to be consumed.  To simplify  matters,  if the cows  eat down 
to a post-grazing  height  of 6 cm in the paddock  and are then moved  on to the 
next paddock,  the farmer  can be satisfied  that the herd is well fed. This is also 
important  for controlling  the quality  of the grass that  will be subsequently  offered 
for grazing  in the following  grazing  rotations.
Cc>w Walk (A) Spokes  of 5 B}BltxikSinp  Orazang  (Di
Figure  1 - Grazing  techniques  during  periods  of marginal  ground  conditions
46
References
Bryant,  A. M. (1979).  Effects  of nutrition  on milk  composition.  Proceedings  ofRuakura  
Fanners ’ Conference,  pp. 121-129.
Bryant,  A. M. (1980).  Effect  of herbage  allowance  on dairy performance.  Proceedings  
of llie New Zealand  Society  of Animal  Production,  40, 50-58.
Buckley,  F. and Dillon,  P. (1998).  The effect of genotype  and feeding  system  on the 
performance  of Holstein  Friesian  cows at pasture.  Proceedings  of Irish Grassland  
Association  Dairy Conference,  pp. 1-15.
Dillon,  P., Crosse,  S., Stakelum,  G. and Flynn,  F. (1995).  The effect  of calving  date and 
stocking  rate on the performance  of spring-calving  dairy cows. Grass  and Forage  
Science,  50, pp. 286-299.
Dillon, P, (1996).  Maximising  profit  in creamery  milk production  using  current  research  
and technology.  Proceedings  of  Irish  Grassland  Association  50th  Anniversary  Dairy  
Conference,  pp. 5-26.
Dillon,  P, Cliffe,  D. and Hurley,  C. (1991).  Scope for reducing  the costs of milk 
production.  Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association  Journal,  25, pp. 
68-79
Givens,  D. I. (1993).  Influence  of growth  stage and season  on the energy  value  of fresh  
herbage.  1. Changes  in the metabolising  energy  content.  Journal  of the British  
Grassland  Society,  48, pp. 166-174.
Glassey,  C. B., Davey,  A. W. F. and Holmes,  C. W. (1980).  The effect  of herbage  allowance  
on the dry matter  intake  and milk production  of dairy  cow  s. Proceedings  of the New 
Zealand  Society  of Animal  Production,  40, 59-63.
Grainger,  C.. Wilhelms,  G. and McGowan,  A. (1982).  Effect  of body condition  at calving  
and level of feeding  in early lactation  on milk production  of dairy cows.  Australian  
Journal  of E.xperimenta!  Agriculture  and Animal  Husbandry,  40, 9-17.
Hodgson,  J. (1977).  Factors  limiting  herbage  intake  by the grazing  animal.  In: Animal  
Production  from Temperate  Grassland  (International  Meeting),  pp. 70-75 (Ed. B. 
Gilsenan),  Dublin: Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association,  An Foras  
Taluntais.
Hodgson,),  and Wilkinson,  J. M. (1967).  The relationship  between  liveweight and herbage  
intake  in grazing  cattle.  Animal  Production,  9, 365-376.
Holmes,  C. W. (1988).  Genetic  merit and efficiency  of milk production  by the dairy  
cow. In: Nutrition  and lactation  in the dairy' cow (Ed. P. C. Garnsworthy),  
Butterw'orths,  U.K.
O’Donovan,  M., Dillon,  P, Stakelum,  G. and Crosse,  S. (1997).  Using pasture  
measurements  to monitor  performance  on intensive  dairy farms. Proceedings  of 
Irish Grassland  Association  Dairy Conference,  pp. 21-33.
O’Donovan,  M., Dillon,  P, Stakelum,  G. (1998).  Grassland  management  - the effect  
on herd performance.  Proceedings  of  Irish Grassland  Association  Dairy  Conference,  
pp. 39-53.
O’Donovan,  M. Dillon,  P., Stakelum,  G. Harrington,  D. and Rath, M. (1999).  An 
evaluation  of four different  techniques  of pasture  mass  estimation.  Irish Grassland  
and  Animal  Production  Research  Forum,  25th  Meeting  U.C.D.  Belfield,  pp. 99-100.
Stakelum,  G. and Dillon,  P. (1990).  Influence  of sward  structure  and digestibility  on 
the intake  and performance  of lactating  and growing  cattle. In: Mayne,  C. S. (ed). 
Management  issues  for the grassland  farmer  in the 1990 ’s. Occasional  publication  
No. 25, British  Grassland  Society,  pp. 30-42.
Stakelum,  G. and Connolly,  J. (1987).  Effect  of body size and milk yield on intake  of 
fresh  herbage  by lactating  dairy  cows  indoors.  Irish  Journal  of Agricultural  Research,  
26, 9-22.
Ulyatt,  M. J. (1981).  The feeding  value  of temperate  pasture.  In: Morley,  F. H. W. (ed). 
Grazing  Animals,  pp. 125-141.
Wilkins,  R. J. and Garwood,  E. A. (1986).  Effects  of treading,  poaching  and fouling  
on grassland  production  and utilisation.  In: Frame,  J. (ed). Grazing,  19-31.  British  
Grassland  Society  Occasional  Symposium,  No. 19. B. G. S. Hurley.
Al
Grazing  Management  of Autumn  
Calving  Cows
G. RYAN
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Introduction
Seasonal  milk production  is a feature  of the Irish dairy industry.  More  than 
85% of manufacturing  milk is produced  between  March  and October  and the 
remaining  15% from November  to February.  Since dairy product-mix  is 
determined  largely  by seasonality  of milk supply,  Ireland ’s current  product  mix 
is mainly  orientated  towards  commodity  products.  Both the Culliton  Report  
(Industrial  Policy  Review  Group,  1992) and the Report  of the Expert  Group 
on the Food  Industry  (1993)  agreed  that continued  dependence  on intervention  
products  is not in the long term interests  of Irish producers,  processors  and 
consumers.  They proposed  the view that seasonal  production  of milk needs  to 
be reduced  in parallel  with the development  of genuinely  market-led  dairy  
products.
The costs associated  with winter  milk production  are higher  than those for 
summer  milk production.  Winter  milk production  systems  are generally  
perceived  as ‘high silage  input ’ systems.  Previous  research  with autumn-calving  
cows has focused  mainly  on indoor  feeding  of silage  and concentrates.  There  
has been very little research  into grassland  based  systems  of milk production  
with autumn-calving  cows. It is important  to exploit  the potential  of grazed  
grass because  it is a low cost, high quality  feed. Full exploitation  of grazed  
grass will have a large influence  on the profitability  of winter  milk.  This paper  
is focused  on the grazing  management  practices  for autumn-calving  cows at 
different  periods  during  the year.
Moorepark  study  on systems  of milk production
A research  programme  was initiated  in the autumn  of 1995 to investigate  
the effect  of three  contrasting  calving  patterns  on animal  production and  grazing  
management.  The herds were assembled  at the Solohead  Research  Site in Co. 
Tipperary.  The study was carried  out over two lactations.  The experimental  
animals  had an average  RBI ’95 of 115. The three contrasting  systems  were:
System  A: 100%  Autumn  Calving  - Sept./Oct.  calving,  stocking  rate of 
2.52 cows/ha,  high nitrogen  input and a planned  concentrate  input of >1,000  
kg-
System  AS: 50% Autumn  and 50% Spring  Calving  - Sept./Oct.  calving  
and Feb./Mar.  calving,  stocking  rate of 2.52 cows/ha,  high nitrogen  input and 
a planned  concentrate  input of >1,0(X)  kg.
System  S: 100% Spring  Calving  - Feb./Mar.  calving,  stocking  rate 
of 2.52 cows/ha,  high nitrogen  input and a planned  concentrate  input  
of -500 kg.
48
Milk yield and composition
The effect of system  of production  on milk yield, milk composition  and 
lactation  length  is shown  in Table 1.
Table 1
The effect  of system  of production  on milk yield, milk composition  and the 
level of concentrates  fed
Year ASystem
AS S
Total milk yield (kg/cow) 1996 6,638 6,513 6,179
1997 6,435 6,200 6,101
305-day  milk yield (kg/cow) 1996 6,322 6,235 6,038
1997 6,219 6,103 6,011
Milk fat (kg/cow) 1996 269 270 250
1997 265 261 242
Milk protein  (kg/cow) 1996 232 229 215
1997 213 221 213
Milk lactose  (kg/cow) 1996 309 306 287
1997 295 290 281
Fat % 1996 4.08 4.15 4.06
1997 4.14 4.22 3.96
Protein  % 1996 3.51 3.52 3.50
1997 3.52 3.57 3.51
Lactose  % 1996 4.64 4.70 4.66
1997 4.59 4.68 4.61
Lactation  length (days) 1996 322 318 304
1997 309 292 298
Concentrate  fed (kg) 1996 1,524 1,095 666
1977 949 719 560
There was a tendency  towards  higher  milk production  with System  A in 
both years  of the trial but no statistical  difference  was recorded.  System  A had 
a longer  lactation  length  in 1996. This longer  lactation  length  would  account  
for some of the difference  in milk yield but when all treatments  had their  
lactations  adjusted  to a 305-day  lactation,  there was still a tendency  towards  
higher  milk yield with System  A.
There  was no significant  difference  in milk fat, protein  and lactose  yield in 
year 1 and year 2 of the experiment.  Milk fat concentration  was significantly  
lower  for System  S in year 2, with no significant  difference  in year 1 of the 
experiment.  The large reduction  in concentrate  feeding  level between  year 1 
and year  2 was due to early  turnout  to pasture  in 1997 and a higher  digestibility  
silage  conserved.
The data in Figure 1 show the highest  peak milk production  was achieved  
with System  S. System  A had higher  milk production  levels  in the latter half 
of lactation  and were more persistent  until the end of lactation.  The cows on
49
Figure  1 - The effect  of system  of production  on milk  production  by 
week  of lactation  in 1996
System  A had a ‘secondary  peak ’ whereby  milk yield rose in mid-lactation.  
This coincided  with the cows being  turned  out to pasture.  System  S had the 
lowest  milk production  levels  at end in both years  of the trial. The seasonality  
of milk  supply  of the three  systems  of production  is shown  in Figure  2. Systems  
A and S had highly  seasonal  milk supply  patterns  whereby  System  AS had a 
more uniform  milk supply  pattern.
Grazing  management  
Early  spring  period
Spring  grass  is higher  in terms  of feeding  value  than grass  at any other  stage  
in the season.  Autumn-calving  cows are in mid-lactation  at this time and are 
still producing  high milk yields.  The provision  of early spring  grass is an
Week  of Experiment
Figure  2 - The effect  of system  of production  on milk  production  by 
week  of experiment  in 1996
50
Table 2
The effect  of different  daily herbage  allowances  on milk yield and composition  
for autumn-calving  cows in the spring  herd
Daily herbage  allowance  (kg DM/cow)
17 kg DM/cow 20 kg DM/cow 23 kg DM/cow
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 17.4 18.5 18.8
Protein  content  (%) 3.73 3.76 3.78
Fat content  (%) 4.38 4.30 4.32
Protein  yield (kg/cow/day) 0.65 0.70 0.71
Fat yield (kg/cow/day) 0.76 0.80 0.80
Source:  Maher,  Stakelum  and Rath, 1998)
important  consideration  on farms with autumn-calving  cows. The primary  
objectives  are to give autumn-calving  cows access  to grazed  grass as early as 
possible  and to budget  that grass  until grass  supply  equals  demand.  The results  
of a study at Moorepark  in 1997 where autumn-calving  cows were offered  
different  daily herbage  allowances  in the late spring  period  are shown  in Table  
2. Three levels  of daily herbage  allowance  (17, 20 and 23 kg DM per cow),  
(> 3.5 cm) were  offered  to autumn-calving  cows  (mean  calving  date September  
23). The experiment  lasted  from late April to mid June. There  were 14 cows  
per treatment  with an average  RBI of approximately  112. The average  pre­
grazing  herbage  yield in the experiment  was 1,904  kg DM per ha (> 3.5 cm). 
The autumn-calving  cows grazed  to a residual  herbage  yield of 401, 498 and 
618 kg DM per ha and a residual  sward  height  of 5.0, 6.0 and 6.9 cm for the 
low, medium  and high allowances  respectively.
There  was a response in daily  milk  yield,  protein  and fat yield  in early  lactation  
up to the highest  level of daily herbage  allowance.  There was a very small  
response  in milk fat and protein  yield and milk fat and protein  concentration  
going  from the medium  to the highest  level of daily herbage  allowance.  The 
results  show that 20 kg DM/cow/day  was capable  of supporting  a high level 
of milk production  and also optimum  pasture  utilisation.  Higher  levels  of daily  
herbage  allowances  resulted  in only a small increase  in milk production  and 
under  utilisation  of pasture.
Mid-summer  period
Supply  of feed in the form of grazed  grass exceeds  demand  for feed for 
autumn-calving  herds  from mid-July  onwards  (Ryan,  Crosse  and Rath, 1998).  
There  is an increase  in farm grass cover  for autumn-calving  cows because  of 
low herd  demand  for feed (cows  non-lactating)  during  this period.  Grass  growth  
rates are still relatively  good at this time of year. The supply  of grass on the 
farm  should  be monitored  so as to avoid large  surpluses  (increase  in farm  cover)  
occurring.  There  was a large area conserved  as surplus  for the 100% autumn ­
calving  herd (16.4  ha) than for the 50%  autumn;  50% spring-calving  herd (13.1
51
Table 3
Dry cow grazing  measurements  for 1996 and 1997
Date 1996 1997
Pre-grazing  height 8.97 8.13
Post-grazing  height 5.77 6.46
ha) or 100% spring-calving  herd (12.6  ha) during  the two years of the systems  
study. Surplus  grass on the farm should  be conserved  and fed indoors  in the 
winter  period  as a high quality  forage.
Autumn-calving  cows will generally  have a higher  body condition  score  at 
the end of lactation.  It is important  that they should  not gain excess  body  condition 
during  the dry period  and that they calve down at a body condition  score of 
3.0 - 3.5. Over  fat animals  tend to eat less post-calving  than  animals  in optimum  
condition  and have large  body  weight  losses  in the first 3 to 4 weeks  of lactation.  
The strategy  followed  at Solohead  during  the systems  study was to graze the 
milking  cows ahead  of the dry cows.  The pre- and post-grazing  heights  for the 
dry cows for the two years of the systems  study are seen in Table 3. The dry 
cows entered  paddocks  with contrasting  pre-grazing  heights  and grazed  these  
paddocks  at a pre determined  height  of 6 cm. Grazing  dry cows behind  the 
milking  cows allows  for more  restriction  in the level of intake  during  the dry 
period. This  can be difficult  to achieve  when grass growth  is high.  A post grazing  
height  of 6 cm results  in dry cows  being  maintained  at an optimum  body  condition 
score and pasture  quality  is also improved  for the remainder  of the grazing  
season.
Late autumn  period
The costs associated  with winter  milk production  are higher  than those for 
summer  milk production.  Grazed  grass is the cheapest  feed available  to Irish 
dairy farmers.  The full exploitation  of grazed  grass and conserved  forage  will 
have a large influence  on the profitability  of winter  milk production  systems.  
The focus  as autumn  cows start calving  is to meet the nutritional  needs  of the 
cow and to achieve  high levels of animal  performance  from home produced  
forage.  Therefore,  grazing  management  should  aim to utilise the maximum  
amount  of grass in the late autumn  period  with autumn-calving  cows. The 
objective  is to achieve  high intakes  of grass up to mid-November  if ground  
conditions  permit.  However,  grazing  beyond  mid-November  will reduce  the 
supply  of grass available  for grazing  in early spring.  It should  be noted that 
autumn  grass has a lower  nutritive  value than spring  grass. Generally,  grass  
grown  in the autumn/early  winter  period  has a low dry matter  content  and has 
also a lower  energy  content.  The amount  of time cows can spend  grazing  is 
also reduced  due to shortening  daylight  hours. The utilisation  of autumn  pasture  
IS more  difficult  because  of the lower  DM concentration of the herbage,  increased  
fouling  due to poor ground  conditions  (Wilkin  and Garwood,  1986),  reduced  
grazing  time and a lower  metabolizable  energy  content  in the DM (Givens,
52
Table 4
The effect  of treatment  on milk yield and composition
Treatment  G Treatment  S
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 23.27 22.48
Fat yield (kg/cow/day) 0.99 0.96
Protein  yield (kg/cow/day) 0.83 0.68
Lactose  yield (kg/cow/day) 0.94 0.85
Fat % 4.30 4.29
Protein  % 3.55 3.04
Lactose  % 4.72 4.42
Average  bodyweight  change  (kg) -0.39 -0.75
1993).  The nutritional  status of the autumn-calving  cow is particularly  important  
at this time of the year. Poor  nutritional  status  and negative  energy  balance  may 
have consequences  for production  levels  in early  lactation  and the reproduction  
efficiency  of the cows. There  are two studies  reported  here with  autumn-calving  
cows on pasture.
A study was undertaken  in the autumn  of 1997 to compare  grazed  grass  
versus  grass  silage  as a forage  source  for autumn-calving  cows  in early lactation.  
Animals  on Treatment  S were fed a diet of grass silage  ad-libitum  and 6 kg 
concentrate.  The cows on treatment  G were offered  20 kg grass DM/cow/day  
and 6 kg concentrate.  Herbage  was allocated  on the basis  of pre-grazing  yields  
(> 4 cm). The grass and silage  comparison  lasted  eight weeks  between  29th 
September  1997 and ceased  on 17th November  1997.  The comparison  ceased  
due to high rainfall  levels  and poor  ground  conditions.  There  was fifty per cent 
first lactation  animals  in each treatment.  The cows had an average  RBI ’95 of 
118.
The effect  of treatment  on milk  yield  and composition  during  the experiment  
is shown  in Table  4.
There  was no statistical  difference  in milk  yield  recorded  in the experimental  
period.  There was no significant  difference  in fat and lactose  yields or 
concentration  in the experiment.  Milk protein  yield and protein  concentration  
was significantly  higher  for Treatment  G. The cows on Treatment  S had a 
significantly  higher  body  weight  loss during  the study  than the cows  on treatment
Table 5
The effect  of treatment  on dry matter  intake  (kg DM/cow)
Treatment  G Treatment  S
FDMI 12.03 6.03
TDMIl 17.27 11.27
FDMI - Forage  Dry Matter  Intake TDMI  - Total Dry Matter  Intake
53
G. There  was 0.36 kg/cow/day  difference  between  the grazed  grass group  and 
the grass  silage  group  for bodyweight  loss in the first seven  weeks  of lactation.
The intake levels  for the cows  offered  grazed  grass  and grass  silage are  shown 
in Table 5. The cows  outdoors  on grazed  grass had a significantly  higher  forage  
dry matter  intake  and a significantly  higher  total dry matter  intake.  The group  
intakes  for Treatment  S during  the experimental  period  were  approximately  8.5 
kg of forage  dry matter  intake  (FDMf)  but for no apparent  reason  the intake  
dropped  to 6 kg FDMf  during  the same period  as the intake  run.
The silage  fed in the study was of good quality  as measured  by the in-vitro  
digestibility  (763 g/kg DM), crude protein  (134 g/kg DM) and the ash (93 
g/kg DM) indicating  very little soil contamination.  However,  for a dry matter  
content  of 149 g/kg,  the pH of 4.26 was  higher  than desirable.  The grass analysis  
measured  over the experimental  period  shows  that the modified  acid detergent  
fibre levels on average  were 242 g/kg DM. The organic  matter  digestibility  
levels  over  the experimental  period  on average  were 805 g/kg OM. The quality  
of the sward was good as measured  by the OMD figures.
Immediately  post-calving,  the autumn-calving  cows diet should  consist  of 
a mixture  of grass  and concentrates.  The level  of concentrate  feeding will depend  
on the quality  and quantity  of the grass  available.  The results  of a study  carried  
out at Moorepark  in the late autumn/early  winter  period  of 1996 in which  grass  
was supplemented  with different  levels  of concentrate  are shown  in Table 6. 
Three groups  of autumn-calving  cows were allowed  graze by day and night  
and were offered  209 kg of grass DM/cow/day  (> 4 cm). This grass had a low 
dry matter  content  (14%)  and a moderate  DMD  (77-78%).  ft is important  to 
note that the grass quality  was low in this study because  the grass cover  was 
too high.
There  was a large  response  in milk  yield  to concentrate  feeding.  The response  
was approximately  0.75 kg milk per kg of concentrate  consumed.  In addition,  
the cows  on the highest  level  of concentrate  feeding  had the highest  milk  protein  
content.  The improved  performance  is associated  with an increased  total energy  
intake.
Grass  silage  should  be introduced  into the diet when  grass  supply becomes  
limiting  or when poor grazing  conditions  prevail.  The cow ’s diet is a blend  of
Table 6
The effect  of level of concentrate  feeding  on the performance  of Autumn  
calving  cows in early lactation
Grass only Grass -i- 3kg cone. Grass + 6kg cone.
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 20.9 23.3 25.2
Fat % 4.62 4.56 4.50
Protein  % 3.16 3.34 3.43
Source:  Maher  and Ryan, 1997
54
grass, concentrates  and silage  until the  cows  are fully housed  indoors.  The cover  
of grass available  for grazing  ahead  of the cows should  not exceed  2,000  kg 
DM per ha (> 4 cm) for herds  with 100%  autumn-calving  herds.  If grass  supply  
is not controlled,  too much grass on the farm will lead to a deterioration  in 
pasture  quality  and it will also have a negative  effect  on animal  performance.  
Grazing  high yields  of grass at the final grazing  will retard  the supply  of grass  
available  for grazing  in spring.  In addition,  grass growth  rates are reduced,  
sward  vigour  will be depressed  and consequently  the swards  may become  very 
open.
Blueprint  for winter  milk production
The above  components  are part  of an overall system of winter  milk  production  
which  can result in very high levels of performance  from grazed  grass and 
conserved  forage.  The overall  blueprint  for autumn-calving  cows is outlined  
below.
Calving  date for winter  milk production  is concentrated  around  September/  
October  calving.  The optimum  calving  pattern  for the spring  and autumn  
components  of the herd will vary widely  depending  on the winter  milk scheme  
available.  A realistic  target for technically  efficient  dairy farmers  using this 
system  is 6,400  litres milk per cow with an average  fat content  of 3.9% and 
a protein  content  of 3.4%.  This level of performance  is achievable  at a stocking  
rate of 2.7 cows/ha  with a nitrogen  input of 300 kg per hectare  and a mean  
calving  date in mid-October.  The inputs  per cow include  1.2 tonnes  (DM)  of 
concentrates,  2.9 tonnes  (DM)  of grazed  grass and 1.4 tonnes  (DM)  of silage.  
Using  this blueprint,  a total of 450-1- kg of fat and protein  per cow (300 day 
lactation)  is possible.  The system  requires  a high digestibility  silage  with high 
intake  characteristics,  which  cannot  be restricted  if this level of performance  
is to be achieved.
Cows  in the 100%  autumn-calving  herd calved  in the September-November  
period.  Post turnout  to pasture,  the grazing  management  in the early grazing  
season  is similar  to the spring-calving  herds.  The autumn-calving  cows  are grazed 
to the same post-grazing  height,  offered  similar  daily herbage  allowances  and 
a similar  per cent of total area is closed  for first and second  cut silage.  However,  
the grazing  management  diverges  after late summer  when  the autumn-calving  
cows cease lactation.  The demand  for pasture  is reduced  after this period  due 
to dry cows. Grass growth  rates are still relatively  good at this time of year.  
This results  in an increase  in farm cover.  It is important  to make full use of 
this feed supply.  The autumn-calving  cows should  remain  outdoors  full-time  
until ground  conditions  or grass necessitate  them being housed.  Maximising  
grazed  grass in the diet of the autumn-calving  cow during  this period  will reduce  
the quantity of silage  fed. Poorer  fertility  performance  is associated  with  autumn ­
calving  cows. Heat detection  can be more difficult  in autumn-calving  herds.  
A combination  of more  intensive  heat detection  and some  heat synchronisation  
may be necessary.
An overview  of the current  recommended  system  for winter  milk  production  
is shown  in Figure  3.
55
Calving  Date
2 t n ^ ^
Month  of year
Figure  3 - Milk  supply  profile  (Y axis on right  of graph)  together  with  
the feed budget  (Y axis on left of graph)  for a system  of milk  production  
based  on 100%  autumn-calving
The seasonality  of milk supply  together  with the fat and protein  content  of 
the milk for 100% autumn  calving  is shown  in Figure  4.
-% MIk Supply - Fat % -Prol.  %
Figure  4 - Seasonality  of milk  supply  (% supply/month)  and the fat and 
protein  content  of milk  for a herd  with 100%  autumn-calving
Some  management  considerations  in relation  to winter  milk production
• Herd management  was more  difficult  with system  AS than with system  A 
or S. There are cows in different  stages of lactation  and this makes  
management  more difficult.  In system  A or system  S the workload  is 
concentrated  around  a few main  periods.  The management  decisions  within  
systems  A and  S are done  on a herd  basis  which  simplifies the milk  production 
system.  Split calving  patterns  leads to four groups  of replacement  heifers  
which  makes  management  more difficult.
• Autumn-calving  cows should  be allowed  access  to grazed  grass as early as 
possible  in the spring  time.  Turnout  to pasture  results  in a ‘secondary  peak ’
56
in milk yield, rise in protein  yield and lower  milk production  costs. The 
optimum  allowance  in the spring  is 20 kg DM/cow/day  resulting  in high 
levels of milk production  and optimum  utilisation  of pasture.  Higher  
allowances  may be necessary  with cows of higher  genetic  merit.
There  is low herd demand  for feed  (cows  non-lactating)  in the mid-summer  
period for autumn-calving  cows.  It is important  to monitor  farm cover  during  
this period  to avoid surpluses.  Surplus  grass should  be conserved  as high 
dry matter,  high digestibility  silage and can be fed indoors  in the winter  
period.
Graze dry cows  behind  the milking  cows  during  the dry period.  The milking  
cows are offered  herbage  of higher  energy  content.  The dry cows graze to 
a pre-determined  height  which improves pasture  quality and insures  dry cows  
are in optimum  body condition  at calving.
The optimum  calving  pattern  for winter  milk production  will vary widely  
depending  on the winter  milk scheme.  Cows calving  in September  and 
October  lead to the possibility  for outdoor  calving  in favourable  weather  
conditions  thereby  reducing  the workload  and minimising  the risk of disease.  
Herd calving  based  on September  and October  allows  for the inclusion  of 
some grazed  grass post-calving.  Improved  milk protein  yield and 
concentration  were obtained  from autumn-calving  cows on grazed  grass in 
early lactation.  The cows on grass silage lost more bodyweight  than the 
cows on grazed  grass. Systems  of milk production  incorporating  autumn ­
calving  cows should  aim to incorporate  the maximum  amount  of grazed  
grass in the cows ’ diet to improve  animal  performance,  animal  intakes  and 
to reduce  the requirement  for silage. This reduces  the cost of milk  production  
during  the late autumn/early  winter  period.
The cow ’s diet is a blend  of grass,  concentrates  and silage  until fully housed  
indoors.  The optimum  level of supplementation  in the autumn  period  will 
depend  on the quantity  and quality  of grass available.
The utilisation  of grass in the autumn  period  is one of the most important  
factors  influencing  animal  performance.  The pre-grazing  yield for autumn ­
calving  cows in early lactation  should  not exceed  2,000  kg DM per ha. The 
autumn-calving  cows should  remain  outdoors  full-time  until ground  
conditions  or grass supply  necessitates  them being housed.
References
Givens,  D. 1. (1993).  Influence  of growth  stage and season  on the energy  value  of fresh  
herbage.  1. Changes  in the metabolisable  energy  content.  Journal  of the British  
Grassland  Society,  48, 1660174.
Industrial Policy  Review  Group (1992).  A time  for change:  Industry  policy  for the 1990’s. 
Chairman:  J. Culliton,  Government  Publications,  Dublin  1992.
Maher,  J., Stakelum,  G. and Rath, M. (1998). Effect  of lactation  stage,  season  and herbage  
allowance  on the performance  of dairy cows. Proceedings  of the Irish Grassland 
and Animal  Production  Association,  Research  Forum  24th Meeting,  UCD,  Belfield.  
p. 171-172.
57
Maher,  J. and Ryan,  G. (1997).  Feeding  the autumn-calving  cow. Todays  Farm,  Vol. 
8, No. 3, September/October,  1997.
Report  of the Expert  Group  on the Food Industry  (1993).  Department  of Agriculture,  
Food and Forestry.  April 1993.
Ryan,  G., Crosse,  S. and Rath,  M. (1998).  The effect  of three  contrasting  calving  patterns  
on the grazing  management  of dairy  cows.  Proceedings  of Irish  Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Research  Forum,  24th Meeting,  UCD, Belfield.  pp. 169- 
170.
Wilkin,  R. J. and Garwood,  E. D. (1986).  Effect  of treading,  poaching  and fouling  on 
grass  production  and utilisation.  In: ‘Grazing ’ (ed. J. Frame),  Occasional  Symposium,  
No. 19, British  Grassland  Society,  pp. 19-31.
58
Improving  Cow Performance  with 
Increased  Use of Grazed  Grass
S. and A. LEONARD  
Teergay,  Kilbarry,  Macroom,  Co. Cork.
Farm  details
Total home  farm area is 44.1 ha, 39 ha of this area is allocated  to the dairy  
herd. Sugar  beet is grown  on 2.5 ha, and barley/whole  crop is grown  on 2.5 
ha. Fifty  dairy  cows  are milked  on the farm,  which  fill a quota  of 77,000  gallons  
(1540  gallons/7209  kgs/cow).  It is a total spring  calving  herd - mean calving  
date 11th of February.  The soil type is brown  podzolic;  the home  farm is located  
on a tributary  to the Lee Valley;  some of the lower  farm is exposed  to winter  
flooding.
Two other  farms exist,  the first farm  is allocated  to the calf  and heifer  rearing  
enterprise  (18 ha), the second  farm (8 ha) is run as a dry hogget  unit. In our 
system  - all farms are integrated  in the REP Scheme.
Labour  units
Two labour  units manage  the farm, my wife Angela  and myself.
Production  figures  (1996-1998)
Table 1
Farm  production  performance  (1996-1998)
1996 1997 1998
Milk yield (kg/milk/cow) 6039 6507 7181
Milk protein  (%) 3.20 3.24 3.34
Milk fat (%) 3.69 3.70 3.79
Milk fat yield (kg MS) 223 237 272
Milk protein  yield (kg MS) 193 211 240
Total solids (kg) 416 448 512
Table 2
Total feed budget  (1996-1998)
Feed budget  (t/DM/cow) 1996 1997 1998
Grass (Allowance) 3.9 4.7 5.7
Cone (Allowance) 0.38 0.40 0.58
Silage (Allowance) 1.0 1.05 1.0
Maize (Allowance) 0.40 0.34 _
Total 5.7 6.5 7.3
59
In the past two years we have leased  more quota. Rather  than increasing  
cow numbers  we have chosen  to increase  the output  of milk per cow. We are 
now filling 15,000  gallons  of extra quota  with the same number  of cows as 
we previously  had. In the past two years  our milk yield  per cow has increased  
by 1142 kg milk per cow (244 gal per cow). This yield has not come at the 
expense  of extra concentrate  feeding.  The majority  of the improved  animal 
performance  has come  from feeding  the animals  better  at grass. Consistently  
over the past 3 years our total feed budget  has increased  and this has resulted  
in an increased  animal  production  performance.  The grass allowance  has 
increased  by over  45% from 1996  to 1998.  Our current  feed budget  incorporates  
290-300  days at grass. Turnout  is in early February  as cows calve, and 
housing during  the early days of December.  The feed budget  has increased  
in three different  areas.
a) Increased  grass availability  in spring
Generally  paddocks  are closed  in rotation  starting  October  10th. The closing  
farm cover  therefore  has a wedge  shape  to it i.e. the paddock  with the highest  
cover  is the first closed  paddock,  the paddock  with the lowest  cover  is the last 
closed  paddock.  Early  nitrogen is applied  in January  whenever  ground  conditions 
and soil temperatures  allow. With a cover of grass on the farm at nitrogen  
application  grass growth  is stimulated.  Then,  as cows  calve  they graze  by day; 
when grass supply  allows  grazing  by night starts.
b) Increased  grass availability  in autumn
With the low stocking  rate we can generally  graze until late November  
depending  on ground  conditions.  With the total farm available  to graze post 
second  silage,  our farm cover  increases  to high levels  during  September  and 
early October.
b) Improved  daily herd grass  allowance  (mid-grazing  season)
With the potential  of the herd we aim to feed the cows fully at grass.  This 
requires  a larger  grass allowance  i.e. 23 kgs DM/cow/day.  We closely  monitor  
milk yield and milk protein.  Combining  grass allowance,  milk yield and milk 
protein  together,  enables  us to see whether  we are feeding  the animals  correctly  
or not.
Grassland  management/measurement
We have  been  involved  in the Moorepark  grass  measurement  project  for the 
past three years,  since its inception  we have learned  quite a deal about  - grass  
cover,  grass allocation,  post grazing  height  and monitoring  the animal  factors
i.e. milk/milk  protein and cow condition score.  We base our grazing  management  
on five cornerstones:
(a) Farm cover
(b) Pre-grazing  yield in paddock
(c) Daily grass allocation
(d) Post grazing  sward  height
(e) Grass quality
60
a) Farm  cover
We generally  aim at keeping  our farm cover  at 900 - 1000 kg DM per ha. 
This means  keeping  a high amount  of kg DM per cow. Therefore  the possibility  
of running  out of grass is usually  low, although  it has happened  on a number  
of occasions  most vividly  during  the mid April period  of 1998.
b) Pre-grazing  yield in paddock
The key to keeping  the cover  in check  during  periods  of high grass growth  
rates, is maintaining  a manageable  yield ahead of the herd. We find that pre 
grazing  yields  in the range  of 1,700  kg/DM/ha  are adequate  to graze out properly, 
with a high proportion  of live leaf. If the pre grazing  yields  run too high ahead  
of the herds,  then the paddock  is cut and it is either  baled or pitted.  Storing  
baled  silage  in the yard is never  a problem  - it is a saleable  product  if not needed  
by our own herd. In the case of grazing  a higher  cover  i.e. 2800-3000  kg/DM/  
ha where post grazing  height  may be lenient  - the pasture  is topped  post grazing.
c) Daily grass allowance
In general  the daily allowance  of grass to the herd at turnout  and for the 
rest of the grazing  season  is high. Post turnout  we strive  to place  as much  grass  
in front of the herd as our budget  allows.  Our low stocking  rate is of great  
benefit  to us - with the area available  we can graze  a lot of ground  in the early  
spring.  Turnout  by night in the past two years has been the 7th March  (1997)  
and 21st February  (1998).  With  the production  capacity  of animals  in the herd 
we aim to allow the herd up to 23 kg grass DM/cow/day  during  the main  grazing  
season.  We aim to produce  as much milk as possible  from grazed  grass, so 
therefore we present  the animals  with  enough  of the feed  to fulfil  their  potential.  
However, we  do not hesitate  to feed concentrates  when  required.  By monitoring  
the grazing  situation  closely,  we always  know how well the animals  are fed 
- the key pointers  to this are post grazing  sward  height,  daily bulk tank yield,  
milk protein  percentage  and the amount  and quality  of grass in the paddock  
immediately  ahead  of the cows.  The awareness  of these principles  in grazing  
management  is the key to the success  in our system.
d) Post grazing  sward  height
With the high allowance  of grass which  we offer the herd one always  must  
be willing  to top the pasture  to maintain  a quality  sward  in front of the herd.  
At times  our post grazing  height  is lenient  but as a general  rule we aim to graze  
pasture  down  to about  5.5 - 6.5 cm depending  on yield and quality  of the sward.  
In general we  top paddocks  twice  a year,  but we also have the facility  to alternate  
our silage  ground  around  the farm,  we do not have one specific  area for cutting  
silage.
b) Grass  quality
Grass quality  is not a big problem  in our system.  With the amount  of topping  
and the high  proportion  of ryegrass  in the swards,  maintaining  a good  digestible  
sward  is not a major  problem.  We have a reseeding  policy  in place where  5- 
8% of the entire  home  unit is reseeded  each year  - this system  runs concurrently  
with our tillage  system.
61
Herd predicted  index
Table 3
Herd predicted  index  profile  (1996-1998)
Milk (kg) Fat (kg) Protein  (kg) Fat (kg) Protein  (%)
1996 186.3 6.9 5.9 -0.01 0.004
1997 234.1 7.9 7.0 -0.01 0.001
1998 254.8 9.1 8.1 -0.01 0.00
Currently  our herd is bred for milk with little emphasis  on milk solids,  due 
to the use of high milk  bulls  in the past. Over  the past two years  we have moved  
our breeding  policy  to use bulls with 400-500  kg of milk and positive  protein  
(%). We have specifically  used Irish bulls to do this, namely,  JOS, MFX,  GMI 
and MAU.  Our future  breeding  policy  will focus  on maintaining  milk volume  
and increasing  milk solids as much as possible.
Type of cow
Strong,  well muscled  cows with good feet and udders  are our objectives,  
the type of animal  that can maintain  1600-1700  gallons  (8000  kg) milk yield  
at 3.5% protein  and 4.0% fat, and more importantly  can maintain  herself  in 
a spring  calving  herd for 5 to 6 years.
Fertility  performance
Table  4
Herd fertility  performance  (1996-1998)
Year 1996 1997 1998
Cows served  in first three weeks  (%) 77 86 80
Calving  to 1st service  interval  (days) 110 75 80
Services  per conception 2.1 1.7 1.95
Pregnancy  rate: 1st service  (%) 44 60 66
2nd service  (%) 56 47 27
3rd service  (%) 42 86 20
Infertile  rate (%) 10.4 4.8 14
In the past three years our fertility  performance  has been variable.  In 1998 
our infertile  rate increased  to 14% from 4.8% in 1997. We use D.I.Y.  AI; it 
seems to work  satisfactorily  on the farm.  We are concerned  that given  the results  
of the three year Moorepark  study,  where  the high merit  animals  had a much  
higher  infertile  rate than the medium  merit  animals,  that this may mirror  itself  
on our farm. We do not have a problem  submitting  cows for AI, the problem  
we have is animals  not conceiving  to the services.  Using  tail paint,  pre service  
scanning  and pregnancy  scanning  are part of our breeding  programme,  without
62
these  aids our  infertile  rate would  most  definitely  be higher.  We are now involved  
in the Moorepark  fertility  study - and hopefully  we will receive  the relevant  
guidance  as to where  to focus our future  breeding  policy  and what to breed  
for.
Cost structure  and future  direction  of the farm
In the medium  term we would  like to increase  our quota  size; this will mainly  
be done through  leasing  more quota.  Our current  cost base is quite low, our 
fixed costs are running  at 38.3 per gal which  includes  the cost of quota  lease  
of 23.2p. per gal, variable  costs are running  at 23.9p. per gal. There  is possibly  
some more room for improvement  in reducing  these costs;  however  the most  
crippling  cost is the leased  quota. One of the bigger  problems  about leasing  
extra quota is taking  on more land. We do not intend  putting  non paying  
enterprises  to use this extra  land. We would  hope to fill about 100,000  gallons  
of milk in the next 2-3 years.  We should  carry this extra quota  with no extra  
labour  cost. With our cost base, expansion  in our current  capacity  is our main  
aim.
Acknowledgements
We would  like to express  our gratitude  to Michael  O’ Donovan  of Moorepark  
Research  Centre  for his help in preparing  this paper.
63
Role of Partnerships  in the Future  of 
Irish Dairy  Farms
T. M. BUTLER
Farm Business  Advisers  Ltd, Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
It is generally  accepted  that dairy farming  profitability  will not continue  at 
the relatively  high level of recent  years.  Apart from the predicted  decline  in 
milk prices,  dairy farm output  is also being reduced  by depressed  values  of 
calves  and cull cows.  As a consequence,  there will be increased  emphasis  on 
cost reductions.  There is a limit below which  cost cutting  cannot  go, and 
ultimately  survival  will not be achieved  without  increase  in size. Additional  
resources  must  be procured  by means  of purchase,  lease,  or amalgamation  such 
as share farming  or partnership.
Expansion  of farm size
The prevailing  market  prices of land with milk quota often give quite  
unattractive  returns  on investment.  In many instances,  the farmer  has no 
requirement  for the additional  land. With margins  declining  in all sectors,  
acquiring  land surplus  to dairying  requirements  at exorbitant  prices  makes  bad 
business  sense.
The leasing  of land with quota  can be commercially  justified  if the land will 
be profitably  used and the quota  price is not excessive.  The value of quota  to 
a particular  farmer  varies with  size being  leased  relative  to owned  quota, seasonal 
distribution  and fat percentage.  It is sometimes  not realised  that a quota  with 
a low base fat content  is vulnerable  to reduction  in size. For example,  lease 
a quota  of 30,000  gallons  with  a fat base of 3.55%; increasing  the fat percentage  
to 3.95%  will reduce  the quota by 2160 gallons.
The possibility  of increasing  unit size by amalgamation  of resources  in a 
formal partnership  has not been a  traditionally  popular  option  but is being widely  
discussed  in recent  times. Partnerships  have many positive  features  but also 
carry  pitfalls.  Prior  to establishment,  it is important  that the serious  implications  
are thoroughly  examined  by the partners.
Requirements  for partnership  success
Before  any physical  farm factors  are considered,  there are certain  human 
attributes  required  for a successful  partnership  i.e. compatibility  in terms of 
personality,  attitude,  commitment  and trust. Major  differences  in any of these 
parameters  will inevitably  lead to divorce  proceedings.
The second  essential  area to be satisfied  is the viability  of the new entity.  
Farmers  that have been performing  unprofitably,  and carrying  significant  
borrowings,  may not be appropriate  participants  in a partnership.  Ideally,  an 
independent  competent  professional  should  be used to determine  the projected  
profitability.  The feasibility  study should  examine  both short-term  and long­
term performance.
64
An important  third aspect  is clear understanding  by each proposed  partner  
to the implications  of partnership  operation.  It must be absolutely  recognised  
that partnership  is not leasing  in disguise.  A partnership  is a well defined  legal  
entity  that will keep accounts,  apportion  profits  in an agreed  manner  and make  
tax returns  (each partner).
Intending  partners  should  be aware that at the present  time, partnerships  
enjoy  no special  privileges  with regard  to milk quota  regulations.  The offieial  
interpretation  is that since each partner  will transfer  land and quota  to a new 
entity,  each quota will be subject  to 20% clawback.  It is hoped  that if there  
is sufficient  positive  demand,  this position  would  be altered.  It is on this basis  
that the concept  is being openly  discussed.
Benefits  of partnerships
Whilst  partnerships  cannot  be expected  to resolve  all of the problems  facing  
dairy  farmers,  they can certainly  help to alleviate  some  of the major  obstacles;-
1. Unit size:
The most  common  problem  is small  quota  size i.e. 20,000  to 40,000  gallons  
on 60 or 100 acres of land. With reducing  values  of dairy farm produce  and 
declining  margins  in other enterprises,  size of unit will be the limiting  factor  
to future viability.
2. Labour  requirements:
Farming,  particularly  when  inefficient,  gives  poor  returns  on labour  relative  
to industrial  employment.  There  are two aspects  to the farm labour  problem:
(i) Returns  to the farmer  himself  are often quite low for the effort  involved.  
Smaller  units  cannot  afford  hired  labour.  These  have traditionally  survived  
on the contribution  of family  labour.  This situation  is rapidly  changing  
with better  education  and employment  opportunities.  Even  relatively  large  
dairy farms  are finding  that no family  member  is interested  in continuing  
the business  due to the moderate  rewards  for the work involved.
(ii) Hired  labour  is becoming unaffordable  and very often  unavoidable.  A typical 
farm labour  unit costs  about  £12,000  per year.  An operator  with managerial  
expertise  or specialist  skills  will cost significantly  more. Without  adequate  
size, a hired labour  unit cannot  be afforded.  A herd size in excess  of 100 
cows is required  before  a permanent  hired labour  unit can be considered.
Partnerships  have very obvious  benefits  to offer.  There  is potential  to rotate  
weekend  work  and organise  holiday  time. If necessary,  and desirable,  a partner  
could supplement  income  with some off-farm  employment,
3. Quality  and safety  standards:
Compliance  with constantly  increasing  hygiene  standards  and safety  
regulations  requires  investment  that individual  farmers  often cannot  afford  or 
justify.  Increased  size will help to carry these costs.
4. Profitability  of secondary  enterprises:
The relevant  secondary  enterprises  that occupy  land are beef cattle,  sheep  
and cereals.  The latter is not applicable  without  area aid eligibility.  In many  
instances,  significant  capital  investment  is required  to improve  efficiencies  in
65
animal  performance  and labour  usage. The combining  of resources  in a 
partnership  may afford  the opportunity  for proper  development.  In some  
situations  the rearing  of replacement  heifers  and fattening  cull cows could  
become  part of this operation.
5. Environmental  standards:
Complying  with  requirements  pertinent  to the environment  is proving  difficult  
on many  farms because  of the inability to make  the necessary capital investments. 
Increasing  the size of the unit, and the opportunity  for specialist  enterprise  
operation,  should  be of great  assistance.  The target  should  be to have  all drystock  
units participating  in REPS.  This would  benefit  the farm and environment.
Partnership  operation
There  is a wide  variety of circumstances  in which  partnerships  have  a positive  
contribution  to make.  Potential  farmers  vary in age, health  status,  land area and 
quality,  milk  quota,  secondary  enterprises,  farm structures,  and financial  position. 
Common  requirements  are the need to improve  efficiency,  profitability,  and 
quality  of life.
Details  of two farms  for which  a feasibility  study  was undertaken  are shown 
in Table 1. Farmer  A has ill-health  and has three children  at various  stages  of 
education.  Farmer  B has recently  taken over the family  farm and recognises  
that he must expand  his existing  operation.
Table 1
Summary  data on proposed  farm partners
Farm  A Farm B
Acres (map) 132 77
Acres (adjusted 123 72
Milk quota (gallons) 67,492 26,014
Beef system 45 calf to beef 20 calf to store
Age (years) 49 28
Permanent  labour  units 1 0
The two farms could quite easily be structured  into a partnership  on the 
following  basis:
(i) A will become  the Dairy  Farm  with 90 cows  and 22 replacement  heifers.
(ii) B will operate  as a Beef Farm with 64 steers reared  calf to beef.
(iii) The permanent  labour  unit will not be required  and will be replaced  by 
Farmer  B, and Farm Relief  Services.
Details  of actual income  and expenditure  on the individual  farms and 
projections  for the proposed  partnership  are presented  in Table 2. These  data 
show the profit  increasing  to £70,721  compared  with the existing  combined  
total of £46,997.  The extra profit  is generated  by income  increase  of £7,254  
and expenses  reduction  of £16,470.  The major  cost savings  are achieved  by 
elimination  of hired permanent  labour  and quota  leases.
66
Table 2
Actual  income  and expenditure  on individual  farms  and partnership  projections
Income: Farm  A (£) Farm B (£) Partnership  (£)
Gross output  livestock 25,651 8,964 41,140
Gross milk receipts 70,918 25,598 96,311
Current  receipts 8,268 1,678 10,880
Expenses:104,837 36,240 148,331
Seeds & sprays 1,362 _851
Fertilisers  & lime 8,694 3,078 12,755
Livestock  maintenance 4,163 1,466 6,122
Feed & fodder 12,914 3041 17,331Casual  labour 897 360 2,000
Transport  hire 644 116 504
Machinery  hire 4,626 1.266 7,177
Daily variable  costs 804 254 2,202
Milk & livestock  levies 1,191 135 2,273
Silage  additive  & polythene 616 208 1,866
Machinery  operating  costs 4,828 688 5,014
Vehicle  costs 3,031 1,237 2,103Telephone  & ESB 3,205 595 2,697
Permanent  labour 13,903 _
Rent, rates & insurance 2,791 712 2,444
Loan interest  & charges 1,069 52 1,215Quota  lease 2,307 670
Repairs,  renewals  & hardware 3,234 445 2,221
Accountancy  fees 920 855 1,169
Miscellaneous  expenses 871 78 1,402
Depreciation 5,696 1,058 6,264
77,766 16,214 77,610
Profit: 27,071 19,926 70,721
This  type of improved  performance  is typical of the potential  that is achievable  
on many  units throughout  the country.  The concept  could  make  rapid  progress  
if the obstacles  of milk quota  clawback  were removed.
Summary
There  are very obvious  benefits  to be derived  from  partnership  establishment  
in Irish dairy farming.  These  include  improved  efficiencies,  higher  profits  and 
better  quality  of life.
To proceed  with the introduction  of partnerships  a first requirement  is the 
removal  of the imposition  of clawbacks  on milk quotas.  Assuming  this is 
achievable,  none of the other potential  difficulties  are insurmountable  if the 
partners  have a committed  attitude.
Partnerships  have advantages  over leasing  in terms  of retention  and use of 
resources  and taxation  implications.
67
Trends  Within  Danish  Dairy  Farming
P. B. S0RENSEN
The Danish  Agricultural  Advisory  Centre  
The National  Department  of Cattle  Husbandry,  Denmark
Danish  agriculture  - past and present
Denmark  is a Scandinavian  country  with a total area of 43,000  km- and a 
population  of 5 million  people.  1000 years ago our famous  and disreputable  
ancestors,  the Vikings,  plundered  and raped  away  from home  while  their  wives  
were  farming  at home.  Since  then we have turned  more  peaceable  and farming  
has become  one of our most  important  businesses.  Even  today  where  Denmark  
is a high-tech  industrial  society,  farming is of immense  importance  to 
employment  and the economy.  More  than two-thirds  of the agricultural  produce  
are exported.
Owner-occupancy  is more  widespread  in Danish  agriculture  than anywhere  
else in Europe  with a very small proportion  of farms tenant-run.
No. of farms:  60,910  in 1997 compared  with 140,200  in 1970.  The average  
size rose from  21 to 44 hectares.  The percentage  of farms  over 50 hectares  rose 
from 7 per cent in 1975 to 25 per cent in 1995 (Fig. 1).
Employment:  Full-time  employees  in 1996 numbered  just under 13,000 
against  20,000  in 1985.  Only one in four  farms  had full-time  assistance. However, 
including  industries  directly  linked  to agriculture,  the farming  sector  provides  
jobs for 233,000  people.
Approximately  1,200  young  people  embark  on agricultrual  education  every  
year. The average  age of people  setting  up in farming  is 27 years.  The average  
age of farmers  is 51 years.
Table 1
Agricultural  area in Denmark  by type of crop
1,000 ha 1982 1998
Cereals 1,706 1,519
of which  winter  wheat 241 673
barley 1,333 677
Pulses 29 107
Oil flax 0 6
Rape seed 168 118
of which  non food rape seed 10
Set-aside 144
Roughage  inch green cereals,  total 760 578
Cereals  for green fodder 53 111
Maize  for silage 16 45
Fodder  sugar beets 131 33
Grass in rotation 324 247
Grass outside  rotation 235 142
Potatoes 32 38
Beets for sugar production 74 64
Seeds for sowing 45 83
Horticultural  products 28 21
Other 11 1
Total cultivated  area 2,854 2,679
cultivated  on farms 2,828 2,658
Area cultivated  on farms in per cent 66.2 62.4
of Denmark ’s total area
Source:  Ministry  of Agriculture
Production:  The annual  output  of animal  products  could satisfy  the 
requirements  of 15 million  people  or 245 per farm.
Exports:  More  than two-thirds  of the total farm production  is exported.  In 
1997, 60 per cent of exports  went to other  EU countries  while  Japan  and the 
US were the main markets  outside  the EU.
Agricultural  exports  in 1997 were  worth  54 billion  Danish  kroner  in foreign  
currency.  The industry ’s requirements  for imported  operational  materials
69
accounted  for 15 billion  kroner  only. The difference  - 39 billion  kroner  - 
contributed  significantly  to pay for imported  raw materials  and equipment  for 
other industries  as well as cars and other consumer  goods.
Farm  product  prices  and costs:  Between  1980/84  and 1997,  the farmgate  
prices  of products  for the home market  rose by 2 per cent while the general  
price level rose by 68 per cent.
Income:  The total net income  in agriculture  amounted  to approx.  7 billion  
Danish  kroner  in 1995, 1996, 1997 and is estimated  to decrease  considerably  
in 1998 because  of the dramatic  drop in pork prices.  For full-time  farmers,  the 
net income  in 1997 was 231,000  Danish  kroner  in crop production.  195,000 
Danish  kroner  in cattle/milk  production  and 501,000  Danish  kroner  in pig 
production.
Organic  production:  In 1997  there  were 1,617  authorised  organic  holdings  
with a total  area of 64,329  ha in Denmark.  This corresponds  to an average  area 
of 39.8 ha.
Structural  changes:  When  talking  about  structural  development  in Danish  
agriculture,  pig production  is often  mentioned.  Denmark  is the world ’s leading  
pork exporter  with an annual  production  of 25 million  pigs. As you can see 
in Table  2, Denmark  produced  9.4 per cent of the total EU pig meat  production.  
In recent  years pig production  has been concentrated  in still fewer  and larger  
farms.
Table 2
Livestock  production  in the EU
1,000  tonnesBeef & 
vealPig Poultry  
meat meat Eggs Milk ButterSkm ’d mil 
Cheese powde
1995 total 7,964 15,976 7,944 5.341 112,996 1,735 5,798 1,186
1996 total 7,950 16,316 8,317 5,223 113,410 1,794 5,942 1,191
1997 total 7,887 16,249 8,575 5,154 113,315 1,756 5,983 1,126
Of which:
Belgium/Luxembourg  340 1,015 311 205 3,199 100 74 56
Denmark 175 1,523 185 85 4,433 50 290 23
Germany 1,449 3,562 745 840 27,171 442 1,591 334
Greece 69 142 161 120 549 1 9 0
Spain 592 2,401 987 557 5,397 24 185 14
France 1,718 2,220 2,290 975 22,922 466 1,521 366
Ireland 569 220 126 31 5,254 139 96 102
Italy 1,160 1,396 1,136 720 9,877 92 799 0
Netherlands 564 1,376 670 592 10,519 131 705 41
Austria 206 489 100 100 2,421 41 80 18
Portugal 104 303 246 103 1,673 21 47 13
Finland 99 179 55 71 2,369 57 88 25
Sweden 148 326 85 109 3,276 54 119 31
UK 694 1,096 1,479 645 14,255 140 380 105
Denmark  as % of total 2.2 9.4 2.2 1.6 3.9 2.8 4.8 2.0
Source:  Ministry  of Agriculture
70
The changes  in Danish  dairy  farming  have  involved  a high  number  of farmers.  
In the following  paragraphs some  of the main  characteristics  of this development  
will be described,  including  the impact  of the new milk  quota  transfer  market.  
Finally,  the challenges  of the future  will be pointed  out.
When  Denmark  joined  the EEC in 1973, the total number  of dairy farmers  
was nearly  70,000  who produced  a total of 4.5 billion  kg milk. Today 10,400 
dairy farmers  produce  the same  volume  of milk.  This decline  in farm numbers  
of about 85 per cent is indeed  very remarkable  (Figure  2).
The total  number  of dairy  cows  has also dropped  considerably.  In 1973 there
5<73 75 77 79 SI 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 98 Y*ar
Number  of hard* Average  herd size
Figure  2
were  a total of 1.2 million  whereas  the present  number  is a little below  700,000.  
In other  words:  The milk yield  per cow has gone up by more than 50 per cent 
and for milk recorded  cows the average  yield per cow is now 7,327  kg (Table
3).
Table 3
Average  production  of milk recorded  in Denmark,  1997/98
Breed No. ofCows % of all Kg % fat Kg % Kg Kg fat +
cows* per herd COWS milk fat protein  protein protein
Danish
Holsteins401,735 64 69.0 7,769 4.16 323 3.39 264 587
Danish  Jerseys 72,615 60 12.5 5.389 6.07 327 4.12 222 549
Red Danish 56,731 49 9.7 7,089 4.25 302 3.58 254 556
Red and White 5,468 53 0.9 6,897 4.16 287 3.45 238 525
Crossbreds 45,658 61 7.8 6,860 4.48 308 3.57 245 553
Total 582,207 62 100.0 7,327 4.36 320 3.49 256 576
‘Nearly  90 per cent of all Danish  dairy cows are under official  milk recording.
71
Today  90 per cent of all Danish  dairy cows  are under  official  milk  recording.  
Together  with a unique  registration  system  and a national  database  this forms 
the basis  of farm management  tools, calculation  of breeding  values  and a quality 
young-sire  testing  programme  where  300 Holstein  bulls, 100 Jersey  bulls, 80 
red Danish  bulls and 15 Red and White  bulls are tested  annually.
Large  improvement  of productivity
Measured  by labour  input,  the average  dairy  farm is much  larger  today  than 
25 years ago as the present  input is 3,700  hours  against  about  3,100  hours  25 
years ago. This means  that by means  of a modest  increase  in labour  input it 
is today  possible  to run a farm with more  than three times  as many  dairy cows 
as in 1973 which is indeed  a dramatic  improvement.
At the time the farms  were less specialized  than today as cattle production  
accounted  for only 60 per cent of the gross margin  in the middle  of the 1970s  
against  75 per cent in the middle  of the 1990s.
The area of the farms  has of course  increased  in this period  from 25 to more  
than 60 hectares.  55 per cent of this area is today used to produce  roughage  
against  45 per cent in 1973.  The roughage  area per cow has been stable  at 0.6 
ha.
An interesting  change  that has taken place  over  the past  25 years  is that dairy 
farms produce  much  less beef  today.  25 years  ago the net sales  of animals made 
up more than 30 per cent of the total receipts  from animals  and milk whereas  
the figure  today is only 15 per cent. This is due to the fact that fewer  cows  
are needed  to produce  the same amount  of milk but also that beef prices  have 
not increased  at the same  rate as milk prices.  Beef  prices  have been especially  
low in the last few years.
Danish  average  farm ranked  second  in the EU
Table 4 shows  the structural  development  in a number  of selected  EU 
countries.  At the beginning  of the new milk quota  year 1999/2000  there will 
be about 10,400 Danish  milk  producers  with an average  milk  quota  of 428,000  
kg. This means  that a Danish  average  farm is close to being  the largest  in the 
EU - thus outranking  the UK farm.  If the about  6,000  “passive ” UK  quota  owners 
are left out, the average  quota  is not 380,000  kg as stated  in the table  but about  
450,000  kg - in this case the UK still has the largest  farms.
The recent  rapid  structural  changes  are caused  by the successful  introduction  
of the new milk  quota  transfer  market  in April 1998.  This  issue  will be described  
later on in this paper.
As appears  from the table,  the development  in Holland  has been relatively  
stagnant  in the recent  years.  The French  milk production  is characterized  by 
large  structural  differences  - from  highly  intensive  milk  production in the northern  
part to extensive  and environmentally  sound  production  in the mountains  in 
the area near the Mediterranean.  The farms  in the northern  regions  have nearly 
50 per cent higher  quotas  than the average  quota of 165,000  kg. A similar  
geographical  structural  difference  also exists in Germany  where  the farms in 
the northern  regions  are comparable  to medium-sized  Danish  farms.
72
Table  4
Structural  changes  in selected  EU countries,  1983-1997/98
Denmark UK (3) Germany  (2)Holland France Sweden Ireland  (3
No. of farms
1983 35,400 58,000 395,000 61,000 427,000 37,400 86,000
1990/91 21,400 45.000 278,000 47,000 212,000 24.800 51.000
1997/98 12.255 37,809 165,178 38.557 144,833 15,188 35,000
Average  milk quota per farm, kg
1983 153,000 290,000 72,000 218,000 65,000 96,000 66,000
1990/91 217,000 320,000 112,000 243,000 124,000 138,000 102,000
1997/98 363,000 380,000 168,000 285,000 165,000 217.000 150,000
Average  number  of cows per herd (1)
1983 28 57 14 41 16 17 18
1990/91 34 63 23 40 25 22 25
1997/98 54 64 30 43 26 31 33
All figures  are computed  as per 1 April 1998
Source:  ZMP, Dairy Facts & Figures,  Eurostat  and EU Commission
!) Estimates
2) 1983-figures  include  West Germany  only
3) Inclusive  of “passive ’ quota owners
Traditionally,  the farms  in the former  German  Democratic  Republic  are large  
- and they still are - whereas  the farms  in the southern  regions  are smaller  than 
the national  average.  The structure  within  Danish  cattle farming  is probably  
the most homogenous  in the EU.
Figure  3
73
Income
Measured  by income  per hour, the result  of the Danish  dairy  farms  has been 
considerably  lower  than the average  of full-time  farms  concentrating  on arable 
production  or pig production  (Figure  3).
The average  difference  is about  30 Danish  kroner  (DKK)  per hour (present  
value).  Only by the end of the 1980s  was the income  of the dairy farms  almost  
equal to that of the other  enterprises.  The economic  incentive  to switch from 
dairy  cows to another  enterprise,  mainly  pigs and/or  plant  production,  has thus 
been present.
Attention  should  also be paid to the level itself  with a relatively  low income  
per hour until the early 1980s,  a higher  but still low level until the late 1980s  
and a figure  nearly  100 Danish  kroner  in the last 8-10 years.  Even though  this 
cannot  be compared  with  labour  market  wages,  the income  is modest  by Danish 
standards.
Measured  by current  income,  the Danish  dairy  farms  have also had a lower  
income  than other  enterprises  even though  the difference  has been somewhat  
lower  than the income  per hour. One of the reasons  is that the dairy farmers  
have generally  contributed  about 10 per cent more labour  than the average  of 
arable  and pig farms.
Investment  and financing
When  Denmark  joined  the EEC, the general  opinion  was that there was a 
basis for increasing  farm production.  This had the effect  that in the 1970s  the 
investments  of the dairy farms  were 50 per cent higher  than the depreciations  
whereas  in the 1980s they invested  15 per cent more than they wrote  off. In 
the 1990s investments  were nearly  35 per cent higher  than depreciations.
74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98
_____ _ Faim  inv«stm«nts
_______ % of form  profit. Owners  own  financing  
It of form  Invastmanf
Figure  4
74
The general  investment  level and the development  in income  per hour  have  
to be considered  when  evaluating  the development  shown  in Figure  4. It shows  
the relation  between  investment  in farm  assets  and farm profit.  The figure  shows  
that the investments  in the 1970s  were not covered  by an operational  surplus  
but later on investments  turned  more prudent.
Of course,  the introduction  of milk  quotas  in 1983 played  an important  role 
in this development  as for some  time they curbed  the decline  in farm numbers  
(see Figure  2).
Generally,  more caution  was displayed  following  a violent  crisis in Danish  
agriculture  in the early 1980s  when  the optimism  of the 1970s  received  a blow. 
The rise in the investment  share  over the past few years is probably  due to the 
fact that the farmers  took up a reserved  attitude  until they knew whether  the 
milk  quotas  became freely transferable  or not and  also that  the share is measured  
at a lower operational  surplus.
Generally,  investments  have been more  prudent  since  the early 1980s  which  
appears  from the self-financing  curve in which  depreciations  are included  as 
well.
In the 1970s  the money  invested  was mainly  borrowed  money  whereas  since  
then the farmers  have mainly  invested  their own money  although  borrowings  
again have increased  dramatically  in recent  years,  but now at a much lower  
interest  rate than in the 1970s.  The actual  interest  in farm property  is about  7 
per cent at 30 years  mortgage  loans.  Up to 70 per cent of the value  of the farm  
property  can be financed  via these loans.
Savings
An important  element  in an economic  assessment  is the volume  of savings  
for consolidation.  This has changed  drastically  for the dairy  farmers  since 1973  
which  is shown  in Figure  5 displaying  the annual  savings  of 5-year  periods.
Savings
Converted  by means  of net price  index
Year
The figures  clearly  show  that the development  has turned  from a deficit  to 
a pretty  good surplus  over the past 10 years.  It can be concluded  that in general 
the existing  dairy farms  have a healthier  economy  than for many years.
It has in no way been a problem-free  development  as thousands  of dairy 
farmers  have dropped  out of dairy farming.  To this must be added  that out- 
goers  schemes  have made  the decision  of stopping  to produce  milk easier  than 
perhaps  even attractive  to elderly  farmers.  The present  possibility  of selling  
quotas  has in principle  the same effect.
Impact  of new milk quota  exchange
The milk quota  exchange  is the most recent  vehicle  for restructuring  the 
Danish  dairy industry.  It was set up last year  and is aimed  at increasing  flexibility,  
to break the ties between  land and quota  and to allow the market  rather  than 
the political  system  to fix the price of quota.  It gives farmers  who are willing  
to expand,  the opportunity  to move  quickly  up to 80 cows.  Other  farmers  have 
to make  the decision  whether  they want to stay in milk  production  in the future. 
How is the exchange  working?
• Producers,  wanting  to sell, make  an offer to the Danish  Dairy  Board  stating  
the volume  they want to sell and the minimum  price.
• Producers,  wanting  to buy, make  an offer  to the Danish  Dairy  Board  stating 
the volume  they want to buy and the minimum  price.
The offers to sell are recorded  in a supply  curve according  to increasing  
prices,  and the offers  to buy  are recorded  in a demand  curve  according  to falling  
prices  (Figure  6). The cut-off  between  the two curves constitutes  an equilibrium  
price or market  clearing  price, which  is the point where  the quantity  offered 
for sale equals  the quantity  which  buyers  want to purchase  as the same price.
Danish  milk quota  exchange
Accumulated  sales  volume  (miion  tonnes)
Figure  6Sourc9:  Danish  MUk  floord
emrcirW
76
• Producers,  who have stated  that they want to sell at a price, which  is lower  
or equal to the equilibrium  price, will sell at the equilibrium  price.
• Producers,  who have stated  that they want  to buy at a price,  which  is higher  
or equal to the equilibrium  price, will buy at the equilibrium  price.
Other  offers to buy or sell (located  to the right  of the intersection)  are rejected
and may “try” again in the next exchange  round.
The equilibrium  price of the exchange  applies  to milk  quota  with an average  
fat content  of 4.36%  and each producer ’s price/price  offer is differentiated  
according  to fat content.
The price formation  of the quota  exchange  is based on the condition  that 
there are many producers  wanting  to buy and sell. This means  that individual  
offers cannot  affect  the equilibrium  price - neither  unrealistically  high offers  
to buy nor unrealistically  low offers to sell.
Possibilities  and limitations  of buying  milk  quota  - for farms  already  having  
a milk quota  the following  rules apply:
• rented  quota  is included  when calculating  the volume  of the quota  and the 
following  upper  maximum  limits apply:
1977-1988:  800,000  kg
1998-  1999:  850,000  kg
1999- 2000: 900,000  kg
2000-  2001:  950,000  kg
2001-  2002  1,000,000  kg
• if a farm has a quota  below  the upper  maximum  limit, the farmer  can buy 
up to 150,000  kg per year or 300,000  kg over 5 years.
• the milk  quota  purchased  includes  the allocation,  if any, received  as a newly  
established  farmer.  After  the purchase  the quota  must not exceed  the upper  
maximum  limit.
Special  rules for newly  established  farmers
To encourage  the producers  to redistribute  quotas  through  the exchange,  a 
clawback  of 33 per cent  on direct  transfers  was introduced  in 1997.  The deducted  
quota goes straight  into the national  reserve  and is redistributed  to newly  
established  farmers.  These  changes  have huge effect  on how quota is being  
transferred.
Newly  established  dairy farms:
• can apply  to the Danish  Dairy  Board  for a quota  up to 560,000  kg (80 cows)
• max. one-third  of the allocation  is free quotas  from the national  reserve
• max. two-thirds  of the allocation  are bought  at the equilibrium  price
Newly  established  “empty ” farms:
• can apply to the Danish  Dairy Board  for a quota  up to 300,000  t
• max. one-third  of the allocation  is free quotas  from the national  reserve
• max. two-thirds  of the allocation  are bought  at the equilibrium  price
Table  5 shows  the result  of the first 3 quota  exchange  rounds.  The first round  
was opened  on 25 December  1997 and closed  for sales and purchase  offers  on 
16 January  1998.  The result  of this first round  was as follows:  A total of 6,840
77
Table 5
Key figures  for the 3 first Danish  milk quota  exchange  rounds,  1983-1997/98
December August December
Market  clearing  price*,  DKK per kg 2.28 2.68 2.92
Market  clearing  quantity,  million  kg 177.80 56.50 158.00
Accepted  offers to sell or buy, total 4,8,5 1,564 4,017
Farms  wanting  to sell or buy quota (total offers)6,840 4,103 5,500
Quota  sales
Accepted  offers to sell quota 1,017 359 978
Offers  to sell 1,394 439 1,100
Quota  offered  for sale, million  kg 278.40 80.40 190.00
Average  quota purchased,  kg 174,800 157,400 161,600
Quota  purchases
Accepted  offers to buy quota 3,818 1,236 3.039
Offers  to buy 5,446 3,664 4,400
Quantity  in demand,  million  kg 222.90 126.30 192.00
Average  quota sold, kg 46,600 45,700 52,000
* 4.35%  fat
Source:  Danish  Dairy Board
producers  traded  at the exchange,  out of which  1,394  wanted  to sell 278.4  million 
kg and 5,446  wanted  to buy. 177.8  million  was traded  kg at the market  clearing  
price of Danish  kroner  2.28 per kg.
1,017 producers  made  sales offers  below  the marketing  clearing  price and 
sold their  quota.  3,818  producers  made  offers  to buy above  the market  clearing  
price  and consequently  they bought  the required  quantity. This  means  that 1,987  
offers were not traded.  366 producers  wanted  too high a price for their quota  
and 1,627 producers  did not offer enough  to acquire  the quota  quantity  they 
intended  to. They  were informed  that their  offers  were  not traded  and they may 
try again at the next round of the quota  exchange.
Since  the milk quota  exchange  system  started  in the autumn  of 1997, it has 
been decided  to have two annual  exchange  rounds.  The price  has gone  up from 
Danish  kroner  2.28 per kg in the first round  to nearly  Danish  kroner  3.00 at 
the latest  in December  1998.  Before  the exchange  the price was Danish  kroner  
1.60 per kg.
This high rise in prices  is a clear indication  that the relatively  high income  
of the dairy  farmers  in the 1990s  has created  optimism  so that they now believe  
in a satisfactory  income  from dairy farming  in the coming  years.  After  years  
of little or no investment  on dairy farms  there  is now a resurgence.  New barns 
for 140-150  cows are being built. Existing  buildings  are being  expanded  by 
farmers  who are confident  they are staying  in the industry.
About  400 Dutch  farmers  have  immigrated  into Denmark  and are now running 
mainly  dairy farms  here. They have contributed  to creating  further  dynamics
78
in cattle  production  because  they demand  large  productive  units and make  heavy  
investments.  Their  farms  are considerably  larger  than the Danish  average  dairy  
farm.
More  stringent  control
In recent  years  Danish  farmers  have experienced  increasing  public  focus  on 
farm production.  This has resulted  in a wide range of rules and regulations  
which  the farmers  have to observe.
I. Animal  manure  and area requirements
In order  to reduce  nitrate  leaching to streams, lakes  and seas strict  rule stipulate  
how to use nitrogen  and animal  manure.  Last year the so-called  aquatic  
Environment  Plan II was adopted,  among  other stipulating  reduction  of the 
maximum  N application  rates to individual  crops.  By way of example:  spring  
barley  75-120  kg N per ha depending  on soil type, pre-crop,  irrigated  or not 
irrigated,  winter  wheat 110-187  kg ha N per ha, grass 290-325  kg N kg per 
ha and grass for extensive  grazing  140 kg N per ha.
The goals of the aquatic  Environment  Plan II are:
1 Wet meadows,  increasing  forest area
2. Increased  feed utilization
3. Increased  harmony  between  area and LU
4. Increased  utilization  of cattle manure
5. Decreased  N-recommendation  (10%)
Strict  rules  govern  the utilization  of N in animal  manure.  By way of example:  
Minimum  50 per cent of the nitrogen  in cattle slurry  must be utilized  in the 
first year and 10 per cent in the second  year. 9 months ’ storage  capacity  is 
required  for slurry  which  must not be spread  in the period  from 1 October  to 
1 February  and only on fields covered  with green crops.  Furthermore  67 per 
cent of all fields must be covered  with green crops during  the wintertime.
Nitrate  directive
Reduction  in N-leaching  100,000  tonnes  
Now:  1 LU = 1 milking  cow
From 1999:  1 LU = 100 kg N ex.storage
Application  of cattle manure
Now:
From 1999:  
From 2003: 
Mixed  farms  
Now:
From 2003:N from 2.3 LU/ha  (app. 270 kg N) 
210 kg N/ha  
170 kg N/ha
2.0 LU/ha
1.4 LU/ha  (140 kg N)
The area of land also has to be balanced  against  the livestock  numbers  on 
each individual  farm.  A cattle  farm is allowed  to have maximum  2.1 livestock  
units per ha. All types of livestock  are converted  to livestock  units. One dairy  
cow of a heavy  breed  (i.e. Holstein)  corresponds  to 1.18 livestock  units,  1 heifer:  
0.35 livestock  units, 1 bull from birth to 450 kg: 0.35 livestock  units, 1 bull
79
from birth to 450 kg: 0.35 livestock  units, 1 sow with  piglets  and young  females: 
0.33 livestock  units, 1 slaughter  pig to 30-98  kg: 0.033  livestock  units.  Poultry, 
sheep,  horses,  mink etc are converted  to livestock  units as well.
As from 1 August  2002 the harmony  requirement  for cattle farms is 1.7 
livestock  units per ha and 1.4 livestock  units per ha for other  livestock  types.  
However,  for cattle  farms  2.3 livestock  units are required  if sugar  beets,  grass 
or grass crops are grown  on more than 70 per cent of the area of the farm.
Every year the farmer  has to prepare  a fertilizer  balance  to The Danish  
Ministry  ot Food,  Agriculture  and Fisheries,  showing  how much commercial  
fertilizer  and animal  manure  have been applied  to each individual  crop and 
utilization  of animal  manure.  Farmers  who break the rules are fined.
The area  requirements  are tightened  as well and this has brought about  rapidly 
rising  land  prices  in areas  with many pig and cattle  farms  (up to 100,000  Danish  
kroner  per ha). So far Denmark  is the only country  meeting  the EU nitrate 
directive.
In the future,  it is likely  that pesticide  balances  are to be prepared  and sent 
to the Ministry  of Food,  Agriculture  and Fisheries  and the farmers  will no doubt  
be forced  to reduce  consumption.  Denmark  is already  among  the countries  in 
the EU applying  least pesticides  (g per ha) - today it is compulsory  to prepare  
a field record  showing  all pesticide  treatments.
2. Veterinary  rules
Currently  there  is much  public  focus on veterinary  and animal  welfare  issues 
and strict rules govern  the use of drugs on cattle farms.
General  rules
• The vet must only hand out or prescribe  prescription  drugs, provide  he 
personally  sets the diagnosis.
• It is not allowed  to hand out antibiotics  and chemotherapeutic  drugs  meant  
for injection  through  the skin of injection  into udder  or uterus.
• Strict  rules  govern  the withdrawal  of milk and slaughter  after  treatment  with 
a prescription  drug.
• Dehorning  of calves  must  take place  only  following  local  anaesthesia  carried  
out by a vet.
Health  advisory  agreement
A herd owner  who enters  into a written  health  advisory  agreement  with a vet 
is entitled  to:
• 12 annual  advisory  visits by the vet
• drugs for post-treatment  of cows, provided  the herd ’s vet has made the 
diagnosis  and started  the treatment
• drying-off  antibiotics,  provided  a positive  bacteriological  test of individual  
quarters
• drugs  for the treatment  and repeated  treatments  of calves  and young  stock,  
provided  the herd ’s vet has made the diagnosis  and started  the treatment
National  disease  eradication  programme
The Danish  cattle  stock  has a high veterinary  status and a great  many  diseases  
have been eradicated  by means  of sanitation  programmes  (“test and slaughter
80
policy ”). In the mid-1980s  IBR was eradicated  in a nationwide  programme  in 
which  more than 15 per cent of all cattle was slaughtered.  Denmark  is now 
100 per cent IBR-negative.
Right  now we are eradicating  BVD (bovine  Virus  Diarrhoea).  Herds  which  
have had an unbroken  BVD-free  status for more than 24 months  and whose  
BVD-free  status  has been  confirmed  through  a status  test are free to sell or buy 
animals  without  preceding  examination.
There  are two types  of status  test (needed  in case of transfer  to another  herd, 
exhibition  at cattle show, pasturing,  etc):
• Tank milk test, showing  a value below  50 units
• If the value  exceeds  50 or if no tank milk  test is available  (e.g. in beef  cattle
herds),  3 young  animals  (age; 8-10  months)  are to be blood-tested  for BVD-
virus and antibodies  with a negative  result.
Animals  from  a BVD-free  herd which  has had BVD-free  status  for less than 
24 months  can only be sold/purchased  if they have been blood-tested  for BVD  
antibodies with  negative  result. Calves  below  the age of 3 months  must  be blood- 
tested  for both BVD-virus  and BVD-antibody  with negative  result  (both  on the 
same day).
All animals  that are traded  must be accompanied  by a health  certificate,  
showing  the BVD-status  of the animal  and issued  by the Minisry  of Food,  
Agriculture  and Fisheries.
3. Housing
Livestock  housing  has also been much  debated  in political  circles.  According  
to the existing  regulations  new livestock  buildings  must meet certain  
requirements  as to ventilation,  resting  area, etc. Young  stock  below  the age of 
1 year must not be tied up and if young  stock  are housed  on slatted  floor,  they 
must  have access  to cubilcles  or deep  liter. The existing  animal  welfare  housing  
requirements  will no doubt  be tightened  in the years to come.
Total  organic  milk production  in mio.  kg.
soo^ MUUenkg arganle  milk
100  J
^ Tew  of ootliorieeHoa
ISM IMS 1M7 ISM
1995 IBSe 1997  1998  1999  2000
Figure  8. Teer  of dellTery
81
Organic  farming  is gaining  ground
The increasing  demand  for organic  dairy products  in recent  years has of 
course  resulted  in a dramatic  increase  in the number  of farms converting  to 
organic  farming.  In 1V2 to 2 years 10 per cent of Denmark ’s dairy production  
will be organic.  The price  of organic  milk is now about  25 per cent higher  than  
that of conventional  milk.
The higher  milk  prices  paid during  the period  of conversion  has accelerated  
the rapid development.  As shown  in Table 6, the average  organic  farm has a 
higher  milk quota  than the average  conventional  farm.
Table 6
Number  of organic  farms  with milk quotas
No. of farms Total quota  
million  kgAverage  quota  
per farm, kgAve. quota per 
conventional  farm, kg
1993/94 132 39 295,000 271,000
1994/95 146 47 323,000 290,000
1995/96 147 56 381,000 310,000
1996/97 344 140 407,000 330,000
1997/98 430 183 427,000 363,000
1998/99 672 333 496,000 392,000
Over the past 10 years there has been an unsatisfied  demand  for organic  
products  among  the Danish  consumers.  Organic  products  are trendy  and the 
consumers  are willing  to pay extra. With the large expansion  of production,  
demand  and supply  seems  to balance.
Branded  goods which  have been successful  as conventional  goods,  e.g. 
“Lurpak ”, are now introduced  in an organic  version.  This product  development  
is expected  to lead to increasing  demand.
In the future  organic  dairy products  are to be exported,  the UK, Germany  
and Sweden  being the most  interesting  markets.  Whether  the high  price  of organic 
milk and the sound  economy  of this production  can be maintained  remains  to 
be seen in the years to come.
High milk price needed
Denmark  cannot  rapidly  expand  production  when quotas  go. The whole  
country  is a nitrogen  sensitive  area. Environmental  restrictions  already  in place  
will limit the increase  in milk production  to between  5-10 per cent. Then why 
are we one of the four EU countries  (Sweden,  the UK, Italy and Denmark)  
calling  for quota  abolition  in 2006 in agenda  2000?  In the long term we are 
aiming  to set up a dairy industry  which  will be viable  - quotas  or no quota.
The system  of farming  is high cost compared  to Ireland.  Grass  has a role 
in reducing  costs but the cold winters  limit its potential.  Cows  are housed  for 
6-7 months  and calving  takes place all year round.
To survive  in the future,  we need  large  herd sizes  but even more  importantly,
82
a high milk price is needed.  Last year the milk price was Danish  kroner  2.50 
per kg. Organic milk, a  sector  in which  the production  as mentioned  is increasing  
rapidly,  made up to Danish  kroner  3.25 per kg. Organic  production  together  
with intensive  product  development,  aggressive  marketing  and increased  
efficiency  are the most important  tools to secure  a high milk price.
To maintain  high prices  in the future  we have set about  targeting  the high 
value added  European  markets.  A strategic  decision  was made over 10 years  
ago to switch  milk  from  commodities  sold to  third  country  markets  and develop  
more profitable  markets  in European  countries,  particularly  Germany. The milk  
pricing  system  was changing  to encourage  a more uniform  year round  milk  
supply.  It seems  that the policy  is now paying  off.
Postponement  of milk reform  gives concern
If we want to have a milk industry  in 25 years time, we have to be able to 
compete  in a free world  market.  We cannot  do it with 30-40  cow herds.  In a 
30-cow  dairy herd in the EU it costs about  Danish  kroner  300 to produce  100 
kg milk. In the US the costs of producing  100 kg is Danish  kroner  150 and 
in Australia  Danish  kroner  100 according  to the International  Farm  Comparison  
Network.  On EU-farms  with 60-75  dairy  cows  it costs about  Danish  kroner  225 
to produce  100 kg.
The Danish  Dairy  Board  is pleased  that an agreement  was made  in March  
concerning  an agricultural  reform  in the EU. At the same  time it is regrettable  
that the milk reform  and thus the lowering  of the guaranteed  minimum  prices  
of 25 per cent was postponed  until 2003/04.  This reservation  leads to uncertainty  
about EU’s long-term  policy  which  neither  the milk producers  nor the dairy  
industry  really need.
From a Danish  point of view it is positive  that the compensation  is now 
divided equally  without  leaving  out special  producer  groups.  The Danish  Dairy 
Board  is clearly  opposed  to the extra quota  allocated  to Italy, Spain,  Greece  
and Ireland.
The milk reform  was postponed  for budgetary  reasons  to make  the political  
patience  come out. This means  that the EU will have much shorter  time to 
adjust  the system  and the competitive  power  to the coming  WTO agreement  
which is expected  to be signed  no later  than in 2003.  Furthermore,  this situation  
also creates uncertain  conditions  for the enlargement  of the EU with the East 
European  countries.
What about the future of the quota system?  In 2003 at the earliest  this 
important  question  - which  is of decisive  importance  to the milk  producers  and 
the dairy industry  - will be dealt with. According  to the Danish  Dairy Board  
this is unacceptable  in connection  with  the very dramatic  structural development  
and the internationalisation  now taking  place.
The future
By 2006 the total number  of producers  in Denmark  will be 5,500  with an 
average  herd size of 80-90 cows to produce  the national  quota.  This clear  
direction  for the future is being backed  by the advisory  service  and the
83
government.  Structures  are being put in place. These include,  as already  
mentioned,  the milk quota  exchange  but also partnerships  and co-ops  to allow  
it to happen.  By way of example,  the two leading  cooperative  milk processors  
MD Foods  and Kloever  Milk merged  one month  ago. The new cooperative,  
named  MD Foods,  will process  91 per cent of the milk produced  in Denmark  
and its total annual  turnover  is estimated  at 26 billion  Danish  kroner.  In the 
beginning  of 1999 the two largest  cooperative  slaughterhouses  Danish  Crown  
and Vestjyske  merged.  The market  shares  of the resulting  company,  named  
Danish  Crown,  will be 85 per cent of all pig slaughterings  and 65 per cent of 
all cattle  slaughterings.  It is the world ’s largest  slaughterhouse  and its total  annual 
turnover  is estimated  at 38 billion  Danish  kroner.  The Danish  agricultural  industry 
is preparing  itself  to compete  with  the biggest  players  on the future  world  market. 
Effectiveness,  constant  product  development,  professional  marketing  and 
introduction  of high-priced  branded  goods  are to secure  the Danish  farmers  the 
highest  possible  prices  for their products.
84
Key Factors  in Growing  a Business
P. BAKER
Cloughjordan  House,  Cloughjordan,  Co. Tipperary
I was honoured  with a Nuffield  scholarship  in 1997.  A Nuffield  scholarship  
gives one the opportunity  to travel  the world  and study one ’s chosen  topic.  Its 
main  aim is to encourage  active  involvement  and leadership  within  agriculture.  
The Nuffield  network  of past and present  scholars  in various  parts  of the world 
is a wonderful  opportunity  to meet  with  positive  and interesting  people.  I would  
like to acknowledge  the generosity  of my sponsors:  The Farmers  Journal,  FBD  
and IFA
Reason  for looking  at “the key factors  in growing  a business ”:
My main  reason  for choosing  this topic  was that I felt there was widespread  
stagnation within  European  agriculture.  This was largely  because  of EU policies  
and restrictions which  were  perceived  as obstacles  to growth.  Industry stagnation  
was, and  is, taking  a financial  and human toll and  my study  was aimed  at finding  
a way around  these “obstacles ”.
Conclusion  of this report:
I interviewed  leading  managers  both from the corporate  sector  and within  
farming.  From  them, I formed  the conclusion for  my report  which  can be summed  
up in one quotation:
“Obstacles  are what  you see when  you take your eyes off the goals ”.
If there  is only one sentence  to be remembered  from my paper  then that is 
it! The reasons  are:
1. Business  growth  comes  from a combination  of management  and capital.
2. Our management  combines  a mix of strategy  (planning)  and capability.
3. My  simple  deduction  is that we all have a certain  amount  of capital  or can 
get it if the idea is right.  We would  also like to think  we have a reasonable  
degree  of capability.  Mostly  we do not have our eyes on a goal or strategy  
for the future.
4. Because  we generally  do not plan or set clear goals in this “impossible ” 
environment  in which  we operate  then we see nothing  but obstacles!
5. The general  trend in the past has been for farmers  to be reactive,  to let the 
co-ops,  the EU and God control  our destiny.  We must become  proactive  
where  we take responsibility  for our own destiny.  We must learn from the 
history  of even the past 5 years.  Individual  businesses  have stagnated  over 
that period.  The question  to ask ourselves  today is where  do we see our 
businesses  and their profits  in 5 years time?  To the vast majority,  it will 
be where the bureaucrats  are now telling  you it will be. All very easy!
6. The vast majority  will not plan.  The average  performer  will be reactive  and 
wait for direction  from the “brainy  boys”.
The difference  between  real success  and failure,  as individual  businesses,
85
is the amount  of time and effort  we are prepared  to put into setting  goals and 
planning  for the future.
The key factors  in growth:
There  are really  three  key factors  to growing  a business  which  I will briefly  
refer  to: The Kerry  Group  is an example  of an organisation  that fully embraces  
these three factors.  I was fortunate  to visit Denis  Brosnan  and his team. The 
Kerry  success  formula  states  that “Sustained  profitable  growth ” will come from 
a mix of:
STRATEGY  X CAPABILITY  X CAPITAL  
(SCC)
a) Strategy:
Real success  depends  on thinking  and planning,  as cited by Denis  Brosnan.  
Without  strategic  planning  Kerry ’s growth  would  be 5% instead  of the annual  
15% actually  achieved.  Kerry work on the principal  of the 80/20  rule:
80% of the growth  of successful  business  is due to time spent  thinking  and 
planning.  Only 20% is due to doing  the physical  work.  Arguably,  many  of our 
farm businesses  suffer  from the reverse,  that is the “ostrich ” syndrome.  Far too 
much  time is spent  on the operational  side and precious  little time given over 
to planning  where  we want our business  to go.
Strategy  can be defined  as asking  three questions:
1. Where  are we now?
2. Where  do we want to be in a given period?
3. How do we go about getting  there?
We must  try to match  realistic  market  opportunities  with our own skills  and 
balance  it with personal  ambitions,  values,  family  issues,  etc. Irrespective  of 
the circumstances  we must be proactive  about our situation  and we must all 
ask these questions:
1. Where  are we now?
Some of the main questions  to be answered  might  be:
• What is our core business?
• What are our limitations,  our weaknesses?
• What is the value of our assets and actual returns  being made?
• How much do we need to live and to pay tax?
• Do we consider  our business  a “lifestyle ” business  or a “growth ” business?  
Kerry  started  this process  back  in 1979.  Then  they were  faced  with  a situation
where  they lost 20% of their  milk  pool through  a brucellosis  disease  eradication  
scheme.  Denis  Brosnan ’s statement  at the time was that they could  never  again 
be solely  dependent  on milk to grow  their business.  They decided  at that stage 
to: “stop, think & plan”.
2. Where  we want to be in a given  period  of time:
We should  examine
• What we see as our mission:  where  do we see ourselves  in 5 years?
• Are there realistic  future market  opportunities?  If not, what are the 
alternatives?
86
• Have we clear financial  targets  (based  firstly  around  what we need to live 
and then creating  real surpluses)?
• There should  be a clear direction  but with flexibility  to respond  to bigger  
picture  factors.  The most pertinent  example  of this would  be whether  your  
plan for the next 10 years is operable  with or without  milk quotas.
• What  are our “soft goals ”? i.e. family,  where  we want  to live, what  we want  
for our children?
For some,  it may involve  accepting  that growth  within  farming,  for the present, 
is limiting.  Milking  50 cows now and blindly  targeting  200 cows in 5 years  
time might  not be a realistic  plan under  the current  scenario.  The exodus  of 
many  producers  will present  opportunities  for those  who  plan to become  serious  
players  in the business.
The Kerry  Group  has a clear  mission  statement  that revolves around  becoming  
a major  food ingredient  corporation,  they also have a clear  goal to grow  profits  
by 15% annually.  They  have detailed  records  of plans  made  over  the years. The  
actual results  consistently  beat their plan. This is largely  because  all of 
management  have agreed  on the plan and are focussed  on delivering  the results.
3. How to get there:
We must answer  the following  four questions  which  increase  profit  in any 
business:  Can we:
i. Increase  production?
ii. Increase  selling  price?
iii. Add value with higher  margin  products?
iv. Cut costs?
The real question  is whether  we have fully explored  all of these options.  
If the honest  answer  to all four is in the negative  than we are all in trouble!  
This is why it becomes  so vital for those  of us who want  to grow  to plan. Some  
of this planning  might  revolve  around:
• Isolating  what you, as a team, are really good at and increasing  the effort  
in that area. If your real skill is cows and grass, have you fully answered  
all four of the above  questions?  Are partnerships,  for example,  the route  to 
efficiency  and lowering  costs  that also free up more  time  to explore  alternative  
strategies?
• Being  prepared  to be flexible  and open to change.  We have to aggressively  
research  and pursue  any alternative  realistic strategies.  A clear  line will emerge 
between  the serious  commercial farm  businesses  and the “hobby ” farms where 
an alternative  source  of income  will be the mainstay.  We have to be crystal  
clear  which  camp  we plan to be in and then work  toward  the goal of getting  
there.
Capability
This is the second  key factor  in growing  a profitable  business.  It has been 
described  as: “the ability  to formulate  and implement  strategy ”. The higher  up 
the ladder  of management  in any business,  the more important  it becomes  to 
be able to think  strategically, to  plan  the growth  of the business.  The old argument  
is that the highest  reward  always  goes  to those  who  use their  minds.  Theoretically,
87
it will always  be possible  to hire in physical  labour.  So we need to constantly  
question  what we are doing  and is it really  contributing  to the growth  of our 
business?
We must all define  the direction  in which  we want our businesses  to grow 
and isolate  the deficiencies  in our own capabilities  that might  prevent  that growth, 
A dairy farmer  for example  might  be good in cow and grass skills but lack 
planning  and financial  skills.  If, after careful  consideration,  your survival  into 
the future  can come  from cows  and grass alone  then you must  chase  new ideas 
and the research  available  to do it better.  The profits  that you plan to generate  
will need to be invested  to further  grow the business.  Have you the skills  
necessary  to sensibly  invest  these profits  to get as high a return  as possible?
We all need to continually  up skill and educate  ourselves  particularly  in areas 
that allow  us to maximise  our resources.  We all need to consider  ourselves  as 
“mature  students ”. This may require  formal  tuition  in areas of relevance:  
attending  courses,  reading  or simply networking with positive, intelligent  friends 
and business  acquaintances.  Recently,  I was fortunate  to be part of a group  of 
20 who took part in a “business ” course.  What did we achieve?
1. We up-skilled  on how to evaluate  our present  businesses
2. We became  very focused  on the need to plan our business  growth,  to set 
goals
3. Received  a comprehensive  outline  of various  key types  of investment  from 
experts
4. Gained  massively  from mixing  with a group of positive  people  who all 
wanted  to succeed
5. Committed,  on an on-going  basis, to  meeting  regularly to learn  and exchange  
ideas.
I present  a case example  of a New Zealand  farmer  who had a plan to grow  
his business  around  dairy farming  provided  that he could achieve  a targeted  
percent  return  on his capital.  He bought  a steep 1000 acre hill sheep farm at 
one-twelfth  the market  price  for normal  land. He now milks  500 cows,  putting  
them on once a day milking  from mid-summer  onward.  Production  is below  
average.  The total focus is on keeping  the operation  as simple  as possible.  A 
manager  (who has a 20% financial  share in the venture)  plus one staff are 
employed.  No silage  is made and no AI used. In this case example:
• The bottom  line is that there is a clear plan for the business.
• There  is the capability  to think  outside  the square,  to implement  a plan and 
to involve  other people  to help the business  to grow.
• He has the clear financial  focus of always  aiming  to get a targeted  return  
on his capital.
Capital
Planning  and management  capability  are very much  linked.  Given  a clear, 
realistic  business  plan and the capability  to carry it out, then capital  should  
always  be available.  Sometimes  our expectations,  as farmers,  is that we have  
large  assets and therefore  the banks  should  give us loads  of money!  Unfortunately
88
the cash generated  on many farms is low in relation  to the value of capital  
employed.
One accountant  suggested  that we should  first examine:  “Profits  first then 
choices ”. Maybe  too many of us moan about  the obstacles  to growth  that we 
see without  ever seriously  looking  at fine tuning  our own business  first. The 
common  factor  in successful  businesses  is their strong  cash generating  ability.
A simple  formula  for maximising  financial  growth  is:
Surplus  cash + Leverage  X High rate of return X Compounding  
= Financial  growth
The key to using  capital  is to invest  in businesses  that can give a high rate 
of return over a long period  of time i.e. they are given the opportunity  to 
compound.  The power  of compounding  is probably  one of the simplest,  and 
yet least understood,  concepts  of growing  a business.  The following  example  
shows  the value of a single  £1000  invested  for either  a 30-year  or a 50-year  
time frame.
Sum invested
£1000
£1000Annual  compound  
interest
15%
15%Age at Age at Total
investing encashment  accumulated
20 70 £1.083m
40 70 £66,194
This illustrates  the power  of time where  compounding  is allowed  to work  
- too late for most of us to think of the 50 year investment.  To those  of us who 
wish to cater for the next generation  or even for our retirement,  we must ask 
if it is responsible  to dump  money  into a low return  business  We must focus  
on getting  a higher  return  for every  £ made or borrowed.  The average  return  
from farm businesses  is estimated  to be well under  5%. Isolating  areas either  
on farm, or off farm, that can be shown  to give a consistently  high return is 
the challenge.
The two golden  rules of investing  were quoted  to me:
1. Never  destroy  capital  and 2. never break  rule 1.
As farmers,  many of us have often broken  that rule. We have often made  
the choices  first and then hoped  tor the profits.
Summary
Long-term  success  can be measured  by sustained  profitability  growth  over 
a minimum  5-year  period.  In managing  our individual  farm  businesses  we must  
ask: Have we achieved  sustained  profitable  growth  over the past five years?  
Can we envisage,  under  the present  scenario,  a £30,000  farm profit  growing  
to £60,000  in five year ’s time?  This is 15% compounded  growth  per annum.  
This is the rate of sustained  profitable  growth  Kerry  and others  have achieved  
over the past 10 years.  It can only be achieved  if we take time to: “Stop,  Think  
and Plan”. If we do that then we are well  on the way to believing  that: Obstacles  
are what you see when you take your eyes off the goals ”.
89
Finally,  I think it is important  to remember  in all of this that a balance  in 
life is vital.  Too many  people  in my year ’s study  had driven  the growth  of their 
business  at the expense  of family.  We in Ireland  are perceived  as having  quality  
and balance  in our lives. The challenge  into the next century  is to ensure  that 
we can survive,  grow and maintain  that quality  of life.
90
Innovative  Practices  for Increasing  
Farm  Net Worth
J. ROSKAM
Ballymalone,  Tuamgraney,  Co. Clare
We milk  cows  to make  money.  This has been  our overall  goal since  we started  
leasing  my parents  23 hectare  farm in 1995.  We set three achievable  goals: 1. 
To reduce the variable  costs  of production,  2. To increase  the value  of our product  
and 3. To grow  our business.  The strength  of these  objectives  is the combination  
of them happening at the same  time.  This  combination  has created a large  surplus  
on our farm which  is the life blood  of what we do. The surplus  has rewarded  
us with two things:
• motivation  to continue  the effort  that raising  performance  demands  and also 
with
• development  options.
The main practices  that have taken place on our farm over the past four 
years are outlined  in the paper.  These  practices  are explained  across  the three  
areas on which  we focused  our farming  efforts.
Production  costs
Focusing  on the costs of production  was the natural  starting  point.  In 1995  
the cost of producing  a litre of milk was 14.3p. In 1998 we had reduced  it to 
8.6p per litre.  The first objective  was the easiest,  partly  because  our old system  
was a very high cost system.  The summary  points  of the old production  system  
on the farm are as follows:
• Cows fed one tonne of meal/head/year
• Huge emphasis  on silage:  two cut system.  Often cows were left tight on 
grazing  in order  to fulfil the silage  requirements  that this system  demanded
• Cows housed  for five months
• Large labour  requirement
Changing  the cost structure  brought  about  by these  high costs practices  was 
and remains  a very straight  forward  job. I joined  a discussion  group  to learn  
from sharing  experiences  with like minded  farmers  in the Tuamgraney/Scariff  
area. The group  was active  and a concentrated  effort  in the area of extending  
the number  of grazing  days allowed  me to learn and implement  new practices  
quickly  and to great  effect.  I found  this easy. Understanding  the principles  and 
science  of extended  grazing  is necessary  and at the end it came down to four 
practices  on which  I took action
• Improving  the grass varieties  in my pasture
• Spreading  nitrogen  throughout  the September-April  period  at cost effective  
rates
• Increasing  the number  of hectares  serviced  with roadways
• backfencing
As a result,  costs of production  were reduced  from 14.3p to 8.6p per litre
91
in 1998.  These  practices  allowed  us to reduce  the level of concentrate  and silage 
being fed to cows. In addition,  savings  automatically  followed  on contractor  
costs. I have found  a direct  relationship  between  the level of grazed  grass in 
the diet and profitability.  I believe  that I can bring  costs  of production  to around  
6p per litre (below  30p per gallon)  on my farm with better  budgeting  of grass  
on the total farm area. With  costs  and labour  time reduced  I have valuable  time 
to concentrate  on other subtle  but rewarding  parts of our daily business.
Milk  is the largest  part of our turnover.  In addition  to producing  milk  cheaply  
we also want to offer Golden  Vale a quality  product  for money.  To do this 
effectively  we concentrated  on lifting  protein  percentage  from 3.3% in ’94 to 
3.7% in ’98 and an increased  price from 22p to 27p per litre. I do not think  
that there is one magic  formula  but a combination  of different  factors  each one 
of which  is important  in its own right.
Identification
The cows  used for breeding  the replacement  heifers  must  be carefully  selected.  
Usually  there are large variations  in the protein  percentage  of cows within  the 
one herd. Milk recording  enables  me to identify  cows which  will be used for 
breeding.  This has  proved  to be an essential part of raising  our protein percentage. 
Half the cows are producing  over 3.8% protein.  To raise the lower  half of the 
herd to that level would  require  two to three generations  which would  be a 
waste  of time and money.  So, it is essential  to know  which  cows  to breed  from.
Breeding
After  selecting  the breeding  cows we then select  the bulls, usually  three or 
four. The following  factors  are taken into account:
• an increase  in protein  of at least 0.10%
• a fairly high reliability  of about 80%
• 300 to 500 kg increase  in milk yield; for instance,  to maintain  a yield of 
54,000  litres (1200  gallons)  you need a bull which  lifts milk yield  by about  
500 kg.
We match  a bull with a cow according  to her yield;  we do not look too much  
at linear  assessment  as we are not breeding  cows for shows.  I believe  that if 
a chosen  bull is not very low in one of the important  functional  traits then it 
is a good match.  There are some suggestions  that cows with a sloping  rump 
angle have less fertility  problems;  this is one aspect  we will consider  in the 
future.
Nutrition
To start with, a cow must be in good condition  at calving.  I like to feed a 
cow a sufficient  quantity  of high  quality  grass.  As well  as autumn  saved pasture,  
wilted  silage  and concentrates  are fed as necessary.  Concentrates  are only offered 
when necessary  and are relatively  inexpensive  at £132 per tonne.
Vigilance
After making  every effort to improve  the protein  percentage,  one very
92
important  matter  remains,  that is, to make  sure we are paid  for what  we produce.  
We take milk samples  regularly  and have  them  tested  independently.  By taking  
this approach,  we have  been  compensated  several  times  by our creamery. Golden  
Vale.
As shown  by the figures  stated  earlier,  a clear and uncomplicated  breeding  
policy  that we understand,  matched  with good  animal  husbandry,  has achieved  
satisfactory  results  over  the past few years.  Our milk value  has been increasing  
by over Ip per litre every year for the last four  years.  Although  lifting  the protein  
percentage  in milk is a slow process,  the money  spent on milk recording,  
breeding,  improving  pastures  and independent  milk testing  has been one of the 
best investments  on our farm.  In our case,  with a 236,000  litres  (52,000  gallons)  
quota,  the high price we get for our milk is worth  about  £12,000  a year over 
the average  milk price.
Growth
Using  good farm  management  practices  on a growing  herd size is necessary  
in order to make a decent  surplus.  Money  is targeted  at areas that will make  
impact  on our business  net worth.  Historically  these have been the most  
significant  areas on which  this surplus  will be spent.  Since  we started  leasing  
my parents ’ 23 hectare  farm in 1995 with 127,000  litres (28,000  gallons)  milk  
quota our progress  to date is as follows:
1995:  We bought  the 27 cows and replacement  heifers  and in the same  year 
we bought  a neighbouring  12 ha farm.
1997:  We bought  another  27 ha and sold the house  on the farm;  we planted  
14 ha with trees. As a result,  we are now farming  63 ha of which  40 ha are 
owned.  Because  we had a commercial  lease  on my parents ’ farm,  we could  buy 
milk quota  through  the restructuring  system.  In total, we bought  111,300  litres  
(24,500  gallons)  in the last four years.  We are now producing  238,700  litres  
of top quality  milk.  Our stock  numbers  have  increased  from  27 cows  to 55 cows  
this year. We also keep the bull calves  until they are one year of age.
Other  information
We are in our third  year  of the Rural  and Environmental  Protection  Scheme.  
Between  forestry  premia,  REPS  money,  higher  farm produce  sales and lower  
production  costs, we are now generating  quite an amount  of surplus  money  
which  with good investment  is very valuable.
Conclusion
Our experience  of farming  to date has been very rewarding.  Through  the 
practices outlined  in this paper  we have  produced  a substantial  amount  of surplus  
money  in a short period  of time. This has given us cash flow to develop  and 
grow.  As a result,  we are enthusiastic  about  continuing  to grow  and to increase  
our net worth.  I see ourselves  trying  to do this in new ways.  I cannot  say now 
what the exact nature  of these ways will be but we will always  be interested  
in buying  assets  that represent  value.  While  looking  for such opportunities  we 
will continue  to remain  with our present  belief  which  is that management  is 
making  surplus  money.  Investment  that increases  net worth  secures  the future.
93
Achieving  Growth  in an Unregulated  
Environment  - Principles  and Lessons  
for Any Environment
J, VAN DER POEL
Dain- Farmer,  Te Awamutii,  New Zealand
Introduction
Are there more opportunities  in an unregulated  environment?  Does 
every farmer in an unregulated  environment  enjoy growth?  If not. why 
not?
Sue and I started  our farming  career  in 1980 with $5,000.00  (£2,700),  16 
cows and a Ford Cortina.  Our first sharemilking  job was milking  120 cows  on 
40 ha. We also mamed  that same year and so had the added  expenses.  Our 
growth  from that beginning  to the present  time finds us involved  in ten dairy 
ventures:  these being the owners  of two famis,  part owners  of four  further  farms, 
involvement  in three  sharemilking  positions  and partnership  in a grazing  block!  
These ventures  encompass  1604 hectares  and 4500 cows in tolal producing  
1,600,000 kg MS  per year. Our personal  share  is 2260  cows  producing  850,000  
kg MS per year.
New Zealand  dairy farmers  receive  the lowest  price for their milk of any 
of the developed  countries  in the world.  We have a small population  and so 
95% of our products  is exported.  After  shipping  our product  12,000  miles we 
lind we are competing  with multi-national  companies  and trading  blocs such 
as the EU that use their economic  power  and subsidised  products  to compete  
with us on the world stage. We are shut out of exporting,  apart from small  
quotas,  into the richest  economies  in the world  such as the EU, USA  and Japan  
and therefore  forced  to trade in third world countries.
We have a government  which  is adamant  that it is going  to open up the New  
Zealand  Dairy board to direct  competition  from other exporters  from New 
Zealand.  We have become  the world ’s lowest  cost producers  from necessity. 
This is hardly  an ideal environment  to grow a business,  but for all that, it still 
has opportunities  to grow.  Out of adversity  comes  opportunity  - the key is that 
you need to be efficient  in the way you produce  milk. Being  average  is not 
good  enough. In fact  in the medium to long  term, world  trends and  ever  improving 
management  practices  will most  likely mean that your  business  will come  under  
immense  pressure  from  more  efficient  farmers  whether  they be in Ireland,  Europe 
or New Zealand.  The farming  practices  needed  to survive  and prosper  in the 
future  need to be identified  and implemented  today.
The way that you conduct  your business  is more important  than the 
environment  you farm in. The factors  which  you yourself  control  will have far 
greater  implications  for your  success  than waiting  for the government  to create  
a so called  ‘level playing  field ’. I will focus  on six factors  that are fundamental  
to being successful:
94
(1) Identify  your areas of influence
(2) Effort,  Focus & Analysis
(3) Goal  setting
(4) Create  margins/profit
(5) Integrity
(6) Think  laterally
Identify  your areas  of influence
Individually  we can’t influence  weather,  government  regulations,  what our 
neighbour  is up to, etc. Our areas of influence  are matters  that we can control,  
such as, how well we use our resources,  what  day to day management  decisions  
we make,  how much  we spend  to achieve  our production,  where  we focus our 
business.  For us, this approach  has helped  us to get where  we are today. If we 
had to spend  too much  time concerning  ourselves  about  low prices,  droughts,  
competition  for sharemilking  jobs etc, we wouldn ’t have been able to achieve  
the kind of growth  that we have. The interesting  thing that we have found  is 
that by focusing  on our area of influence,  we have been able to increase  our 
area of influence.  For Irish  farmers  your opportunities  will be different  because  
you live and farm  in a different  environment  but the same  principles  apply.  Perhaps  
in Ireland  your  main areas  of influence  include  your  farming  system,  the allocation  
of resources  between  the dairy and beef  enterprises,  your approach  to business  
management  and perhaps  traditions.
Effort  focus and analysis
If you look closely  at any successful  business,  farming  or otherwise,  
somewhere  in that operation  there  is someone  who is driving  it forward,  keeping  
it on track,  monitoring  progress.  Never  underestimate  the power  of management.  
As owner  or manager  of your  farm  you have a far greater  influence  on the outcome  
or profit  from your farm than most people  realise.  The decisions  that are made  
and the  effort  that is applied  to implement  those  decisions  will greatly  influence  
whether  or not they will succeed.
We can no longer  be directly  involved  in all the decisions  regarding  our 
operations.  However,  we talk to the managers  about  what  goals  are. Our managers/  
partners  are invited  to help set  these  goals  to help  identify  management  practices  
that will achieve  them.  We talk to them regularly  to monitor,  provide  support  
and make sure progress  is being made.
Also, when considering  your management  options,  don’t be afraid to try 
something  different,  something  that is not normal  practice  for yourself,  take 
some  risks.  If you are too afraid  to try something  new, and take some  risks,  how 
will you grow?  You might  make mistakes,  ‘but it is not the mistake  that will 
hurt you, it is what you do next’.
Good  farmers  make  just as many  mistakes  as anyone  else - sometimes  more  
because  they take more  risks.  But the difference  with the best guys is that often  
it is not obvious  to others  that a mistake  has been made  because  they are in tune 
with their  farm and recognise  and correct  the mistake  quickly.  Change  can make  
you feel uncomfortable  because  it often means  stepping  outside  from where  
you feel comfortable.
95
Goal setting
Goal setting  needs no explaining  but is very important.  What  is the use of 
running  hard if you are headed  in the wrong  direction?  Setting  goals  will also 
help you to keep on track. When  setting  goals think of where  you want to be 
in, say, five years,  both financially  and from a family  perspective.  Keep your 
goals balanced.  Once you have set your goals break them down into yearly 
measurements  to monitor  progress  and then review  them yearly.  Don ’t ever 
consider  them to be set in concrete  because  as your circumstances  change,  so 
will your measures  of success.
Create  margins/profit
Each of us will have a different  reason  for choosing  to be dairy farmers.  
It could  be because  we enjoy the lifestyle,  enjoy working  with stock,  running  
our own business.  Whatever  the reason  we chose farming,  it is a lot more  
enjoyable  if you make  a good net income  from your efforts  and it is your NET  
income  that matters.  Net income  is the amount  left over from your farming  
operation  for:
— personal  drawings
— debt servicing
— debt reductions
— savings
— extra investment
To make a high net income  requires  a will to maximise  the gap between  
gross income  and cost of production.  This is a financial  measure  and cannot  
be confused  with  physical  measures  such as number  of cows  milked,  production  
per cow, or indeed  the size of your quota.  Without  any checks  on the physical  
indicators  and what they are costing  to achieve,  they don’t necessarily  tell the 
full story or help you achieve  your goals. If we can achieve  high per cow 
production  over larger  numbers  of cows  and do so profitably  by keeping  a tight  
control  of our cost structure,  then we really create some opportunities  for 
ourselves.
If we are profit  focused  and achieve  good margins  and high net profits,  we 
open up opportunities  for our families  and ourselves.  With those profits  we 
could choose  to:
— improve  our lifestyle
— Support  our children  with better  levels of education
— Service  larger  debts for extra growth
— Pay off our mortgages  faster
— Invest  in other business  opportunities
Whatever  you do with those  profits  is up to the individual  and will depend  
on your circumstances  and goals.  The important  thing is that you have given  
yourself  some choices.  You have created  the ability  for you and your family  
to achieve  your goals.  On the other  hand, however,  if your farming  operation  
is not generating  profits,  your options  tend to be limited  and it is hard to feel 
good  about  farming  if you are working  hard and not getting  a reasonable  reward  
for your efforts.
96
The controlling  and management  of profits  requires  a high level  of awareness  
of the business  performance.  Financial  monitoring  systems  need not be elaborate  
or time-consuming.  The important  thing is that you are always  aware  of how 
the business  is performing.
Integrity
Some people  believe  that to get ahead you need to cheat or practice  one- 
upmanship  in business.  I truly  believe  that the opposite  is the case.  Good  business  
is where  both parties  benefit  from the transaction,  where  the people  who work  
for you provide  service,  value  your business  and look to continually  do repeat  
business  with you. We have found  that by identifying  people  we want to do 
business  with,  explaining  to them  what  standards  we expect,  giving  them  repeat  
business  if these standards  are met and paying  our accounts  on time, we have  
been able to negotiate  favourable  trading  terms  and get excellent  service.  Also  
we have  found  that by treating  people  fairly,  we get more  opportunities  to grow.  
In New Zealand  there are only 14,000  dairy farmers  in the country  so a bad 
reputation  as well as a good one follows  you.
Thinking  laterally
As a dairy farmer  the main product  that is produced  is milk. But your milk  
is not identifiable  from your neighbour ’s. As far as the consumer  is concerned,  
your  milk  is no different  than mine  or someone  farming  in the US  A or Australia.  
So it’s not as if we can all go out and produce  different  types  of milk  to differentiate  
from our neighbours.  If we wish to do better  in our farming  operations  than the 
average  farmer,  we can approach  that from two different  ways;
(1) We can do what the average  farmer  does, but better,  and more efficiently  
and in a larger  scale to give us some advantage.
(2) We can look at ways of farming  differently,  of finding  better  and more  
efficient  ways of growing  our business.
For us, this has meant  questioning  all aspects  of how things  have  traditionally  
been done. In practical  farming  sense we first became  efficient  in harvesting  
pasture  into milk and then started  adding  in other feeds to add value to our 
business,  not something  that is considered  normal  practice  in New Zealand.
From a growth  perspective,  traditionally  in New Zealand  one progresses  
through  the industry  by getting  a 50/50 sharemilking  position  where  the 
sharemilker  supplies  labour,  stock  and machinery  for 50% of the milk cheque.  
The young  sharemilker  normally  moves  from one sharemilking  position  to the 
next until they have enough  cows to sell a portion  and use the money  to put 
down  a deposit  on a farm. At this stage  they stop being  sharemilkers  and become  
farm owners.  We followed  this same pathway  for the first eight years of our 
career  but instead  of giving  up our sharemilking  position  and selling  our cows  
to purchase  our first farm, we kept our sharemilking  position.  We borrowed  the 
extra revenue  from both operations  to service  and repay the extra debt. From  
then on, we kept expanding  this concept  to where  we are today. It was just a 
matter  of farming  really  well  in the first place,  taking  the strengths  of the present  
system  and adapting  them to help to achieve  our goals.
97
The same  principles  apply  in ownership.  Historically  in New Zealand,  dairy 
farms  are operated  by family  units with a strong  sharemilking  system  helping  
farmers  reach  their goals and dreams  of farm ownership.  This system  was and 
still is coming  under  increasing  pressure  as farms need to increase  in size to 
stay economic.  High  land prices  mean  that it is becoming  increasingly  difficult 
to achieve  farm ownership  from sharemilking.
To counter  these obstacles  and to help us achieve  our own goals,  we have 
recently  become  more  involved  in equity  partnerships  where  a sharemilker  that 
is ready for land ownership  can afford  to purchase  a share in a large viable 
farming  business.  They  earn their share  of the net income  from that investment  
and also earn a salary as the employed  manager  of that farm.
For us and our partners  as shareholders  in these farms, we have people  
operating  these  farms  that are totally  committed  to their  success  and  who consider  
these farms  to be their own and treat them as such. We see this as a win/win  
arrangement  where  managers  have farm ownership  and we have committed  
managers.  If you are aiming  to grow  your farming  operation  don ’t ignore  what 
is tried and proven,  but at the same time don ’t be afraid  to think outside  the 
norm.
Conclusion
The principles  of success  can be translated  anywhere.  Where  you farm is 
not as important  as how you farm. A  banker  once  told me “A successful  farmer  
would  be successful  in any business  - it’s just that he chose  to be a farmer ”. 
I believe  that it is the principles  that make the business  successful.
Success  is a state of mind.  The way you  see a problem  IS the problem.  Some  
farmers  see a problem;  other farmers  see solutions.  The way you look at a 
problem  is far more  important  than the problem  itself.  So, being  successful  in 
an unregulated  environment  requires  the same mindset  and commitment  as in 
any environment.
98
Artificial  Insemination  of Sheep  - Current  
Status  and Possible  Developments
A. DONOVAN  and J. P. HANRAHAN  
Teagasc  Research  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway
Introduction
Artificial  insemination  (AI) is probably  the most  important  single  technique  
devised  to facilitate  the genetic  improvement  of animals.  The widespread  use 
of AI in cattle has allowed  for the rapid dissemination  of genetic  merit on a 
national  and international  basis to the benefit  of both breeder  and consumer.  
It also enables  the use of sophisticated  data analysis  procedures  to accurately  
identify  animals  of superior  performance.  Theoretically,  similar  benefits  with 
regard  to the rate of genetic  progress,  which  may be achieved  through  the use 
of AI, should  be available  to sheep  breeders.  Availability  of an efficient  sheep  
AI service  would  be of great  benefit  to pedigree  and commercial  breeders wishing  
to respond  positively  and effectively  to consumer  demands.  The widespread  
use of AI and the realisation  of its full potential  depend  essentially  on the use 
of frozen  semen,  and thus on the availability  of techniques  that result in 
acceptable  fertility.  However,  the very low level  of fertility  obtained  when  frozen- 
thawed  semen  is used for cervical  insemination  has stemmed  widespread  interest/  
uptake  of AI in sheep.  The alternative, laparoscopic  AI, while  an effective  method  
of insemination  with frozen-thawed  semen,  is costly,  thereby  limiting  its use 
to pedigree  breeders. It is therefore  desirable and necessary  to develop  procedures  
that may form the basis of making  AI a practical  reality  for sheep farmers.
Advantages  of AI
1. Breeding  efficiency
The use of AI, based  on frozen-thawed  semen,  can greatly  increase  the number  
of offspring  produced  per sire per year  because  a ram has the potential  to produce  
enough  spermatozoa  to inseminate  thousands  of ewes.  Thus, genetically superior  
rams  could be made  accessible to all sectors  of the sheep  industry,  thereby  rapidly  
improving  the quality  of output  from the sector.
2. Increased  rate of genetic  improvement
In Ireland,  genetic  improvement  is hampered  by the small size of pedigree  
flocks,  which  reduces  the intensity  of selection  and leads  to lack of consistency  
in breeding  goals.  Furthermore,  available  breeding  value estimates  are generally  
only valid  for within-flock  selection.  These  constraints  severely  impair  the rate 
of genetic  improvement  being achieved  nationally  (Hanrahan,  1997). Sire 
Reference  Schemes  are currently  being  adopted  by some breeds  to overcome  
these disadvantages  (Simm  and Lewis,  1997).  This also increases  the precision  
of breeding  value  estimates  through  the application  of BLUP  procedures.  Sire 
Reference  Schemes  are based on the use of a small set of rams to produce  
progeny  in all flocks  as a basis for providing  genetic  links among  the flocks.
99
While  these linkages  can be produced  by transfer  of ewes to a single  location  
for mating  and/or  rotating  rams among  flocks  during  the mating  period,  these 
options  are stressful  for the animals  and this may affect  fertility.  There  are also 
disease  risks attendant  upon such intermixing  of animals  from different  flocks. 
AI based on frozen  semen  would  eliminate  these problems  and allow the 
widespread  dissemination  of valuable  genetic  material  even to small flocks, 
thereby  leading  to effective  genetic  improvement  of the national  sheep  flock.
3. Eas\ transport  of genetic  material
AI can facilitate  the introduction  of new genetic  material  through international  
exchange  of semen.  It also allows  large numbers  of ewes to be inseminated  
by specific  individual  rams  over  a wide geographical  area in a short  time period.  
This enables  across-flock  genetic  evaluation  and high selection  intensity.
4. Lone term storage  of semen
Successful  storage  of semen  allows  for the more widespread  use of individual 
sires and the preservation  of genetic  material  for future use. It also allows  
preservation  of genetic  material  from rare breeds.  Semen  from rams can be 
frozen-stored,  without  loss of fertility,  for at least 16 years  (Salamon  etal,  1985)  
but probably  longer.
Disadvantages  of AI
/. Reduced  fertility
Fertility,  encompassing  both pregnancy  and litter size, is adversely  affected  
by AI especially  AI using  frozen-thawed  semen.  Despite  intensive  laboratory  
studies,  the procedure  of freezing  and thawing  ram semen  inevitably  reduces  
the viability  of spermatozoa.  The major  obstacle  to fertility  in ewes cervically  
inseminated  with frozen-thawed  semen  is the establishment  of a large enough  
population  of viable  spermatozoa  in the cervix  and impaired  transport  from the 
cervix  to the site of fertilisation.
2. Potential  for inaccurate  breedine
Accidental  errors  in insemination  can occur  if semen  from individual  sires 
is not carefully  or properly  labelled,  particularly  if semen  from several  sires 
is being used concurrently.  Secondly,  if breeding  values  of sires have been  
overestimated  or determined  incorrectly  then genetic  loss rather  than gain could  
ensue.  Additionally,  use of sires with undetected  genetic  defects  could result  
in the rapid spread  of that defect.
3. Cost
As with any technololgy,  production  costs are incurred  when AI is used. 
Costs include  collection  and assessment  of semen,  processing,  freezing  and 
storage  of semen,  delivery  of AI, labour,  management  and drugs for 
synchronisation.
Semen  collection  and prepararion
Ultimately,  the genetic  impact  of a superior  ram is limited  by the number  
of sperm  produced,  which  is a direct  function  of testicular  size. Therefore  selected
100
rams need to be placed  on a high plane of nutrition  and maintained  in good  
conditions  - otherwise  semen  production  may be seriously  impaired  especially  
under the intensive  collection  regime  required  for AI programmes.
Semen  may be  collected  by artificial  vagina  (AV)  or by electrical  stimulation.  
The AV method  is preferable  because  it does not stress  the animal,  it is quick  
and simple  and results  in the collection  of better  quality  semen.  After  collection  
the quality  of semen  is assessed  for volume,  motility,  concentration  and 
morphology  on an individual  ejaculate  basis.  Accepted  ejaculates  can then be 
inseminated  raw (undiluted)  as soon as possible  after collection  or stored  in 
protective  media  on a short term basis. This is known  as ‘chilled ’ or ‘liquid  
stored ’ semen  where  spermatozoa  are held at 5°C and inseminated  within  24 
hours.  Semen  can also be frozen  for long term storage.  Frozen  semen  may be 
stored  in PVC straws (0.5 ml and 0.25 ml),  minitub  straws (0.25  ml) or as pellets.  
Pellet  freezing  of ram semen  has produced  better  conception  rates compared  
with PVC  straws,  but not significantly  better  than minitub  straws.  These  provide  
a useful  alternative  to pellets allowing for  individual  dose  identification (required  
for export),  easier  storage  and are less time consuming  at insemination.
In the case of semen  frozen  at Athenry,  a random  sample  of straws  from  each  
ejaculate  is thawed  and assessed.  Semen  containing  less than 50%  spermatozoa  
with progressive  motility  is discarded.  This is considered  a crucial  step in the 
quality  control  process.  Based  on results  of our studies  to date we would  expect  
to obtain  about 500 useable  straws  per ram over a 4-week  collection  period.
Insemination  techniques
Insemination  of sheep  may be vaginal,  cervical,  transcervical  or intrauterine.  
The various  methods  differ in their complexity,  cost and effectiveness.
Vaginal:  This is the simplest  form of insemination  and involves  depositing  
fresh semen  in the anterior  vagina  without  any attempt  to locate  the cervix.  
Reported  success  rates are highly  variable  and this method  is unsuitable  for use 
with frozen  semen  at present.
Cervical:  The  cervix  is located, via a speculum  with  a light  source, and semen  
is deposited  into the first fold of the cervix.  This is a cheap  and relatively  easy 
method  of insemination . Conception  rates  with  fresh  or ‘chilled ’ semen are good  
(65 to 75%)  but unacceptably  low (10 to 30%)  if frozen-thawed  semen  is used.  
An exception  is in Norway  where  mean  conception  rates of 60% are reported.
Transcervical:  This method  involves  grasping  the cervix  and retracting  it 
into the vagina  with a pair of forceps  to allow an inseminating  instrument  to 
be introduced  into the cervical  canal.  Acceptable  conception  rates (57%)  have  
been reported  by Halbert  et al (1990)  but not by others  who have tried this 
method.  This  procedure  involved  a high  degree  of manipulation  and any resultant  
injury  could  compromise  the ewe ’s ability  to conceive  naturally.  As yet,  no data 
are available  on the efficacy  of repeatedly  using this technique.
Intrauterine:  This utilises  a rapid laparoscopic  location  of the uterus  and 
direct  injection  of semen  into  the uterine  horns  using  a fine  pipette.  This method  
circumvents  the cervical  barrier  and radically  improves  fertilisation  rates when  
using frozen-thawed  semen;  conception  rates ranging  from 50 to 80% have
101
been reported.  This method  also has the advantage  of only requiring  a small 
number  of spermatozoa,  thereby  allowing  a more  widespread  dissemination  of 
valuable  genotypes.  However  laparoscopy  has several  disadvantages.  It is an 
invasive  procedure,  requires  veterinary  expertise  and is expensive  in terms  of 
equipment  and labour.  It is also possible  that laparoscopic  and transcervical  Al 
may become  unacceptable  in the future  based on welfare  grounds.
AI Research  in Teagasc
As an industry,  sheep producers  need an AI technique  which is widely  
available,  cheap  and effective  in terms  of pregnancy  rate. It also needs  to take 
account  of welfare  issues.  The aim of AI work  carried  out in Teagasc, Athenry  
is to develop  an effective,  nonsurgical  cervical  procedure  for frozen  semen from 
individual  rams.
In Norway,  good  conception  rates (approximately  60%)  have been reported  
with cervical  inseminations  using  frozen-thawed  semen.  The obvious  objective  
was to determine  if similar  success  could  be achieved  in Ireland  by the adoption  
of Norwegian  AI freezing  and insemination  procedures.  However,  breeds  used 
in Norway  are quite  different  from  those  found in this country  and insemination  
is to a natural  oestrus.  In Ireland  this would  be impractical  and any serious  
thought  of applying  AI here would  require  set time  Al to a synchronised  oestrus. 
It was necessary  to determine  if the good  conception  rates achieved  in Norway  
are due to inherent  Norwegian  factors/practices.  Therefore,  issues such as 
freezability  of semen  from Irish and Norwegian  rams and the effect of 
synchronisation  and inseminator  on pregnancy  rate were addressed  during  the 
breeding  season  in 1997. Ewes (various  breed types;  n=297)  were cervically  
inseminated  (according  to Norwegian  methods)  with either  fresh or frozen-  
thawed  semen  to a natural  or synchronised  oestrus.  Two people  (Norwegian  
and Irish) carried  out all inseminations.
The results,  presented  in Tables  1 and 2, showed  that ewes  inseminated  with 
fresh semen  had significantly  higher  pregnancy  rates compared  with frozen-  
thawed  semen.  This is consistent  with the findings  of others.
No significant  differences  were  found  in pregnancy rates  or litter  size between 
Irish frozen-thawed  and Norwegian  frozen-thawed  semen  or between  ewes  
inseminated  to a natural  or synchronised  oestrus.  Therefore,  the good  conception  
rates achieved  in Norway  were not due to specific  qualities  of semen  from 
Norwegian  breeds  (semen  from both Norwegian  and Irish rams were frozen  
according  to the same  protocol),  nor were they due to ewes being  inseminated
Table 1
Pregnancy  rates for ewes inseminated  with fresh and frozen-thawed  semen
Semen  type
nNatural  oestrus 
Preg. rate (%)Synchronised  oestrus  
n Preg. rate (%)Overall  
Preg. rate (%)
Fresh 28 82 30 70 76
Frozen  - Irish 62 40 50 52 46
- Norwegian 68 34 59 37 36
102
Table 2
Effect  of synchronisation  on litter  size adjusted  for ovulation  rate
Semen  type
nNatural  oestrus  
Preg. rate (%)Synchronised  oestrus  
n Litter size
Fresh 23 2.7±0.23 21 3.2+0.23
Frozen - Irish 25 1.9+0.23 26 L4±0.23
- Norwegian 23 2.0±0.24 22 1.9+0.24
at a natural  oestrus.
A notable  finding  (Table  3) was the significant  effect of ewe breed on 
conception  rate and such  breed  effects  may be  the reason for  the good  conception  
rates achieved  in Norway.  We had hoped  to inseminate  Norwegian  ewe breeds  
with Irish frozen-thawed  semen  but Norwegian  legislation  on disease  control  
did not permit  this.
Litter  size was lower  in ewes inseminated  with frozen-thawed  semen  and 
this adverse  effect  was greater  in synchronised  ewes  (Table  2). This may reflect
Table 3
Effect  of ewe breed  on pregnancy  rate
Breed n Pregnancy  rate (%)
Finnish  Landrace 60 57
S, Blackface  cross 104 54
Lowland  crosses 133 38
reduced  fertilisation  and/or  embryo  surgical  rates due to damage  caused  by the 
frozen-thaw  process  on the structure  and function  of spermatozoa.  In addition,  
the inseminator  was influential  in pregnancy  outcome.
A second  trial (in 1998)  set out to specifically  determine  if the ewe breed  
differences  seen in 1997 were also evident  among  purebred  ewes of terminal  
sire breeds,  these being a target group for Sire Referencing  Schemes.
A selection  of purebred  and crossbred  ewes  were  inseminated  cervically  with  
fresh or frozen-thawed  Norwegian  or Irish semen.  Results  presented  in Table  
4 confirm  the existence  of highly  significant  differences  among  ewe breeds.  
Pregnancy  rate ranged  from 18% to 77% (the latter  being  equivalent  to overall  
pregnancy  rates with fresh semen).
The pregnancy  rates achieved  with Belclare,  Scottish  Blackface  cross and 
especially  Finnish  Landrace  breeds  across  two years  show  that cervical  AI using  
frozen-thawed  semen  can provide  a pregnancy  rate acceptable  for use in breed  
improvement  programmes  (around  50%).  However  fertility  rates  with terminal  
sire breeds  were poor. The reasons  for the very large breed differences  in 
pregnancy  rate remain  unknown  - it may simply  be a function  of the timing  
of AI relative  to ovulation  or to such factors  as ovulation  rate, anatomy  of the
103
Table 4
Pregnancy  rate for ewes inseminated  with frozen-thawed  semen
Breed
nFrozen  semen
Pregnancy  rate (%)
Finnish  Landrace 35 77
Suffolk 77 18
Texel 101 30
Belclare 25 44
S. Blackface  cross 40 43
Suffolk  cross 56 19
cervix  or more subtle  differences  in uterine  environment.
Future  developments
Commercial  implementation  of an AI programme  requires  a procedure  that 
yields  consistent  and acceptable  pregnancy  rates.  It also must  be cost effective  
and welfare  friendly  (i.e. via the cervix).  Attainment  of this objective  requires  
overcoming  problems  involving  both the ewe and the ram. The precise  basis 
for ewe breed  differences  need to be determined  but in addition  further  effort  
on devising  freezing  protocols  that are less injurious  to spermatozoa  is required  
to minimise  the impact  of any specific  ewe breed effects.
At ewe level,  are the causes  of differences  in pregnancy  rates  between  breeds  
of ewes physical  or physiological?  The cervix  of the ewe is approximately  7 
cm in length  and contains  about  5 funnel  shaped  rings.  These  rings have small 
openings,  are not concentrically  aligned  and do not dilate  during  oestrus.  The 
anatomy  of the ovine  cervix  therefore  precludes  the deposition  of spermatozoa  
into the uterus  via the cervix.  It is possible  that the anatomy  of the cervix  differs 
between  breeds.  If the cervix could be dilated  this would  overcome  any 
differences  that may exist between  breeds.  Attempts  have been made in this 
area by the use of pharmacological  hormones,  such as oxytocin.  This however  
had detrimental  effects on fertility.  Pharmacological  products, which  successfully 
dilate  the cervix  without  interfering  with sperm  transport,  may become  available. 
Similarly,  the development  of an instrument  that would  allow deposition  of 
semen  deep within  the cervix  or uterus  could  prove  very beneficial  for cervical  
insemination  with frozen-thawed  semen.  Physiological  issues  may simply  be 
a reflection  of differences  in the timing  of ovulation  between  breeds.  Studies  
designed  to assess  the timing  of ovulation  in relation  to sponge  removal  for 
different  breeds  need  to be done to identify  the optimum  time for insemination  
on a breed  basis. Other  more subtle  parameters  such as uterine  environment  
may require  investigation.
The freezing  and thawing  of semen  causes  ultrastructural,  biochemical  and 
functional  damage  to a significant  proportion  of spermatozoa.  These  changes  
are accompanied  by decreased  viability  and fertilising  capacity.  There  is therefore 
potential  for improvement  in the techniques  of cryopreservation  of ram semen,
104
particularly  at finding  new cryoprotective  dilutents  that would  give sufficient  
protection  to ensure  successful  passage  through  the entire  female  reproductive  
tract. Development  of better  diluents  for chilling  without  resorting  to freezing  
may be another  route worth  investigating.  If semen  could be maintained  for 
a couple  of days,  without  losing  fertilising  capacity,  it could  solve  geographical  
problems  of distribution.  The downside  is a reduction  in the number  of ewes  
that can be inseminated  by an individual  ram in any one year.
One of the problems  in the cryopreservation  of ram semen  is being  able to 
evaluate  the success  of the freeze-thaw  methods  employed.  Unfortunately,  
spermatozoa,  which  are highly  motile  post thawing,  can give poor conception  
rates and vice versa.  To date, in vitro assessment  of the viability  and structural  
membrane  integrity  of ram spermatozoa  post thaw  does not correlate  well with 
actual  fertility.  The development  of a test that would  indicate  actual  fertilising  
capacity  of spermatozoa  post thaw  would  provide  an important  tool in choosing  
rams in an insemination  programme.  Work  for this AI project  included  studies  
on the development  of an IVF procedure  to assess the fertilisation  rate and 
development  competence  of ovine  oocytes  using  semen  from individual  rams.  
Results  showed  that this IVF procedure  was a useful test for predicting  the 
relative  in vivo fertility  of frozen-thawed  ram semen after laparoscopic  
insemination  (G. Byrne  et al, 1999).  This is an exciting  development  which  
may prove  useful  in the assessment  of semen  from  the commercially  important  
breeds.  Development  of such in vitro tests,  while  requiring  substantial  research  
funding  and commitment,  deserves  attention.  It is reasonable  to assume  that, 
given  the resources,  procedures  and instrumentation  could  be developed  for the 
successful  implementation  of cervical  AI using frozen  semen.
Benefits  to the producer
Genetic  improvement  is an effective  strategy  for altering  the performance  
of farm  animals.  While it may be considered  slow  in comparison to other  methods  
such as improved feeding, it is permanent,  cumulative  and generally sustainable.  
The benefits  of AI, if used in conjunction  with accurate  Sire Referencing  
Schemes,  can pay off in terms of improved  growth  rate and carcass  traits.
The benefits  expected  to accrue  to the commercial  producer  will depend  on 
many  factors  but a reasonable  estimate  of the initial  worth  of access  to genetic  
superior  rams through  AI is an increase  of 2 to 3 kg in average  weaning  weight  
for the flock and heavier  carcasses  at a given level of fatness.  It is estimated  
that the economic  benefit  of this would  be around  £200 to £250 per 100-ewe 
flock  per annum.  It is also to be noted  that the genetic merit  of rams  will increase  
over  time  as effective genetic improvement  systems are implemented  in pedigree  
flocks.
If cervical  AI using frozen-thawed  semen  becomes  a commercial  reality,  it 
should  be remembered  that in itself  it is not a magic wand.  It should  be considered  
as a tool to be used in conjunction  with clear breeding  goals and effective  
management  strategies  if the full benefits  are to be realised.
105
References
Byme,  G. P. et al. (1999).  Use of IVF procedures  for assessing  the fertility  of frozen-  
thawed  ram semen.  Proceedings  of 25th  Agric.  Res. Forum,  U.C.D., Belfield,  Dublin,  
pp. 3-4.
Halbert,  G. W. et al. (1990).  Field evaluation  of a technique  for transcervical  intra­
uterine  insemination  of ewes. Theriogenology  33: 1231-1234.
Hanrahan,  J. P. (1997).  Exploiting  genetic  resources  to enhance  the competitiveness  of 
lowland  sheep  systems. Proceedings  of Irish Grassland  Association  Sheep  Conference,  
Carlow,  pp. 22-23.
Salamon  eta/. (1985).  Fertility  of ram semen  frozen  for 16 years.  Proc. 19th Ann. Conf  
Aust. Soc. Reprod.  Biol. p. 62.
Simm,  G. and Lewis,  R. M. (1997).  Sire Referencing  Schemes;  A fast lane in Sheep  
Breeding?  Proceedings  of Irish Grassland  Association  Sheep  Conference,  Carlow.
pp. 8-20.
106
Genetic  Evaluation  of Sheep  Breeds  for 
Meat Traits'
D. L. KELLEHER
Department  of Animal  Science  and Production,
University ’ College  Dublin
Introduction
Various  studies  (e.g., Kempster  et al., 1986)  have shown  that lamb carcases  
can consist  of 20% to 26% fat in excess  of that desired  by consumers.  This is a 
highly  unsatisfactory  situation,  not only because  it takes  extra  feed energy  and 
therefore  costs money  to put on this fat but also because  the consumers  dislike  
fat. They are concerned  about putting  on excess  weight  and they are also 
concerned  about  the adverse  effects  that fat is likely  to have on their  cholesterol  
levels  and the consequential likelihood  of heart  problems.  In addition,  consumers  
regard  meat  with excessive  fat as poor value  for money.
For these and other  reasons,  sheep  meat  consumption  in Europe  has remained  
low relative  to other  meats,  decreasing  from 8% to 5% (in the EC-12) of all 
meat between  1961 and 1991 (Bansback,  1993).
Commercial  sheep  breeding
If the Irish  sheep  meat  industry  is to develop,  it must  focus  on producing  and 
supplying  leaner  meat  and presenting  it as attractively as possible at a competitive  
price. Fortunately,  in sheep meat production,  meat quality  and efficiency  of 
production  can be favourably  correlated.  Quality  and efficiency  are both 
increased  by increasing  lean tissue growth  rate and by avoiding  waste by 
producing  the minimum  of fat. One of the difficulties  that both breeders  and 
commercial  sheep  farmers  often face is the lack of clear  information  regarding  
the economic  benefit  of producing  leaner  meat.  Abattoirs  too often do not pay 
adequately  for higher  lean percentage  or penalise  excess  fat sufficiently.  Reliable  
market  information  must be available,  starting  from the consumer  and relayed  
faithfully  right  back to the pedigree  breeder,  otherwise  all sectors  of the sheep  
meat industry  will not operate  efficiently  in a co-ordinated  manner.
The first step in improving  the genetic  merit  of sheep  at commercial  level is 
to identify  the breeds and crosses  that are most  suitable  to a particular  production  
system.  Genetic  improvement  at commercial  level invariably  involves  
crossbreeding.  This takes  advantage  of hybrid  vigour  in lambing  rate and lamb  
survival  and combines  the good  features  of different  breeds.  After  that, further  
genetic  improvement  is usually  brought  about  by the improvement  of the pure 
breeds  that are components  in the cross by within-  breed  selection.  Sustained  
improvement  of pure breeds  over time,  combined  with crossbreeding,  is a very  
effective way of achieving  continued  genetic improvement  at commercial  level.
There  are about  4.5 million  commercial  ewes  in the country.  The structure  of 
sheep  breeding  can be described  as a pyramid  with  the flocks that are participating  
in the Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep Breed Improvement
1. The author  wishes  to acknowledge  funding  under  the Operational  Programme  for Agriculture,  
Rural  Development  and Forestry  1994-99,  Stimulus  Fund  T/G(55)  - Ram Genetic  Indexing
107
Programme  at the top, other pedigree  flocks  as a second  tier and finally  the 
commercial  flocks  as the main part of the pyramid.
Pedigree  sheep  breeding
The pedigree  sector  of the industry  is that sector  which,  over a long number  
of years,  has developed  breeds  of sheep  that are regarded  as being  genetically  
superior  in economically  important  traits  of value to commercial  sheep  farmers.  
In fact, the commercial  sheep farmer  and the pedigree  sheep breeder  are 
complementary  and mutually  dependent  on one  another.  It is important,  therefore, 
that they should  be properly  co-ordinated.
Like the commercial  sheep  farmer  who supplies  a quality  product  (high  lean, 
low fat carcasses)  to the factories,  the pedigree  breeder  also supplies  a quality  
product  (genes  of high genetic  merit for increased  lean meat production  and 
low fat production)  to the commercial  sheep  farmer,  delivered  in the form of 
semen  and rams.  That product  must be capable  of producing  sustained  genetic  
improvement  in the quality  of the commercial  lambs,  so that when given the 
appropriate  environment  (proper  feeding  and management),  they will be well 
capable  of meeting  the needs  of the consumers  in the higher  priced  markets  in 
the EU or elsewhere.
The pedigree  breeders  should  be highly sensitive  to the needs of the 
commercial  sheep producers  and the problems  that they face in satisfying  
consumer  demand.  If one is to take this idea seriously,  the breeding  goal at 
pedigree  level must be defined  with the needs and requirements  of the 
commercial  sheep  farmer  in mind.  This is greatly  encouraged  by the commercial  
farmers  being proactive  in demanding  high genetic  merit (for increased  lean 
meat production  and low fat production)  from the pedigree  breeder.
Genetic  improvement  in pedigree  flocks
Genetic  improvement  of a pure breed  can be achieved  by following  a fairly 
simple,  clearly  defined  strategy.
• Firstly,  one must define  the breeding  goal or breeding  objective  clearly  and 
ideally,  all members  of the breed society  should  agree with this breeding  
objective.  The breeding  objective  spells  out the animal  traits for which  the 
breed  is to be improved.  It should  also spell out the relative  importance  of 
each of these  traits.  For example,  a meat  type breed  might  wish to improve  
lean tissue growth  rate with a minimum  increase  in fat deposition.  It is 
advisable  that the traits in the breeding  goal should  be confined  to those  
traits that are of proven  economic  importance.  If a trait is included  that has 
not been proven  to be of economic  importance  (e.g., width of the head),  
selection  for other  genuinely  important  traits may be compromised.  Useful  
criteria  for deciding  what traits to include  in the breeding  objective  include  
the requirements  that
- they are of economic  importance  in increasing  the quality  of the product  
or in reducing  costs of production  and that
- they should  show  a reasonable  amount  of genetic  variation.
If a breed  does not have a  clearly  defined  breeding  goal, or if all the members
108
of the breed  society  do not agree with the breeding  goal, it will find it difficult  
to make  progress  in any direction.
• Secondly,  one must  measure  performance  traits  that are in the breeding  goal, 
or are closely  related  genetically  to the traits  in the breeding  goal.  For example,  
if the genetic  improvement  of lean tissue  growth  rate is a part of the breeding  
goal, since  this trait cannot  be measured  directly  in the live animal,  one can 
use rate of gain in live-weight  (LWT),  ultra-sonic  muscle  depth  (UMD)  and 
ultra-sonic  fat depth (UFD)  to predict  breeding  value in rate of lean tissue  
growth  rate.
• Thirdly,  by using  up-to-date  statistical  methods  to process  the performance  
records  (data  on traits that have been measured)  in order  to make  maximum  
use of the available  information.  The method  currently  most widely  used is 
called  Best Linear  Unbiased  Prediction  (BLUP).  This method  provides  us 
with  estimated  breeding  values  (EBVs)  for all animals  in the measured  traits.  
These  estimated  breeding  values  are usually  combined  into a single  figure  
for each animal called  a “selection  index ”. This makes  the ranking  of animals  
for selection  considerably  easier.
• Fourthly,  by supporting  developmental  research  into new methods  of 
improving  the efficiency of the genetic  evaluation  and selection. For example,  
there  may be better  methods  of measuring  traits  that are more  closely  related  
to those  in the breeding  goal than those  currently  being  used,  (e.g., computer  
assisted  tomography  (CT)) or there may be better  methods  of rearing  the 
pedigree  lambs  in order  to minimize the nongenetic  or environmental variation 
between  them.
Level of participation  of pedigree  breeders  in the Irish Department  of 
Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep  Breed  Improvement  Programme
In 1998,  eight  breeds of sheep (Suffolk,  Texel,  Charollais,  Vendeen,  Belclare,  
Beltex,  He de France  and Berrichon)  participated  in the Department  of 
Agriculture ’s Breed  Improvement  Programme.  The numbers  of ewes  and flocks  
in the three  main breeds  are given  in Table 1.
It is important  to note that only a quarter  of the total number  of pedigree  
flocks  in these  eight breeds  in Ireland  actually  participated  in the Programme.  
The participation  level was higher  in some  breeds  (Texel  49%)  than in others,  
(Suffolk  15% and Charollais  16%).
Only two (Texel  and Charollais)  of the eight breeds  participated  in a Sire 
Referencing  Scheme  and even in the Texel  breed,  the proportion  of flocks  that 
participated  was very low (21%).  Participation  of the Charollais  in the Scheme  
was 60%.  Considering  that the total population  of commercial  ewes  in the country  
is about  4.5 million  and considering  that the number  of ewes  in recorded  flocks  
is about  5,300, it is apparent  that the usage  of rams  coming  directly from  recorded  
flocks per year  to the commercial  flocks  is only  a fraction  of what  is reasonably  
possible.  Five thousand  ewes  could  be expected  to supply  3,000  rams per year 
to the commercial  flocks.  At 40 ewes  per ram per year and each ram remaining  
in the flock for 4 years,  one would  expect  that the flocks  participating  in the 
recording  programme  could  supply  enough  rams to serve  about  500,000  ewes
109
Table 1
No. ewes and flocks  from the breeds  participating  in the Department  
of Agriculture ’s Flock  Recording  Programme  in 1998
No. ewes No. flocks
Total
nationallyIn
recorded
flocksIn sire 
referencingTotal
nationallyIn
recorded
flocksIn sire 
referencing
Suffolk 13,000 2,100 none 430 65 none
Texel 3,700 2.025 665 153 75 16
Charollais 3,740 821 648 184 30 18
Vendeen 1,697 195 none 41 8 none
Others' 866 177 none 38 7 none
Total 23,003 5,318 1,313 846 185 34
'Other  breeds  participating  in the Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep  Breed  Improvement  
Programme,  viz., Belclare,  Beltex,  He de France,  Berrichon.
per year which  is only a fraction  of the potential  number  of ewes  mated  to meet 
breed  sires each year. It is possible  that many  commercial  lamb  producers  also 
use rams that are one or two generations  removed  from recorded  flocks.  This 
seriously  slows  down  the transfer  of genetic  merit  from the recorded  flocks  to 
the commercial  flocks  and limits the cost effectiveness  of the recording  and 
selection  programme  in the recorded  flocks.
What  is BLUP?
BLUP  stands  for Best  Linear  Unbiased  Prediction.  This  is a specially  designed  
statistical  procedure  for analysing  performance  data on animals  in order to 
estimate  breeding  values  (EBVs)  for recorded  traits.  Although  the basic  concept  
had been in use since the 1930s (Lush, 1945),  the procedure  was developed  
further  by C. R.Henderson  to facilitate  simultaneous  adjustment  of the 
performance  records  for non-genetic  effects (such  as flock  effects)  and to handle 
multiple  traits.  BLUP  is now regarded  as the best statistical  procedure  available  
for genetic  evaluation  and is used  in all species  of farm livestock  in the developed  
world.  All those involved  in the genetic  evaluation  and improvement  of sheep 
in Ireland  are assured  that the version  of BLUP  that has been  used since 1998 in 
the Irish Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep Breed Improvement  
Programme  is the most  up-to-date  version that is currently  available,  viz.. Multi ­
trait Individual  Animal  Model  BLUP.  It has the following  features.
• It can estimate  the effects  of non-genetic  factors  such as sex, type of birth 
and rearing,  age of the dam, age of the lamb  at scanning,  maternal  effect  of 
the ewe, and flock  effect  from  the data being  analysed  rather  than depending  
on pre-adjustment  using  estimates  from other  data-sets.
• It can include  performance  information  from  all known  relatives  of the animal 
being  evaluated  (on the maternal  side as well as on the paternal  side) in its 
calculations.
110
It can adjust  for the  genetic  quality  of the ewes  when  evaluating  a sire on the 
basis of its progeny ’s performances.
It can include  performance  information  from all measured  genetically  
correlated  traits.
It can take account  of the degree  to which  the trait is inherited  (heritability)  
in deriving  the estimated  breeding  values.
It can take account  of the maternal  environment  provided  by the ewe as a 
nongenetic  effect  on her progeny.
What  is estimated  breeding  value  (EBV)?
The estimated  breeding  value  (EBV)  of an animal  that is provided  by BLUP  
is the best estimate  of the additive  genetic  merit  of the animal,  i.e., the sum of 
all the animal ’s genes.  However,  to someone  who is buying  a ram for breeding  
purposes, what  it transmits  to its progeny is of greater  relevance  than its estimated  
breeding  value  (EBV).  Because  an animal  transmits  only half  of its genes  to its 
progeny,  its predicted  transmitting  ability  (PTA)  is only half  of its EBV.  It is not 
always  clear  whether  the quoted  breeding  value  is an EBV  or PTA  and this can 
give rise to confusion  regarding  the predicted  performance  of the progeny.
When  the estimated  breeding  values  (EBV)  are quoted  for a number  of rams,  
any two rams  can be compared  on the basis  on the predicted  differences between  
their progeny  means,  assuming  that those progeny  are obtained  from similar  
samples  of ewes.  The progeny  means  of these rams are expected  to differ  by 
half of the difference  between  the ram EBVs.  Therefore,  if two rams differ  in 
EBV by 4 kg., their  progeny  means  are expected  to differ  by 2 kg.
In any given breed,  the estimated  breeding  values  (EBVs)  for individual  
traits are always  expressed  as deviations  (+ or -) from a “base value ”. In the 
Irish Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep Breed Improvement  
Programme  in 1998 (and this will be the case also in 1999),  the base that was 
used for each breed was the average  EBV of all lambs bom in that breed in 
1998. All animals  in a particular  analysis  (breed)  are expressed  as deviations  
from the  same  base value.  Therefore,  all animals  in a given  breed,  whether  they 
are lambs,  older  rams or ewes,  can be compared  directly  with one another.
Figure 1 shows  a typical  distribution  of EBVs  for 120-day  liveweight  of 
lambs  in a given  breed.  The performances  vary from approximately  -20 kg to 
+20 kg  around  the average,  but the EBVs  vary only from  about  -5 kg. to +5 kg. 
This illustrates  the fact that not all of an animal ’s superiority  (or inferiority)  in 
performance  is regarded  as heritable.  This is consistent  with a low heratability  
(see next section).
BLUP  provides  EBVs,  not only for those animals  that have performance  
records,  but also for other  animals  that do not have  performance  records  but are 
related  to those  that have such records.  For example,  sires and dams that have  
no records  themselves  but have progeny  with records  would  be given  EBVs.
What  is “heritability ”?
Heritability  is
a. The proportion  of the variation  among  animals  in a given trait in a given
111
Figure  1 - Typical  distribution  of performance  and breeding  values  for
120-day  liveweight
population  that is due to genetic  differences  among  them  
h. The proportion  of the superiority  (or inferiority)  of an animal  in a given  trait 
in a given  population  that is regarded  as genetic  
c. The proportion  of the difference  between  any two animals  in a given  trait in 
a given  population  that is regarded  as genetic.
If the heritability  of liveweight  in a particular  breed  is, say, 15%, and if two 
animals  differ  by 20 kgs., we regard  the genetic  difference  between  them to be 
only 3 kgs (15%  of 20 kgs). In other  words,  in order  to be realistic  in predicting  
the type of progeny  that an animal  will produce  relative  to another  animal,  we 
must  reduce  its apparent  superiority  in performance  considerably  (by about  85%)  
and only half  of what  is left (7.5%)  is expected  to appear  in its progeny.  If more 
control  could be exercised  over the degree  of non-genetic  or environmental  
variation  among  performance  recorded  animals,  one would  expect  less variation 
in performance  but the heritability  of the trait would  be higher  and the animal ’s 
performance  would  be more  useful  as a predictor  of its breeding  value.
Reporting  the Results
Table  2 shows the  layout  of the report  produced  by the Department  of Agriculture 
in 1999.
What  is meant  by “accuracy ”?
Estimated  breeding  values  (EBYs)  that are published  in the Department  of 
Agriculture ’s annual  report  to the breeders  have  an “accuracy ” value  associated  
with them. This accuracy,  which  is on a numerical  scale between  0 and 1.0, 
indicates  the amount  of information  available  on the animal  in question  and, 
therefore,  the level of confidence  that the authors  have in the EBV values. 
Statistically,  “accuracy ” is the estimated  correlation  between  the EBV and the
112
Table  2 - Layout  of Report
ANY BREED IMPROVEMENT  PROGRAMME
Breeding  values and INDEX for 1996 lambs 
Date - June 19, L99B Flock Code » XVZ
JOHN ROE 
ANYWMERB
H/M/XYZ /9e/05B 
H/M/XYZ /96/009 
H/M/XY2 /96/ODEIN IRELAND
Breeding  values
LWT
(>cg)UMD
(mm)LMI-9R 
(M«an- 
UFD 100
(min) ACC SD«30>
H/H/ABC
H/M/ABC
H/M/ABC/92/036
/92/036
/92/036H/F/VFT
H/K/VFT
H/F/CFR/S5/099
/S4/006
/53/04S2.75
1.04
■2.14.39
33-0.18 0.5&164
(D
Lamb  Ko.This is the lamb identity'  number,  it has encoded  in it the breed,  sex, flock,  
year of performance  and the ear tag number  as the last 3 digits.
Sire Mo.This is the identity  of the sire of the lamb
Ewe No.This is the identity  of the dam
EBVs  for LWT,  
HMD  and UFD.These  are the estimated  breeding  values  (EBVs)  for live weight  (LWT),  
ultrasonic  muscle  depth  (UMD)  and ultrasonic  fat depth  (UFD),  respectively.
' AccuraevThis is a measure  of how close we believe  that the estimated  breeding  value  is 
likely  to be to the true breeding  value.  The accuracy  values  presented  refer 
only to Live-weight.  Time  constraints  at present  do not permit  the 
development  of a procedure  for calculating  the accuracy  of the Index.
' LMLTMI-SRThis IS the calculated  Lean  Meat ludex. It is designated  as LMI-SR  for Sire 
Reference  flocks  and LMI for the Non-  Reference  flocks.
true breeding  value  and is a function  of the heritability  of the trait.
Table  3 shows  how the accuracy  of EBV  can change  for different  amounts  and 
sources  of information.  The level of accuracy  depends  on
— the numbers  and types  of relatives  considered
— the heritability  of the trait.
High accuracy  means  that the EBV  is not expected  to change  very much  as 
new information  comes  available  whereas  low accuracy  means  that the EBV  is 
expected  to change  as new information  comes  available.  There  is, therefore,  a 
greater  gamble  involved  in selecting  animals  on EBVs  with a low accuracy  
than on EBVs  with a high accuracy.
Finally,  accuracy  is our measure  of assurance  of the quality  (high  or low) of 
the product  (genetic  merit  of the animal  for lean tissue  growth  rate).
Table 3
How accuracy  changes  with different  amounts  of information  available
Accuracy  (approx.)
Information  available Heritability  (h2)=0.1 h2=0.2 h2=0.3
Own performance  only 0.32 0.45 0.55
Own performance  and 10 offspring 0.52 0.65 0.79
Sire having  200 offspring  only 0.91 0.95 0.97
113
The Lean  Meat  Index
Each animal  in the Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Flock  Recording  
Programme  that has a performance  record,  or that is related  to an animal  that 
has a performance  record,  is given an EBV for liveweight  (LWT),  ultrasonic  
muscle  depth  (UMD),  ultrasonic  fat depth  (UFD),  carcass  lean weight  (CLW)  
and carcass  fat weight  (CFW). The EBVs  for CLW  and CFW  are combined  into 
a single  figure  called  a Lean Meat  Index  (LMI).
The LMI  is then  scaled  in such  a way that the lambs  in the “base ” population  
have a mean  value  of 100 and a standard  deviation  of 30. The “ base ” population  
is the same  as that referred  to earlier,  viz,, all lambs  born in that breed  in 1998.  
Scaling  the Lean  Meat  Index  does not change  the ranking  of the animals  within  
the breed but it makes  it easier  for breeders  to compare  animals  in the same  
breed  that had performances  or relatives  performing  in different  years.
Can animals  be compared  across  breeds?
It is important  to note that the LMI for one breed  is not comparable  with the 
LMI for another  breed  because  their estimated  breeding  values  are calculated  
independently  and they have different  “base ” populations.  Thus,  an animal  with 
a LMI of 100 from one breed  cannot  be regarded  as having  the same genetic  
merit  as an animal  with a LMI of 100 from another  breed.
At present  the information  that is required  to compare  animals  across  breeds  
is not available.  To do so one would  need to have sufficient  numbers of animals  
from the different  breeds  reared  and measured  under  the same  conditions.  The 
necessary  information  could be provided  by commercial  producers  if the 
performance  and pedigree  of the commercial  animals  were recorded.  It would  
be important  that the pedigree  could  be traced  back to the pure breeds,  at least 
on the male side.
Figure  2 shows  the type of distribution  of LMIs  that one can get in a particular  
breed.  As in most biological  populations,  the distribution  of the LMIs is
Figure  2 - Typical  distribution  of index  values
114
approximately normal;  most  of the values  are near  the mean  of 100 with  relatively  
few at each extreme  (as low as 0 or as high as 200).  Animals  with LMIs  greater  
than 100 are regarded  as better  animals  than those with indexes  below 100.
In case anyone regards  those  animals  with indexes  less than 100 as being  of 
poor breeding  quality,  it is important  to state that they  may well be much  better  
than animals that have  no performance  records  and for which one has no genetic  
evaluation.  This includes  rams and ewes in pedigree  flocks that are not 
participating  in the Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep Breed  
Improvement  Programme  as well as those  non-pedigree  rams  and ewes  that are 
used for breeding  in commercial  flocks.
The environment
The genes  that an animal  carries  on its chromosomes  gain expression  when  
the animal  is exposed  to an appropriate  environment.  By environment  here we 
mean every influence  that an animal  experiences  after it is conceived.  Those  
genes  that gain expression  and that have an influence  on performance  in one 
environment  may not gain expression  in another  environment  or may be 
expressed  to a lesser  degree.  This phenomenon  is well known  in biology  and is 
called  Genotype  by Environment  interaction.  “Horses  for courses ” would  be a 
familiar  way of expressing  the same  concept,  meaning  that one type of animal  
is suited  to one  environment  while  another  type is suited  to another  environment.  
In sheep  production,  the fact that certain  breeds  are more suited  to mountain  
conditions  while  other  breeds  are more suited  to lowland  conditions  is a good  
example  of the existence  of genotype  by environment  interaction.
Pedigree  sheep  breeders  feed and manage  their  sheep  very well.  They  claim  
that it allows  the lambs  to express  their genetic  merits  better.  If this was truly  
the case, then one would  expect  that the heritability  of LWT,  UMD  and UFD  
would  be greater  than the value of 15% to 20% that that is generally  found.  
Hanrahan  (1997a,  1997b)  reported  that the differences  between  the progeny  of 
rams at commercial  level were not as great  as one would  have expected,  based  
on the Lean Meat Index values  of their sires. He claimed  that the genetic  
parameters  (heritabilities)  used to predict  progeny  performance  at commercial  
level were overstated,  resulting  in overstatement  of their EBVs.  Whatever  the 
reasons  for the discrepancies  between  predicted  and actual performances  at 
commercial  level, the results  that he obtained  should  give us all serious  cause  
for concern.  If we wish to encourage  commercial  sheep  farmers  to buy rams  of 
high genetic  merit, it is essential  that the information  presented  in the sales  
catalogues  gives a reliable  indication  of the performance  of the progeny  at 
commercial  level.
Since  the economic  climate  in which  the commercial  sheep  farmers  operate  
does not allow them to feed expensive  diets, there may be large differences  
between  the levels of feeding  in pedigree  and commercial  herds.  These  
differences  may be so great as to cause  (a) serious  over-stating  of the genetic  
differences  between  rams  in terms  of progeny  performance  and, more  seriously,  
(b) changes  in the rankings  of those  rams.
The responsibility  of addressing  these  issues  rests, to a considerable  extent,
115
with the commercial  sheep  farmers.  In any production  system,  it is essential  to 
monitor  quality  at each stage of production,  thereby  enabling  one to identify  
the precise  stage at which factors  that cause poor quality  occur.  At present,  
there is no systematic  structure  in place by which  commercial  sheep  farmers  
can check  the genetic  quality  of the breeding  stock  that they are using  in their  
flocks.  This would  require  individual  sire matings  at commercial  level and the 
keeping  of records  of performance  and parentage  of lambs.  If such information  
were available,  one could relatively  easily analyse  the data and relate the 
performance  of lambs  to their  sires ’ breeding  values  and provide useful  answers  
to a number  of questions.  Record-keeping  is a task that nobody  finds  attractive  
but it is an essential  part of monitoring  product  quality.
Some  responsibility  also rests with the pedigree  breeder.  It is in the long­
term interest  of the pedigree  breeder  to focus on product  quality.  High quality  
of product  from the pedigree  breeder  ultimately  means  high genetic  merit of 
breeding  stock  for meat traits under  commercial  conditions.  Feeding  practices  
and rearing  conditions  in pedigree  herds  should  be such  as to enable  breeders  to 
identify  animals  that conform  to high product  quality  versus  those that do not. 
It is necessary,  therefore,  to ensure  that all animals  get a fair and equal  chance  
to express  their genetic  merit.  More  attention  could  be paid to
- compact  lambing,  to ensure  that all lambs  are as close  as possible  to being  
the same age through  their rearing  period.
- weaning  reasonably  early (8 weeks)  to give the lambs  a better  chance  to 
express  their genetic  merit  free from maternal  effects  prior to weighing/  
scanning  at 120 days.
- Treating  all lambs  in the flock (particularly  those of the same sex) as 
alike as possible.
- Ensuring  that the level of feeding  and management  is not so excessively  
high as to cause  serious  genotype  by environment  interaction.
What  are “reference  sires ”?
Reference  sires are specially  selected  rams  that are mated  to ewes  in several  
pedigree  flocks  in a given season  in order to facilitate  the separation  of the 
flock differences  in performance  into their genetic  and non-genetic  (or 
environmental)  parts. It is most effective  when at least two rams are used in 
each flock and each ram has several  progeny  in each flock. However,  this is 
difficult  in very small  flocks.  The procedure  enables  breeders  and sheep farmers  
to make  more  reliable  comparisons  between  animals  in different  flocks  on their  
genetic  merits  and thereby  widens  one’s scope  for selecting  replacement  breeding  
stock.  It also enables  the individual  breeder  to compare  the genetic merit  of his/ 
her flock  relative  to the genetic  merit  of other  breeders  flocks.
Prospects  for improving  selection  on LMI  in the pure  breed  flocks
The rate of genetic  progress  in any given  animal  trait depends  on the amount  
by which  the replacement  stock  each year exceed  those  that were used in the 
previous  year. Table 4 shows,  for a sample  of 91 pedigree  flocks,  the mean 
LMI of the parents  of lambs  born in 1999.
116
Table  4
Lean Meat Index  of parents  of pedigree  lambs  born in 1999
Type of parentYoung*  parents  
No. Average  LMIOlder**  parents  
No. Average  LMI
Sires
Dams66
308135.2
104.4113
1433109.1
94.4
*Bom in 1998 in the case of males,  in 1997 in the case of females
**Bora  prior to 1998 in the case of males,  prior to 1997 in the case of females
The young  replacement  parents  had considerably  higher  LMIs  than  the older  
parents.  There  is, however,  considerable  room for improvement.  Some  young  
replacement  rams had very low LMIs  (12%  of all young  replacement  rams had 
LMIs  less than 100) and others  (about  23%)  appear  to have come  from flocks  
that were not participating  in the Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep  
Breed  Improvement  Programme  (though  they may  have had an evaluation  from  
elsewhere  and may have  been genetically  acceptable).  It is also very likely  that 
many high LMI rams were sold to commercial  flocks  or to flocks  not in the 
recording  programme  and were not available  for use within  the participating  
flocks.  Considering  a reasonable  lambing  rate of 160%  and approximately  12 
ewes mated  per ram in participating  flocks,  it should  be possible  to achieve  an 
average  LMI of 160 in the case of young  males  (and an LMI of 130 in the case 
of the females).
Economic  value  of genetic  improvement
• Banks  (1994)  in Australia  and Simm  et al. (1997)  in the UK estimated  a 
benefit  cost ratio of more  than 8:1 resulting  from expenditure  on testing  and 
selection  for meat traits in nucleus  flocks.  While this estimate  could be 
regarded  as being  high,  nevertheless  it is true that expenditure  in this area is 
sufficiently  cost effective  to justify  a reasonable  level of expenditure.
There  are a number  of conditions  necessary  for achieving  a high benefitxost  
ratio.
- High level of participation  of the nucleus  (pedigree)  sector  in the genetic  
evaluation  programme,
- Efficient  use of the results  of genetic  evaluation  in achieving  a high rate of 
genetic  progress  in the nucleus  (pedigree)  population,
- Increased  training  on performance-based  methods  of selection,  promotion  
of more comprehensive  recording,  improved  design of breeding  programmes  
including  the promotion  of sire-referencing  schemes,
- Rapid  transfer  of the genetic  gain from the nucleus  (pedigree)  sector  to the 
commercial  sector,  increasing  the usage of recorded  rams in commercial  
flocks,  or improving  the dissemination  of high merit  breeding  stock  through  
the wider  use of Al or other  reproductive  technologies.
117
Also,  there  should  be continuing  development  and use of improved  tools for 
selection  (e.g., use of computer-assisted  tomography  (CT) to take whole-body  
scanning  measurements  on some  animals).
It is difficult  to see a disadvantage  in putting  greater  effort  and expenditure  
into genetic  improvement,  especially  if the alternative  is the increasing inability 
of the sheep  meat  industry  to compete  favourably  in the high  quality,  high  priced 
sheep  meat  markets.  At pedigree  level,  genetic  improvement  can be cumulative,  
permanent  and cost-effective.  At commercial  level,  genetic  improvement  gives  
increased  product  value  and greater  competitiveness  in higher-priced  markets.  
It is a prize that we cannot  afford  to ignore.
Bibliography
Banks,  R.G.  (1994).  Structural  effects  on returns  from  genetic  improvement  programs:  a 
case study.  Proc. 5th World  Congr.  Genetics  Appl. to Livest.  Prod., 18:123-126.
Bansback,  B. (1993).  Meat  Demand  Economics.  In “Meat  Consumption  in the European  
Community ”. Proceedings  of a workshop  organised  by the Director-General  for 
Agriculture  (DG VI) of the Commission  of the European  communities.  Office  for 
Official  Publications  of the European  Communities,  Luxembourg.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1997a).  Evaluation  of Lean Meat Index  for Sheep.  Summary  of papers  
presented  at Irish  Grass.  Anim.  Prod.  Assn.  23rd  Annual  Meeting,  University  College  
Dublin,  Belfield.  pp33 1-332.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1997b).  Exploiting  Genetic  Resources  to Enhance  the Competitiveness  
of Lowland  Sheep  Systems.  Irish Grassland  & Animal  Production  Journal.  31:106-  
115.
Kempster,  A.J., Cook,  G.L.,  Grantley-Smith,  M. (1986).  National  estimates  of the body  
composition  of British  cattle,  sheep  and  pigs with special  reference  to trends  in fatness.  
Meat Science  1 986, 17: 107- 138.
Lush,  J.L. (1945)  Animal  Breeding  Plans.  The Iowa State  College  Press,  Ames.
Simm,  G., Amer,  P.R. and Pryce,  J.E. (1997).  Returns  from Genetic  improvement  of 
Sheep  and Beef  Cattle  in Britain.  In SAC Animal  Sciences  Research  Report  1997.  
SAC,  Edinburgh.
Simm,  G. (1998).  Genetic  improvement  of cattle  and sheep.  Farming  Press.
Simm,G.  and R.M.Lewis  (1997).  Sire Referencing  Schemes:  A Fast Lane in Sheep  
Breeding?  Irish Grassland  & Animal  Production  Journal.  31 :97-105.
Simm,  G. and W.S. Dingwall  (1989).  Selection  Indices  for Lean Meat Production  in 
Sheep.  Livestock  Production  Science,  21: 223-233.
118
Some  Observations  on Animal  Disease,
Ill Thrift  and Infertility
J. F. Quinlan
Department  of  Agriculture  and Food,  Regional  Veterinary  Laboratory,  
Athlone,  Co. Westmeath
Cattle
Although  bovine  abortions  occur  throughout  the year the highest  incidence  
is generally  during  the first quarter.  From our perspective  the main agents  
continue  to be Leptospira,  Salmonella,  Neospora,  Listeria  and Brucella.  With  
our emphasis  on diagnosis  the quality  of the sample  is paramount.  Indeed  the 
quantity  is also very  important  in that the more  samples  submitted  the more  one 
increases  the chances  of establishing  the true cause of abortion  where  up to 
70% fail to yield a specific  cause.  In view  of this, it is advisable  to bring  the first 
aborted  foetus  to the laboratory  and not to wait until perhaps  the third  or fourth  
incident  before  taking  action.
With  regard to stillbirth/early  neonatal  death,  the single  most  important  cause  
of loss is dystocia/anoxia  or damage/stress  at calving.  However,  events/  
conditions such  as infections,  deficiencies  and mismothering  leading  to starvation  
are also involved.
Neonatal  mortality  (up to 28 days) is generally  assoeiated  with pneumonia  
and diarrhoea  or respiratory  and enteric  disease.  The viruses  rotavirus  and 
coronavirus,  E.coli.  K99 E coli, Cryptosporidia  and coccidia  are isolated  from  
intestinal  contents  of calves  with diarrhoea.  With regard  to pneumonia,  while  
viruses and  bacteria  such as E.coli  and Pasteurella  are regularly  isolated,  foreign  
body pneumonia  due to aspiration  of milk into the lungs is also significant.  
Navel  ill is a hardy  annual.  Starvation  continues  as a significant  cause  of death  
in neonatal  calves  and is probably  due to the incorrect  use of electrolyte  solutions.  
In general,  calves  should  not be left without  milk  for more  than 24 hours. Immuno  
deficiency,  that is where  the newborn  calf does not receive  either  sufficient  
quantity  or quality  of colostrum  early  enough  in life to protect  against  disease,  
is a major  contributory  factor  to neonatal  mortality. The management  system  of 
shared  space  where  pregnant  and calved  cows are housed  together  along  with 
their calves  will raise the incidence  of calf diarrhoea  and potentially  neonatal  
mortality  by a factor  of three.  In such situations  the incidence  of pneumonia  is 
also similarly  raised.  Mineral  deficiency,  in particular,  trace  minerals  may also 
be involved  resulting  in weakly  born calves  that are more  susceptible  to disease.
Ill-thrift  in 1999 in all species  was influenced  by parasites  and in particular  
fluke and worms  although  a number  of cases of heavy lice infestation  have  
been diagnosed,  Copper  deficiency  again  in both cattle  and sheep  continues  to 
effect  thrive and indeed  fertility.  In general,  in our particular  catchment  selenium
119
values  recorded  in blood samples  and in tissue samples,  such as kidney,  are 
adequate.  In some  areas  iodine  deficiency  continues  to influence  calf  mortality, 
thrive  and fertility.
With regard  to infertility  the obvious  causes  such as deficiency  and disease  
are of course  important.  However,  nutrition  is probably  more important  than 
either  of the aforementioned.  It is advisable  to have infertility  investigated  in 
order  to establish  a cause.  It has been established  that Ketosis  in the perinatal  
period  has a major  influence  on fertility  and that the depth  and duration  of the 
Ketosis  can result  in prolonged  infertility  into the next breeding  season  with 
consequent  effect  on the calving  interval.  Leptospirosis  is also regarded  as a 
major  cause of infertility.  Diseases  that cause  a high febrile  reaction  such as 
Tick-borne  Fever  also affected  fertility  although  this may be more  important  in 
sheep.
Sheep
In sheep  the single  most  important  cause  of infectious  abortions  continues  to 
be Toxoplasmosis,  although  increasingly  Listeria,  Salmonella  and Chlamydia  
are appearing.  Campylobacter  is also seen occasionally.  As with cattle it is 
important  to bring all abortions  to the laboratory  and where  available  to also 
bring the afterbirth.  Twin lamb disease  or pregnancy  toxaemia  also causes  
abortion  and generally  the death of the ewe as well. Presently  we see this 
condition  most  often in ewes that are too fat. While  Leptospirosis  has not been 
identified  as a major  abortifacient  in sheep  the flock  can serve  as a reservoir  of 
infection  for cows in the mixed  farming  situation.
Still birth and early neonatal  death are most importantly  due to dystocia/  
anoxia  and starvation/exposure.  Early neonatal death  is also  caused by infections 
causing  diarrhoeas  such as E.Coli,  rotavirus  and Salmonella  and by navel 
infections  causing  tissue  abscessation  and septicaemia.
The incidence  of Listeriosis  in neonatal  lambs  appears  to be increasing  with 
the classical  nervous  disease  manifestations  but also in some cases with 
microabcessation  of the liver and consequent  death.
Just as with calves  the incidence  of disease  in lambs  is associated  with high 
environmental  contamination  which increases as lambing  progresses  particularly 
when  the flock  is housed.  Clostridial  diseases  are ever present.
This past year has been notable  for parasitic  infestations  in sheep.  Fluke  and 
worms  are a major  cause of ill-thrift  in sheep  but also a major  cause  of death  
since sheep are most susceptible  to acute fluke. The incidence  of acute and 
chronic  fluke  has been seen at a level  not recorded  for many  years.  Copper  and 
cobalt  deficiencies  have also  been recorded;  in some  cases  the copper  deficiency  
has appeared  as Swayback  as well as ill thrift.
Infertility  in ewes  in our experience  has been  associated  with  Toxoplasmosis  
and Tick borne  Fever.  Ram infertility  of course  is also a major  factor.  However, 
disease  and/or  deficiency  are not the only factors  and poor management  can 
have a significant  negative  influence  if superimposed  on an already  at risk 
situation.
120
DETECTION  OF ENTERO-PATHOGENS  IN CALVES  UNDER
ONE MONTH
Period  Jan - Mar 1999
I.aboratorv:  Athlone
Entero-Pathogen  No. examined No. Positive Percentage  Positive
Rotavirus 173 62 35.8%
Cryptosporidia 142 47 33.1%
K99+£.  co/( 175 13 7.43
Coronavirus 173 29 16.8%
Salm. typhimurium 172 2 1.2%
Salm. dublin 172 2 1.2%
Coccidia  species 34 6 17.6%
DETECTION  OF BOVINE  ABORTIFACIENTS  
Period  Jan - Mar 1999
Laboratory:  Athlone  
TOTAL  NUMBER  EXAMINED  - 136
Abortifacient No. Positive , » Percentage  Positive
Brucella  abortus 5 3.7%
Salmonella  abortus 5 3.7%
Salmonella  species 1 0.75
Actinomyces  pyogenes 8 5.9%
Leptospira  hardjo 13 9.6%
Listeria  monocytogenes 1 0.7%
Fungal  Species 1 0.7%
Neospora  Species 3 2.2%
121
Ectoparasites  of Sheep
D, J. O’BRIEN
Veterinary  Research  Laboratory,  Abbotstown,  Dublin  15
Ectoparasitic  diseases  of sheep have animal  welfare,  environmental  and 
economic  effects.  The most common  sheep  ectoparasites  in Ireland  are mites,  
lice, ticks and flies.
Mites are the most serious.  Satcoptes  scabei,  a biting  mite, is frequently  
encountered  in continental  Europe  and North  Africa  but is not generally  a 
problem  here. Neither  Chorioptes  bovis  nor Demodex  ovis cause serious  
problems.  However,  Psoroptes  ovis is a sucking  mite and the cause of the 
notifiable  disease,  sheep  scab. It causes  a serious,  sometimes  fatal disease  of 
sheep with extreme  pruritis  exudative  dermatitis,  loss of wool. It lowers  
production  by one third (Kirkwood  1980)  and lambs  born to infested  ewes are 
ten percent  lighter  than those  from uninfested  ones.
Sucking  lice Linognathus  ovillus  and L. pedalis  which  are confined  to the 
hairy  areas  of the body,  can cause  problems  but Damalinia  ovis  a biting  louse  is 
a more serious  pest causing  production  losses  to the fleece  and hide damage.
The tick Ixodes  ricinis  (Castor  tick) is the most  common  tick found  on sheep  
in this country  and although  it causes  some damage  to the hides of sheep its 
main importance  is as a vector  of several  viral and bacterial  diseases.
Fly strike  (Blowfly  myiasis)  causes  great  pain and suffering  to sheep. Lucilia  
spp  (Green  bottles),  Phormia  sp (Block  bottles) and Calliphora  spp  (Blue  bottles)  
lay their  eggs in the fleece  of lambs  and unshorn  ewes  having  been attracted  by 
the smell and condition  of the fleece  soiled  by faeces  and urine (French  et al. 
1996).  The eggs hatch to larvae  which  burrow  into the flesh and cause  lesions  
which  can be further  exacerbated  by the attention  of other  flies and bacterial  
infection.  Melophagus  ovinus  (the sheepked)  which  is a wingless  insect  causes  
sporadic  outbreaks  of disease  with wool lose and irritation.  These  are usually  
not serious.  The nasal botfly Oestrus  ovis  is a minor  problem  in parts of the 
south  of England  but is not a pest here.
Control
It has become  most important  to use ecto-parasitic  treatment  systems  in a 
judicious  manner  to ensure  efficacy  and avoid  environmental  damage.  Likewise  
the timing  of treatments,  when they might give best results,  must be well 
considered.  Epidemiological  experience  and accurate  diagnosis  gives this 
information.
In the past when  dipping  systems  alone  were available  all of these  diseases  
were treated  similarly.  However,  a divergence  of treatment  measures  has now 
occurred  with different  therapies  sometimes  being  effective  against  particular  
parasites.
Factors  influencing  the treatment  for mites  and lice would  be similar  as both 
groups  are obligate,  species  specific  parasites  which  have only limited  survival
122
lime off the most  (O’Brien et al. 1994).  In the case of flies and ticks,  both spend  
considerable  periods  away from the host, are often not species  specific  and 
their  success  and period  of activity is governed by climate,  weather,  geographical  
and topographical  factors.
Treatment  systems
Historically,  efforts  to find treatments  of these  diseases  commenced  early  in 
the nineteenth  century  when  many chemicals were  used  externally  and internally  
in efforts  to control  them.  The first dips were produced  by William  Cooper  in 
1843. Substances  used for control  included,  hellebore,  mercury,  kerosene  and 
sulphur.  The most successful  were arsenic  and nicotine,  which  products  were  
used into the twentieth  century.  Organochlorines  (OC) were first used in 1947.  
Downing  (1947)  and Wright  (1957)  first used organophosphates  (OP) for the 
control  of lice. The introduction  of avermectins  (Egerton  et al. 1980) had a 
profound  effect  on parasite control.  Invermectin was found  to be effective against  
sheep  scab (Psoroptes  ovis)  with two subcutaneous  injections  at 200 mcg/kg,  7 
to 10 days apart (Soil et al. 1992, O’Brien et al. 1993). One injection  of 
moxidectin  at 200 mcg/kg  was found  to be fully effective  (O’Brien  et al. 1994).  
As with dipping,  it was recommended  that for field outbreaks  two treatments  
be used and just one for prophylasic,  as moxidectin  has a  prophylactic  action  of 
at least 28 days (O’Brien et al. 1996).  Doramectin  has been found  to have a 
therapeutic  effect  with one injection  at 300 mcg/kg  (Bates  et al. 1995).
These  injectable  products  have  become known  as endectocides,  as they control 
many internal  and external  parasites.  It is strongly  recommended  that two 
injections  of endectocides  be used for the treatment  of sheep  scab.
A bolus preparation  of ivermectin  has now become  available  and has been 
assessed  for efficacy  against  sheep  scab at the VRL, Abbotstown  and found  to 
have therapeutic  and prophylactic  activity  for over  three months  (O’Brien  et al. 
in press).
The synthetic pyrethroids (SP) have  been widely  used  as both  dips and topical 
pour-ons  since the early eighties.  Several  different  SPs have varying  efficacy  
against  flies, mites,  lice and ticks (Romano  and Greco 1983, Hamel  and Van 
Amelfoort  1987).
Until recently  the most widely  used dip products  were OPs. They have a 
wide range  of activity  and can be used against  all of these  parasites.  They  work  
well if manufacturer ’s instructions  are followed.  They will not perform  in the 
presence  of organic  matter  (faeces,  muck, etc.), in dirty water  nor in the presence  
of old or spent  dip. They must also be made  up to the correct  concentration  or 
they will give disappointing  results;  replenishment  must be carried  out as 
recommended.  It is essential  to retain  each sheep  in the solution  for one minute  
to allow  a dose of active  ingredient  to be absorbed  onto the fleece  which  must  
be at least 0.5 inches  long. Most  OPs give protection  for six weeks  or more if 
used correctly  (Kirkwood  and Quick  1981 & 1982).
The disposal of used  dip solutions,  OPs and even  more  so SPs must  be carried  
out as recommended  by local administrations  or they will pose a serious  threat  
to aquatic  life and the environment  generally.  OPs also require  careful  use from
123
a human  health  aspect  and those  using  them  require  to be trained  and licensed.
The choice  of product  must  now be carefully  made. Endectocides  have  much  
to recommend  them being  convenient,  non labour  intensive,  safe, requiring  no 
special  equipment  and can be used in any weather  and in most locations  even 
on mountain  sides. They have an added  advantage  of also killing  nematode  
worms.  However,  the injectable  forms  have no worthwhile  effect  against  flies 
or lice and if these  are present  a diagnosis  must  first be made  as disappointment  
and economic  loss will ensue if mites are not the problem  and of course  
endectocides  are much  more  expensive  to use.
In addition to the above  mentioned  products. Insect  Growth  Regulators (IGRs) 
are being  more frequently  used.  Already  they are popular  for controlling  fleas  
and Cyromazine  is widely  used to prophylactively  control  blowfly  strike in 
sheep. It gives prolonged  activity  (O’Brien and Fahey 1991) and works by 
interfering  with the development  of the larvae  of dipterous  flies. More  of these  
products  will become  available. Work  continues  on the development  of vaccines  
against  ectoparasites.  However,  it must  be stressed  that very few new products  
are being developed  due to costs and time consuming  trials required  for 
registration.  Hence,  it behoves  us to use these products  wisely  for already  
resistance  is developing  to some  of these  and there  is concern  over the safety  of 
others.
References:
Bates,  P.G.,  Groves,  B.A.,  Courtney,  S.A. and Coles, G.C. (1995).  The Veterinary  Record.  
137: 491 -492
Downing,  W. (1947).  The Veterinary  Record.  59: 581-582
Egerton,  J.R., Birnbawn,  J., Blair,  L.S.,  Chabula,  J.C., Conroy,  J., Fisher,  M.H., Morozik,  
J. Ostlind,  D.A.,  Wilkins,  C. A. and Cambell,  W.C.  (1980).  British  Veterinary  Journal.  
136: 88-97
French,  N.P.,  Parkin,  T.D.H.  and Morgan,  K.L. (1996).  The Veterinary  Record  139: 384- 
388
Hamel,  H.D. and Van Amelsfoort,  A. (1988).  Veterinary  Medical  Review.  59: 162-166  
Kirkwood,  A.C. (1980).  The Veterinary  Record.  138: 210-211  
Kirkwood,  A.C. and Quick,  M.P. (1981).  The Veterinary  Record.  108: 279-280  
Kirkwood,  A.C. and Quick,  M.P. (1982).  The Veterinary  Record.  Ill: 367 
O’Brien,  D.J. and Fahey,  G. (1991).  The Veterinary  Record.  192: 351-353  
O’Brien,  D.J., Gray,  J.S. and O’Reilly,  P.F. (1993).  Irish Veterinary  Journal.  46: 99-101  
O’Brien,  D.J., Gray,  J.S. and O’Reilly,  P.F. (1994).  Veterinary  Research  Comunications.  
18: (1)3 27-36
O’Brien,  D.J., Gray,  J.S. and O’Reilly,  P.F. (1994).  Veterinary  Parasitology.  52: 91-96  
O’Brien,  D.J., Parker,  L.D., Menton,  G., Kearney,  C., McCollum,  E. and O’Laoide,  S.
(1996).  The Veterinary  Record.  139:438-439  
O’Brien,  D.J., Forbes,  A.B., Pitt, S.R., Baggot,  D.G. (1999).  Veterinary  Parasitology.  
85: 79-85
Pearson,  P. (1996).  Proceedings  Int. Conference  on Sheep  Scab,  Tralee,  Ireland.  March  
1996. 22-25
Romano,  A. and Greco,  J. (1983).  Gacets  Veterinaria.  XLV: 57-69  
Sargison,  N.D.,  Scott.,  P.R., Penny  C.R.,  Pirie,  R.S. (1995).  The Veterinary  Record.  136: 
287-289
Wright  P.W. (19571.  Rural Research  in C.S.l.R.O.  20. 25-26
124
Producing  Quality  Beef for the Market
W. McLAUCHLAN
Greenmount  College,  22 Greenmount  Road,  Antrim.
It is well recognised  that given Northern  Ireland ’s relatively  small quality  
beef  production,  producers  and processors  must  focus on supplying  quality  beef 
cost effectively  into Europe.  These  markets  are prepared  to pay premiums  for 
a top class/branded  product  providing  sufficient  numbers  of cattle  grading  EUR  
with fat class 2 and 3 can be consistently  provided  52 weeks  of the year. Is 
the Northern  Irish beef industry  well positioned  to respond  to the challenge?
Decline  in quality  evident
The graph  below  shows  the decline  in the percentage  of steers  and heifers  
grading  EUR over the past 10 years.
91 92 99 94 95 96 97 96 99
Change  in conformation  classification  for cattle  slaughtered  in N. 
Ireland  from 1990 until 1999 - EU and R grades  combined
It is notable  that the data post BSE excludes  approximately  55,000  dairy  
bred bull calves  which  were removed  under  the Calf Processing  Aid Scheme.  
Had these  animals been  added  in, then only  36% of streets  would  meet  the EUR  
specification.
Reasons  for decline  in quality
• Influence  of Holstein  genes  in the dairy herd lowering  the conformation  of 
beef X dairy steers  and indirectly  through  the supply  of poorly  conformed  
replacements  to the suckler  herd.
• Retention  of poorly  conformed  heifers  from within  the suckler  herd.
• Decline  in the carcass  weight  of Continental  x cattle.
• Reduction  in the proportion  of finished  bulls slaughtered.
• Suspected  increased  usage of poor quality/scrub  bulls.
125
Quality  targets  - a farm quality  assurance  plus scheme
Currently  a quality  beef  scheme  is being  developed  within  the province  the 
main aims of which  are:
• supply  a minimum  of 2,500  cattle  per year to the main processors  with 75% 
grading  EUR of fat class 2 and 3 by 2006.
• encourage  information  flow, intergration  and competence  development  
through  training  across  the supply  chain.
• develop  minimum  stress,  high welfare,  systems  designed  to meet consumer  
requirements.  This will be based  on limiting  the number  of holdings  to 2 or 
3 per animal  combined  with disease  prevention  programmes.
• monitor  eating  quality  of all carcasses.
Achieving  the quality  targets
Bull improvement  - terminal  carcass  sire
Within  Northern  Ireland  the BLUP  system  is operated  on behalf  of Signet  
by AI Services  NI. By removing  the environmental  effects  the system  allows  
the true genetic  value of bulls to be compared  through  the use of Estimated  
Breeding  Values  (EBV ’s). EBV ’s are calculated  using the bull ’s own 
measurements  combined  with measurements  for its relatives.  The EBV ’s are 
then rolled  into an overall  index known  as the ‘Beef Value ’ and reflects  the 
financial  benefit  of using that bull. For example,  the Beef Value of 24 for 
Greenmount ’s Cheadlewood  Jupiter  bull in Table 1 means  that he will pass on 
approximately  £12 extra  margin to each of his progeny  compared  to the average  
for the breed on 1980.
Below  each EBV is an accuracy  percentage.  The higher  the percentage  
accuracy  then the greater  the chances  are that the figure  is unlikely  to change.
Table 1
EBVs  for two Limousin  bulls
Run date 
9/8/99.1
C3 ^t? ooU CO ^’> (L>
cj S'53
CQ SCut)c=sis-^ s".e
o ®CN &bs Iaoc
"o i>
= OU _c3 Q.
S-SJC
3 s-U- T3« —^ 5
Cheadlewood
Jupiter
EBV 2.0 -3.8 3.3 LM -7.0 39 49 0.7 0.5 0. LM
-2C 2 24
Accuracy  % 82 74 87 82 49 86 84 74 77 60 75
Index 84 80 64 80 67 138 126 119 140 81 119
Farland  Orver
(Jupiter  son)
LM LM
EBV 1.8 -4.1 3.1 -2C -6.0 57 77 0.8 0.6 0.2 37
Accuracy  % 64 47 65 61 35 65 60 48 55 34 52
Index 86 77 67 80 72 162 148 123 150 81 142
126
The higher  the heritability  of the trait, the amount  of infoimation  on relatives  
and the number  of contemporaries  recorded,  the better  the accuracy.  Generally  
the overall  Beef  Value  should  have an accuracy  of 40%. The lower  accuracy  
associated  with  Orvet  (Jupiter ’s son) is a reflection  of fewer  records.  As a result  
there is a greater  chance  that Orvet ’s EBVs  may change  in the future  either  
up of down.
Recently  Signet  has added an index for each EBV reflecting  how the 
performance  trait compares  to the present  average  for the breed.  An index of 
130 or above  indicates  that the animal  is in the top 1% for the breed in that 
particular  trait.
Both bulls have very high positive  EBV ’s for growth  rate and muscling.  
Both traits are normally  associated  with more difficult  calving  as indicated  by 
a negative  calving  value  and lack of milk as indicated  by a negative  2000-day  
milk  EBV.  However  it is possible  to find a bull that demonstrates  positive  EBV ’s 
for all these important  economic  traits.
For commercial  suckler  producers  contemplating  purchasing  a bull it is 
important  to select  a list of bulls which  will improve  the weakest  aspect  of your  
current  calf crop. The aim may be to correct  low growth  rates or poor  
conformation  or a combination  of both. Having  made the selection  based on 
EBV ’s view the bulls and the select  the best according  to:
• soundness  of legs and feet
• conformation  and breed character
• large  even sized  testicles  - associated  with better  fertility  in male and female
• purchase  the best value for money
In Table  2 results  from a progeny test  comparing  two Limousin  bulls  differing  
in Beef  Value  by 7 points  is compared.  This indicated  that through  higher  carcess  
weight,  improved  grading  and better  feed efficiency  the bull with the highest  
Beef  Value  produced  steers  which  were  worth  £73 more  than the progeny  from 
the lower  quality bull. Further  calculations  show  that combining  estimated  heifer  
and steer  results  would  lead to an improvement  in output  of approximately  £63 
per finished  animal.  If this superior  bull LM23  was used on an average  herd 
of 19 cows producing  18 calves  per year over 5 years then this bull would  
produce  an extra  £5670  over his lifetime  compared  to the moderate  beef bull 
LM16.  This is a clear  example  of how the quality  bull plays a significant  role 
in improving  profit  margins.
Table 2
Comparison  of steer progeny  from high and moderate  beef value bulls
Beef value LM 16 LM 23
Carcass  wt. (kg) 344 375
Conform,  grade (%) 0+ 72 41
R 28 41
U 0 18
Days to slaughter 700 690
Reduced  feed cost (£) -£8
Overall  output  (£) 521 594
127
The use of AI
UsingAI  successfully  in the suckler  herd  is fraught  with a number  of practical  
difficulties.  This is reflected  in the low rate of usage  of AI in the suckler  herd. 
It is estimated  from semen  usage figures  (1994  UK Dairy facts and figures)  
in 1993/94  that no more  than 13% of the national  suckler  herd in the province  
would  have received  a single  AI dose in that year.
The remoteness  of many  herds and difficult  terrain  make heat observation  
3 times per day a challenge.  Nevertheless  certain  committed  producers  who 
recognise  the superior  quality  of AI bulls  make  use of a quad  bike and binoculars  
to observe  cows  regularly.  One producer  currently  covers  120 cows  by AI and 
the other 40 cows while holding  down a full time job. The same individuals  
are innovative  in making  use of a portable  crush  with pens attached  which  can 
be moved  from field to field on the tractor  pick up hitch. Electric  fences  are 
used to form a funnel  to assist in moving  the cows on standing  heat into the 
service  pen. Both are skilled  in carrying  out their own AI,  regularly  achieving  
conception  rates of 60%.
Through  the use of AI at Enniskillen  College  a double  muscled  Charolais  
Culard  bull called  Haubois  was used last year on a herd of West of Ireland  
(WOI)  black  cows calving  in January/February.  The bull calves,  now at point  
of weaning  at 8 months  of age, weigh  383 kg having  achieved  an average  daily  
liveweight  gain of 1.35kg  since  birth  with  no meal  feeding. These  animals  have  
the potential  to grade  E and U. Some of these calves  weighed  up to 60kg at 
birth. However,  no major  increase  in calving  difficulty  with Charolais  Culards  
was observed  in this relatively  small batch of cattle.
Heavily  muscled  Charolais,  Belgian  Blues  or Blonde  D’Aquitaine  bulls used 
on WOI black  cows should  produce  lean well muscled  lean carcasses  suitable  
for the Continental  market.  However  a V4 Continental  cow crossed  to a 
Continental  bull is more likely to produce  the desired  carcass  with minimal  
calving  difficulty.
Synchronisation
Despite  these success  stories  many producers  will not have the labour  and 
handling  facilities  to cope with AI. It is feasible  to successfully  use 
synchronisation  and AI and achieve  a normal  conception  rate of 60%.
Given  the current  price  of synchronisation  drugs  combined  with  lower  prices  
for weanlings/stores  it is difficult  to justify  the cost of synchronisation and double  
AI. However  producers  involved  in calf  to beef  systems  are likely  to more  than 
justify  the costs of synchronisation  and AI when the effects  of extra carcass  
weight  and improved  grades  are taken into account.  This is currently  under  
investigation  at Greenmount.
Improving  suckler  cow quality  
Three  possible  options:
1) Replacements  from the dairy herd
Minimise/avoid  obtaining  suckler  replacements  from the dairy herd unless  
the herd is of British  Friesian  or other dual purpose  breed.  If some Holstein
128
is evident  in the beef x dairy replacement  then consider  producing  V4 breds  
from the V2 breds as replacements.
This approach  has been adopted  within the LIMO suckler  herd  at Greenmount  
where beef  production  from  progeny  out of 72,73  and pure-bred  Limousin  cows  
is being  assessed.  Cattle  will be marketed  through  Linden  Foods  into  Continental  
markets.
NOTE:  Herds  of dual-purpose  dairy  cows  are scarce  and will  fall  far short  
of suckler  herd replacement  demand.  This increases  the risk of introducing  
disease  into the suckler  herd.
2) Breed the suckler  cows to one breed of bull and keep the heifer  
replacements.  This will eventually  lead to a pure bred herd.
Note: Simple  to operate  leading  to a fairly uniform  cow. Suffers  from lack 
of hybrid  vigour  reducing  output  per cow by 22-23%.
3) Criss-cross  breeding  program
For the majority  of suckler  producers  this will be the most cost effective  
solution to improve  cow quality. This consists  of a criss-cross  programme  using  
two different  breeds  of pedigree  beef bulls both with positive  200-day  milk  
EBV.  The two breeds  selected  should  be similar  in size otherwise  a wide  range  
in ultimate  cow size will result.  This criss-cross  breeding  program  will, after  
6 generations,  have virtually  eliminated  the Holstein  genes  settling  down to a 
cow type alternating  between  66% and 33% of both breeds.  This approach  when 
crossed  to a terminal  sire of a different  breed will retain approximately  86% 
of the hybrid vigour obtained  in a hybrid (dairy x beef cross) bulled  
to a terminal  sire of a different  breed.  It is important  to match  the breed size 
and hardiness  to the environment.  Large  breed  types such as the Charolais  x. 
Blonde  x and particularly  Simmental  x cows should  preferably  be avoided  in 
the Hill environment.
Currently  a wide  range  of breeds  is being  assessed  on farm in a major  study  
being carried  out by ARINI  Hillsborough  (Steen  1999).  Calving  difficulty,  cow 
fertility,  carcass  output  and quality  will be monitored  from a whole  range of 
cow breed types currently  carried  on Northern  Ireland  farms.
Selecting  breeder  cows
Ideally,  to breed replacements  from within the herd select cows which  
calve  early and have a proven  history  of a good temperament,  milking  ability  
producing  a well conformed,  sizeable  calf each year. To obtain  sufficient  
replacements  approximately  40% of the herd will have to become  breeder  cows  
each year.
Breeding  replacements  from within  the herd to calve  down  at two years of 
age will be difficult  for the smaller  Hill producer  who traditionally  sells his 
calves  as weanlings or stores.  In this situation it  is likely  that a number  of lowland  
suckler  herds will become  specialised  suckler  replacements  to calve down at 
two years of age. It is this route that the April/May  calving  Abbey  herd at 
Greenmount  is presently  following  with a criss-cross  breeding  programme  
between  Saler  and Limousin.  The aim is to provide  replacements  for this lowland  
herd and a May/June  calving  herd at Greenmount  Hill farm.
129
Why Limousin  and Saler?
Limousin  helps to retain conformation  in the cow along with reasonably  
easy calving.  Compared  with the Limousin,  the Saler brings  up to 43% more  
milk (D’hour et al 1998), 23% larger  pelvic area (D’hour et al 1998) and 
improved  reproductive  performance  reaching  puberty  at the same weight  as 
Limousin  heifers  but 1 month  earlier  (D’hour et al 1996),  In a situation  where  
feed was restricted  in quantity  and quality  Salver  cows came into heat four 
weeks sooner  than Limousin.  After 4 parities  in a restricted  nutritional  
environment  appproximately  85% of the Salers  remained  in the herd compared  
with 60% of the Limousins.  (D’hour et al 1997).
Given the current  financial  difficulties  in beef production  it is likely that 
herds  will expand  or producers  will move  to part time  fanning.  In both scenarios  
less time will be available  to calve cows or to encourage  calves  to get up and 
suckle,  h is felt that the Limousin  x Saler  when  crossed  to a muscular  terminal  
sire will help over  come  these  difficulties  producing  a quality  calf  at least  cost.
Does payment  on grade  reflect  the quality?
The Livestock  and Meat Commission  (1999)  carried  out an assessment  of 
saleable  meat yield across  5 different  grade bands as shown  in Table 3.
Table 3
The effect of grade  on saleable  meat yield
Grade  band Carcass  grades % Saleable  meat % Price change  from base
1 E2 E3 U4 URL 76.5 +7
2 R3 R4L 0+3 0+4L 72 0
3 4H R4H 0+4H
03 04L 04H67 -7
4 0-3 0-4L 0-4H 66.5 -17
5 P3 66 -27
Within  band  2 and 3 there is currently  a price  range  of 18p per kg of carcass  
or £58 per average  steer carcass.  In moving  from the base band 2 up to band  
1 increases  the current  average  price by 5 per kg of carcass  and moving  down  
to band 3 would  decrease  the average  price per kg of carcass  in this band by 
5p. Such a scheme  if adopted  would  more fairly reflect  the yield of saleable  
meat rewarding  the farmer  better  for producing  a quality carcass.  One  processor  
in the province  moved  this year to reflect  a block  grading  system  paying  base 
+4p extra for E 3 & 4L and U 2 & 3, base -6p for R 2 & 3 and U 4L with 
0+3 fetching  base -lOp. Base price was taken as U3 Brussels  quoted  price.
Conclusion
Getting  the right quality  of Continental  terminal  sire selected  using  EBV ’s 
and crossed  onto a criss-cross  bred  Continental  cow is the best recipe  to achieve  
Continental  consumer  requirements  that is carcases  under  400kg  grading  EUR
130
with fat score 2 and 3. At current  prices  improving  carcass  grade from O to 
U will increase  the average  value  of the carcass  by £77 and improving  carcass  
weight  by 10 kgs will improve  output  by approximately  £17 per animal.  Plan 
and make changes  now to the breeding  programme,  it will take time for the 
benefits  to feed through  to put extra cash in your pocket.
References
D’hour  R, Menissier  F and Petit  M (1998)  in PJ Goddard  (ed),  Proceedings  of European  
workshop  on “ The implications  of extensification  for the health  and welfare  of beef 
cattle and sheep ” Aberdeen  5-6 March 1998.
D’hour  P. and Petit  M. (1997).  Proceedings  of’Suckler  cow workers  meeting ” UK, Sept.  
1997 pp 15-19.
D’hour R, Petit M and Garel J.P. (1996).  Rencontres  Recherches  Ruminants,  3: 233- 
266.
Livestock  and Meat Commission  (1999).  Lissue  House  31 Ballinderry  Road Lisburn  
Bt 28 2 SL.
Peck D. (1999)  Scottish  Agricultural  College  Beef/Sheep  notes July 1999 P 23. 
Steen R.W.J.  Patterson  D.C. Frost J.P. & Binnie  R.C. (1996).  Occasional  Fhiblication  
No. 22 March  1996 p92.
Steen R.W.J. (1999).  Personal  communication.
131
Breeding  Policy  for the Suckler  Herd
M. DRENNAN
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath
The aim in suckler  beef production  is to produce  progeny  of high growth  
potentialwithout  undue  calving  problems  and carcasses  eligible  for the  highest  
priced  markets.  The highest  priced  markets  available  are in mainland  EU and 
the animals  required  by these markets  are lean and of good conformation.  As 
breed  is the main  factor  influencing  these  traits  a continental  breed  of bull must  
be used for the production  of suitable  animals.  There  is a wide range  of options  
for the cow breed type but the following  factors  must be considered  in cow 
selection:
• Crossbred:  to avail of hybrid  vigour
• Satisfactory  milk production  potential
• At least 50 percent  continental
Hybrid  vigour
Hybrid  vigour  or heterosis  is defined  as the superiority  of the crossbred  over 
the average  of the two parent  breeds  for a particular  trait. A summary  of the 
available  data (Fallon  and Drennan,  1999) shows  that the overall  advantage  
expected  from  using  a crossbred  suckler  cow as opposed  to a purebred  in terms  
of kg of calf  weaned  per cow put to the bull is 13 percent  (Table  1). This advantage  
results  from  a combination  of improved  fertility, lower  calf  mortality  and higher  
calf liveweight  gain to weaning.  In addition,  the available  data indicate  that 
using  a sire of a third  breed  increased  the weaning  weight  by a further  8 percent.
Table 1
Improvements  from heterosis  in suckler  calf production
Cow Calving  rate Mortality Weaning  weight Overall  calf weaned  
(kg)/cow  to bull
Purebred 100 100 100 100
Crossbred 105 104 104 113
Fallon  and Drennan,  1999
Cow breed  comparisons
In one study at Grange,  Hereford  x Friesian  cows were compared  with 
Limousin  x Friesians  over 4 years. First calving  was at 2 years of age using  
an easy calving  Limousin  bull while  Charolais  or Simmental  sires were used 
for subsequent  calvings.  Male progeny  (bulls)  were taken to slaughter  at 16 
months  of age and heifers  at 21 months.  Limousin  x cows averaged  only 15 
kg greater  liveweight  (560 v 575 kg) than Hereford  x cows.  The progeny  of 
the Limousin  x cows had better  killing-out  rates, higher  carcass  weight  gains
132
(total 10 kg), lower  carcass  fat scores  and lower  kidney  plus channel  fat weights  
than Hereford  x progeny  (Table  2).
Table 2
Liveweights  and slaughter  data of progeny  of Hereford  x Friesian  and 
Limousin  x Friesian  cows
Hereford X Friesian  cows Limousin  x Friesian  cows
Weaning  weight  (kg) 319 323
Slaughter  weight  (kg) 578 584
Carcass  weight  (kg) 321 330
Kilhng-out  rate (g/kg) 554 562
Carcass  per day of age 599 616
'Carcass  conformation  score 3.5 3.5
-Carcass  fat score 3.9 3.5
Kidney  -i- channel  fat (kg) 11.4 10.2
'Scale 1 to 5 (Best conformation)  -Scale 1 to 5 (fattest)
In a second  study Charolais  cows  were  compared  with  Hereford  x Friesians.  
Both  were  bred  to Charolais  sires  as mature  cows while  an easy  calving  Limousin  
sire was used  for first calving  at two years  of age. The Charolais  cows  averaged  
over 100 kg heavier.  The overall  incidence  of calving  problems  was low and 
there  was no difference  in calf  birth  weights.  Daily  gains  from birth  to weaning  
were 1.10 and 1.19 for the calves  from Charolais  and Hereford  x Friesian  cows,  
respectively  (Table  3). This amounted  to a 240-day  weaning  weight  difference  
of approximately  22 kg in favour  of the Hereford  x Friesian  progeny.  This 
difference  in calf daily gain to weaning  was a reflection  of difference  in milk 
yield of the cows.  Averaged  over two studies,  milk yield at grass for spring  
calving  Charolais  and beef (Hereford  and Limousin)  x Friesian  cows were  7.3 
and 11.1 kg, respectively  (Table  4).
In three experiments,  the steer progeny  of the Charolais  and Hereford  x 
Friesian cows were taken to slaughter  and in two of these experiments  the pistola  
from one side of the carcass  was dissected  into meat,  fat and bone.  The average  
age of the Charolais  and Hereford  x Friesian  progeny  at weaning  was 217 and 
222 days, respectively.  Corresponding  weaning  weights  were 304 and 328 kg
Table  4
Cow milk yields  (kg per day)
Charolais Beef X Friesian
Experiment  1 7.6 12.1
Experiment  2 7.0 10.1
McGee  1997
133
(Table  5). When  fed similarly  from weaning  to slaughter  at about  2 years the 
final liveweights  were 678 and 697 kg, respectively.  Corresponding  carcass  
weights  were  384 and 393 kg. Thus,  the weight  difference  between  the progeny  
of the two breed  types  present  at weaning  was largely  present  at slaughter.  Carcass 
produced  per day of age was 531 and 540 g for the progeny  of the Charolais  
and Hereford  x Friesians,  respectively.  However, kidney plus channel  fat weight  
and carcass  fat scores  were lower  for the progeny  of the Charolais  cows,  while  
carcass  conformation  was better  than for the Hereford  x Friesian  progeny.
Table 5
Liveweight  and slaughter  data for steer progeny  for Charolais  and Hereford  x 
Friesian  cows (mean  of 3 experiments)
Charolais  dam Hereford  x Friesian  dam
Birth weight  (kg) 49.1 49.5
Weaning  weight  (kg) 304 328
Slaughter  weight  (kg) 678 697
Carcass  weight  (kg) 384 393
Age at slaughter  (days) 724 729
Carcass/day  of age (kg) 531 540
Kidney  + channel  fat (kg) 11.4 15.7
Carcass  fat score 3.8 4.1
Carcass  conformation  score 3.7 3.4
Table 6
Weight  and composition  of the pistola  from the steer progeny  of Charolais  and
Hereford  xFriesian  cows (mean  of 2 experiments)
Charolais  dam Hereford  x Friesian  dam
Carcass  weight  (kg) 371 383
Pistola  (g/kg carcass) 468 456
Muscle  g/kg) 675 643
Fat (g/kg) 153 181
Bone (g/kg) 172 176
When  expressed  as a proportion  of carcass  weight  the pistola  (higher  priced  
cuts) of the Charolais  progeny  was greater  than that of the Hereford  x Friesian  
progeny  (Table  6). The Charolais  progeny  had a greater  proportion  of meat  and 
a lower  proportion  of fat in the pistola  than the Hereford  x Friesian.  Although  
carcass  weight  of the Charolais  progeny  dissected  was 12.1 kg less than that 
of the Hereford  x progeny,  the meat yield in the pistola  was 5.0 kg greater  
(Table  7).
Due to the carcass  weight  difference  the carcasses  of the Hereford  x Friesian  
progeny  were worth  £22 more than the Charolais  progeny  when a flat price
134
Table 7
Value  of the steer progeny  dissected  when based on a flat price per kg or
muscle  yield
Charolais  dam Hereford  x Friesian  dam Difference
A. Carcass  weight  (kg) 371.2 383.3 -12.1
Pistola  weight  (kg) 173.6 174.6 -1.0
Fore weight  (kg) 197.6 208.7 -11.1
Muscle  in pistola  (kg) 116.4 111.4 +5.0
B. Muscle  in carcass  (kg) 293.0 232.1 +6.9
'Value  (£) based on A 668 690- -22
^Value  (£) based on B 719 -I-.693 +26
p/kg based on B 194 181 +13
'Carcass  = 180 p/kg
-Pistola  muscle  = 454 p/kg Forequarter  muscle  = 155 p/kg
(pistola  = 0.487 and 0.48 of carcass  muscle  for Charolais  and Hereford  x progeny,  respectively)
of 180p  per kg of carcass  was used (Table  7). However,  if the carcass  is valued  
on muscle  yield  with pistola  muscle  priced  at 454p  per kg and forequarters  (and  
flank)  muscle  at 155p per kg then the Charolais  progeny  are worth  £26 more  
than the Hereford  cross Friesian  progeny.  Based  on muscle  yield the carcass  
value of Charolais  and Hereford  x progeny  are 194,181p  per kg, respectively.  
Similar  calculations  (Keane)  showed  a difference  in value of 20p per kg of 
carcass  between  Hereford  x Friesian  and Charolais  x Friesian  steers.  Thus,  
assuming  a constant  carcass  weight  of 350 kg and the above  price  differentials,  
Charolais  x Friesian  and purebred  Charolais  steers would  be worth  £70 and 
£116,  respectively  more  than the Hereford  x Friesians.  This calculation  is based  
purely  on muscle  yield  and  does not allow  for the higher  priced  markets  available  
to the Charolais  or their potentially  higher  carcass  weights.
In conclusion,  the Charolais  progeny  (and cull cows)  result  in carcasses  of 
excellent  quality  (lean and of good conformation)  but the purebred  breeding  
programme  does not avail of hybrid  vigour  and the cows have low milk (and 
colostrum)  production  potential.
Breed  composition  of the suckler  herd
Presently  there are 1.18 million  suckler  cows in Ireland  and they account  
for 48 percent  of the total cow population.  Information  on cow and sire breeds  
in both suckler  and dairy  herd  was collected  in the National  Farm  Survey  (NFS)  
in autumn  1992  and 1998.  In the suckler  herd  Friesian/Holsteins,  early maturing  
breeds  and late maturing  breeds  accounted  for 20, 51 and 29% of the suckler  
cow herd, respectively  in 1992 (Table  8). Corresponding  figures  for 1998 were  
2, 46 and 52 percent.  Thus,  during  this six year period  the Friesian/Holsteins  
(no longer  eligible  for suckler  cow premia)  were  replaced  by continental  crosses  
(mainly  Charolais,  Simmental  and Limousin)  with the early maturing  breeds  
(Hereford,  Aberdeen  Angus  and Shorthorn)  decreasing  by 5 percentage  units.
135
Table 8
Cows and heifer  breed types (%) in suckler  herds
1992Cows
1998Replacement  heifers
1992 1998
Friesian/Holstein 20 2 7 1
Hereford  X 35 31 31 19
Aberdeen  Angus  X 9 12 9 19
Shorthorn 7 3 2 3
Charolais  X 7 17 15 20
Simmental  X 9 16 13 15
Limousin  X 8 15 15 20
Other 5 4 8 4
Total 100 100 100 100
An examination  of suckler  herd  replacements  showed that Charolais,  Simmental  
and Limousin  crosses  combined  increased  from 43 percent  in 1992  to 55 percent  
in 1998.  Thus,  the proportion  of continental  breed  crosses  in the suckler  herd 
is steadily  increasing  and it is also expected  that the proportion  of continental  
genes  in these crosses  is also increasing.  The data from the NFS show that 83 
percent  of mature  suckler  cows are bred to continental  sire breeds  (over half 
of which were to Charolais)  with no major  change  between  1992 and 1998  
(Table  9). Somewhat  more  than half  of the suckler  herd  replacements  were bred 
to continental  sire breeds  with 49 and 42 percent  bred to early maturing  breeds  
in 1992 and 1998, respectively.  The data from the NFS also indicates  that 49 
and 61 percent  of suckler  cows were bred using natural  mating  in 1992 and 
1998,  respectively.  The corresponding  figures  for heifers  were 55 and 46. Thus,
Table 9
Breed  of sire (%) used on suckler  cows and replacement  heifers
Cows Replacement  heifers
1992 1998 1992 1998
Hereford 11 9 20 11
Aberdeen  Angus 2 6 22 29
Shorthorn 2 1 2 3
Charolais 42 46 15 16
Simmental 16 16 11 10
Limousin 20 17 18 25
Other 7 7 10 5
Total 100 100 100 100
136
despite  the small herd size most animals  in the suckler  herd are bred using  
natural  mating  and the trend with mature  cows is for reduced  use of artificial  
insemination  (Al).
Future  breeding  policy  in the suckler  herd
The case for having  the terminal  sire from one of the continental  breeds  is 
clear (based  on growth  potential  and market  demands)  and where  a crossbred  
cow is used,  the bull should  be from  a third breed.  As the majority  will be using  
natural  service  the availability  of bulls  of high beef  merit  will be essential.  The 
breed type of suckler  cow cannot  be as clearly  defined  but the hybrid  vigour  
resulting  from using  a crossbred  and milk production  potential  are important.  
Limousin  x Friesian  spring  calving  cows  bred to an easy calving  Limousin  bull 
for their first calving  at two years of age and subsequently  to Charolais  (or 
Simmental)  sires has been the main cow type used at Grange  in recent  years.  
Conformation  scores  of the steer progeny  slaughtered  at 23/24  months  of age 
at over 390 kg carcass  weight  were 60 percent  U, 39 percent  R and 1 percent  
O (Table  10). Heifer  progeny  slaughtered  at 20 months  of age and 310 kg carcass  
weight  resulted  in 43 percent  of U and 57 percent  R. Fat scores  for both steers  
and heifers  were predominantly  4L and 4H. While the above carcasses  are 
satisfactory,  continued  movement  towards  Holsteins  in the dairy herd will 
gradually  result in a decline  in carcass  quality  from those three-quarter  
continental  animals.  Thus, in the longer  term if carcass  quality  is not only to 
be maintained  but improved  suckler  herd replacements  will need to be sourced  
from within  the suckler  herd.  While  many  breed combinations  can be suggested,  
one suitable  type cow would  be obtained  by alternate  crossing  of Limousin  
(good  conformation)  and Simmental  (milk production  potential)  with a third 
breed used as the terminal  sire (e.g. Charolais).  The potential  of these breeds  
to produce  carcass  of high quality  has been clearly  demonstrated  in previous  
studies  (Table  11; Keane,  1999).  These  breed  types  are already  widely  available  
and it is suggested  that certain  herds should  specialise  in the production  of 
suitable  replacements,  i.e. herds  with Simmentat  X cows use a Limousin  bull, 
while those with Limousin  X herds use a Simmental  sire.
Table 10
Carcass  grades  of the progeny  of Limousin  x Friesian  cows (6 years data)
Steers Heifers
Conformation  score (%) U 60 43
R 39 57
O 1 -
Fat score (%) 3 9 15
4L 42 47
4H 37 32
5 12 6
137
Relative  (FriesianTable 11
100) performance'  of Friesian  and beef x Friesian  steers
Sire
BreedCarcass
weightMuscle
weightConformation
scoreFat
scoreEye
muscle  areaFeed
efficiency
Friesian 100 100 100 100 100 100
Angus 99 94 127 120 100 90
Hereford 104 100 131 124 102 88
Limousin 105 111 140 101 118 83
Blonde 108 117 132 91 119 84
Belgian  Blue 109 119 140 91 120 85
Simmental 108 115 134 101 118 86
Charolais 111 118 144 95 123 84
‘At constant  age for steers out of Friesian  dams
Belgian  Blue
Due to high carcass  merit  the “double  muscled ” Belgian  Blue cattle  receive  
premium  prices compared  to other breed types, particularly  on the Belgian  
market.  For that reason  selection  for double-muscling  was widely  practiced  in 
Belgium  and as a result  the incidence  of dystocia  has increased  with caesarian  
sections  now common  practice.  Use of a Belgian  Blue bull on other  cow breed  
types results  in an incidence  of difficult  calving  similar  to that recorded  with 
other continental  sire breeds.  The main calving  problems  arises in purebred  
double  muscled  Belgian  Blues  and for that reason,  use of Belgian  Blue crosses  
could not be recommended  as suckler  herd replacements.  In a study (Flynn,  
Drennan  and Caffrey,  1999) involving  a relatively  small number  of animals,  
Belgian  Blue x Friesians  (17 animals)  had a higher  incidence  of calving  
difficulties  (29% caesareans)  than Limousin  x Friesians  (10% caesareans)  or 
Simmental  x Limousin  x Friesian  (no caesareans).  However, further  information  
is required  on the incidence  of calving  problems  in (1) Belgian  Blue  x Friesians,  
and (2) the progeny  of Belgian  Blue x Friesian  from a continental  bull breed,  
e.g. Limousin  x Belgian Blue  x Friesians  compared  with (3) conventional crosses  
(e.g. Limousin  x Friesian)  when crossed  with either  a standard  continental  breed  
of sire or a Belgian  Blue  sire. The availability  of such  data would allow informed  
recommendations  on the possible  role of Belgian  Blue as suckler  cow 
replacements.
Summary
• The highest  priced  markets  require  lean animals  of good conformation  and 
thus continental  breeds  must be used.
• Ideally  the cows should  be crossbred  (1/2 to full continental  breeds)  and 
the terminal  sire should  be from a third breed.
• Purebred  Charolais  provide  high quality  carcasses  but obviously  lack the 
advantages  of hybrid  vigour  and have low milk production.
138
Based on muscle  yield, 50 and 100 percent  Charolais  are worth  20p and 
carcass  more than Hereford  x Friesian.
Information  is required  on the incidence  of calving  problems  in Belgian  
Blue cross females.
References
Fallon,  R.J. and Drennan,  M.J. (1999).  Determining  the optimum  suckler  cow breed  
for Irish conditions.  Beef Production  Series No. 12.
Flynn,  J., Drennan,  M.J. and Caffrey,  P.J. (1999).  Level  of dystocia  in Belgian  Blue x 
Friesian  heifers  compared  to existing  suckler  breed types.  Agricultural  Research 
Fomm:  33-34.
Keane,  M.G. (1999).  Beef crossing  on the dairy herd. In: A New Agenda  for 
Dairying  Moorepark  Open Day; 35-38.
McGee,  M. (1997).  Defining  suckler  systems  in terms of efficiency  of lean meat 
production  and market  requirements.  Ph.D. thesis 1997.
139
Marketing  Beef  in Holland
ARNO  BOON
Albert  Heijn  Supermarket  Group,  Holland
In this paper I will summarise  Albert  Heijn ’s purchasing  policy and also 
discuss  consumer  trends,  the way in which  we identify  these trends  and our 
supplier  strategy.  But firstly  I will present  a short  profile  of Albert  Heijn  as part 
of the Ahold  company.
Albert  Heijn is part of Royal  Ahold,  a worldwide  operating  retail trading  
company.  Besides  many supermarkets  in the Netherlands,  Ahold  also has 
supermarkets  in the United  States,  the Far East and in South  America.  Last year  
the total turnover  amounted  to over 58.4 billion  guilders.  Albert  Heijn ’s 
supermarkets  are all found  in the Netherlands  with a high density  population.  
Ireland  is approximately  twice the size of the Netherlands,  yet we have  
approximately  three times the number  of inhabitants  of Ireland.  Albert  Heijn  
has always  been the largest  supermarket  chain  in the Netherlands  and currently  
has some 670 supermarkets,  of which approximately  170 are operated  as 
franchise  stores.  Last  year  the consumer  turnover  was approximately  12 billion  
guilders.  Our market  share in the Dutch foods and beverages  market  is 
approximately  28%. Albert  Heijn has 45,000  employees.  The Albert  Heijn  
formula  is characterised  by a wide  product  range  with a special  focus on service  
and quality.  This places  Albert  Heijn  at the top end of the market.
During  recent  years  we have  abandoned  the concept  of a uniform supermarket  
and have focused  on differentiation  within  and outside  of the supermarkets.  In 
the past, our supermarkets  were  mostly  situated  in the residential neighbourhoods  
of the cities. We are currently  developing  such new concepts  as mini ­
supermarkets  in Shell petrol stations  and in railway  stations,  neighbourhoods  
shops,  inner-city  supermarkets,  teleshopping  and we now also even have  a mini 
Albert  Heijn  in a major  hospital.  Our aim is to create  a service  concept  catering  
for the individual,  allowing  us to serve  customers  wherever  and whenever  they 
want. Because  consumers  often vary per geographical  region,  Albert  Heijn  
supermarkets  in the Netherlands  also vary.  We do our utmost  to take account  of 
and cater  for local circumstances  for the local market.
Albert  Heijn exists  by the grace of the customer.  If the customer  changes,  
we, as market  oriented  company,  will also have to change.  And the Dutch  
customer  is changing.  He has become  more  selective,  less predictable  and he is 
far more  demanding  than previously.  Customers  wish to obtain  their groceries  
in a supermarket  with  a wide  product  range,  at low prices  and with an excellent  
service  level.  Today ’s customer  has less time  and plans  less. Fixed  eating  patterns  
have been abandoned  under  the increasing  influence  of individualisation.  The 
moments  at which  people  eat are now determined  by the individual  himself.
In the Netherlands  the traditional  family  is no longer  the corner  stone  of our 
society.  There is a sharp increase  in the number  of small households  (two or 
three persons)  and the number  of working  women.  Furthermore,  there is a
140
decrease  in the number  of farmilies  with children.  The traditional  values  and 
building  blocks  on which  our society  was based  are slowly  crumbling.  A large 
number  of people  prefer  to create  their own purely  individual  lifestyle.
The customer  doesn ’t exist  anymore.  What  remains  are individual  customers  
whose  purchasing  behaviour  can vary from moment  to moment.  We call this 
the moment  consumer  whose  behaviour  may be characterised  as being  erratic.  
A result  of this change  is that we have  been  forced to increase  the product  range  
in the supermarkets.  Over  the past few years  the assortment  in an average  Albert  
Heijn  has increased  to 20,000  articles.
Albert  Heijn strives  to maintain  its carefully  built up quality  reputation  by 
focusing  on so-called  “anchor  groups ”, such as fresh  vegetables  and fruit,  coffee, 
bake-off  bread,  wine  and fresh  meat  We make  a clear  distinction  in assortments  
which  consist  of daily groceries  and low-priced  articles  and assortments  where  
emotion  and surprise  play an important  role. In this way we cater for both the 
rational  moments  of our customers  (daily  groceries,  ease, inexpensive),  as well 
as the emotional  moments  (surprise,  luxury,  hedonism).  The unique  and 
innovative  characters  of our fresh food products  and the ready-to-heat  meals  
play an essential  role in all of this. Top priority  is that we ensure  that all products  
sold under  our name  are of a consistently  good  quality.  Whereas  previously  the 
retail market  was extremely  fragmented,  nowadays  concentration  is the name 
of the game.  Supermarket  chains  are turning  into brand  names  and Albert  Heijn 
is such a brand  name  for the Dutch  consumer.  Consistent  quality  of our fresh 
food products,  such as meat, can help to establish  and bolster  such a brand 
name.
In order  to serve  the Dutch  consumer  better  and cater  for all his moods  at all 
moments  we have fine-tuned  our strategy  to this consumer.  We have changed  
from serving  the masses  to serving  the individual.  As mentioned  previously,  
differentiation  is of the essence.  Through  differentiation  we aim to be able to 
provide  each customer  with a vibrant  and heterogeneous,  own supermarket,  a 
supermarket  which  is able to satisfy  the true needs of the customer. These  needs  
are constantly  changing  under  the influences  of factors  such as: environmental  
considerations,  better  awareness  of price  and quality, time and demand  for ease. 
Such new demands  require  new answers  from  service-oriented  companies  such 
as Albert  Heijn.
We create  added  value  for our customers  and maintain  our competitive  edge  
through  differentiation  and through  focusing  on quality  both inside  and outside  
our supermarkets.  But in order  to ensure  that the price  difference  with regard  to 
our competitors  doesn ’t get too large, cost management  is an absolute  necessity.
Differentiation,  cost management  and a focus on quality  are therefore  the 
three pillars  on which  our strategy  is built. It is a combination  of three factors  
which,  according  to traditional  economists,  is hardly  feasible.  However,  thanks  
to the implementation  of modern  technology  in our logistical  processes  such a 
combination  has become  possible.  Albert  Heijn is a front-runner  in this field 
thanks  to economies  of scale and its position  as market  leader.
In order  to make  cost  management  and differentiation  possible  we have been 
busy for some time at improving  processes  both at the demand  as well as the
141
supply  side of the chain.  Close  cooperation  with our suppliers  is essential,  not 
only in order  to cut back  costs,  but also to increase  our added value  and be able 
to cater  for the needs of the changing  market  more  quickly,  more  efficiently  and 
in a more flexible  manner.
Our goal is to achieve  far more than simply  to implement  an efficient  
electronic  messaging  system  between  companies.  We hope to be able to co­
operate  with our suppliers  in such far reaching  matters  as product  ingredients,  
production  process,  farming  methods,  promotional  activities  and product  
development.  What  we want is co-makership.
Our latest  advertisement  campaign with the slogan  “Taste  the day” has focused  
on quality:  ‘relax and enjoy  our best quality  products ’ is the message.  When  we 
say ‘relax and enjoy ’ it means  that as the largest  supermarket  chain in the 
Netherlands  Albert  Heijn  has an indisputable  social  responsibility.  The Dutch  
consumer  expects  us to take on such a responsibility  as market  leader,  but also 
based  on the sense  of an individual ’s environmental  and social  awareness.
A good  example  is the successful  introduction  at the beginning  of this year 
of a large  range of organic  products.  As part of the introduction  of these  products  
Albert  Heijn  organised  an open  day during  which our customers  were welcome  
to visit  farms  throughout  the Netherlands  and take a closer  look  at the production  
methods.
The supermarket  is the last link in the chain between  the supplier  and the 
customer,  we offer  a hand that reaches  out to the consumer  and hands  him the 
end product.  Customers  can and do trust the quality  of the products  sold by 
Albert  Heijn.  It is therefore  Albert  Heijn ’s task to ensure  that customers  purchase  
an excellent  piece  of meat each and every  time, which  has been produced  in a 
safe and sound  manner  and which,  thanks  to cooking  instructions  provided  by 
Albert  Heijn,  customers  know  how to cook  properly.
We are no longer  the serving  hatch  through  which  products are simply  passed  
on from the supplier  to the customer,  although  some  suppliers  still think  we are. 
Albert  Heijn  is not the sales  person  for the supplier;  we are the  buying agent  for 
our customers.  This is an essentially  different  approach.  Our customers  wish to 
have a certain  supply  and we offer  it to them.  If we can purchase  the products  
locally  in the Netherlands  we will do so. If not, we will travel  the world  to find 
the necessary  products.
In order  to fully  effect  our responsibility  towards  the customer  and to eliminate  
unnecessary  costs,  Albert  Heijn  is constantly  striving  to improve its supply chain  
management.  We call this from field to yield.  Customers  also want  to know  the 
origin  of certain  products.  They want to have an answer  to specific  questions  
regarding  not only the product  ingredients  but also the production  methods.  
Customers  expect  us to set an example  in such areas  as environmental  care and 
health.  We could  even  state that it is the customer  who has forced  us to improve  
our supply  chain management.  And management  not in the sense of an up- 
down  structure,  but management  in the sense  of co-operation.
Only if we are able to properly  manage  the supply  chain  will we be able to 
guarantee  the origin  and quality  of the products.  We have no use for a product  
that finally  reaches  the shelves  of our supermarkets  after  having  been passed  on
142
between  innumerable  middlemen.  The more parties  concerned,  the higher  the 
cost price and the more anonymous  the product.
Supply  chain management  calls for identification  and traceability.  It is for 
this reason  that Albert  Heijn  insists  on being  informed  by its suppliers  about  the 
origins  and production  methods  of a product.  We call this the supply  chain 
guarantee  system.  Products  can be checked  during  any moment  in the supply  
chain  process  by means  of the so-called  ‘traceability  registration  system’ . This 
system  has been implemented  to a greater  extent  for certain  product  groups  
than for others,  due to such factors  as level of co-operation  with suppliers,  the 
market,  competition,  policy,  etc.
The customer  has become  increasingly  aware  of quality  and expects  to find 
quality  products  in our supermarkets.  He wishes  to be able to purchase  the 
same high-quality  steak  in the supermarket  which  he has eaten in a restaurant.  
Inferior  quality  won ’t do. As we say in the Netherlands:  “the butcher  is as good  
as his steak  is”.
As I have mentioned  previously  there is also the additional  factor  where  
meat  is concerned  and that is the fact that it is an “emotional ” product,  requiring  
that special  touch.  The true experience  of quality  and taste will only be fully 
realised  if certain  boundary  conditions  regarding  product  safety  and health  have 
been met.
The introduction  of Argentinean  beef in 1995 was a success.  For this beef,  
we require  that certain  preconditions  be met in the total supply  chain:  from the 
farm to Albert  Heijn
Argentinean  meat  is produced  in compliance  with a stringent  quality  control  
programme  which  closely  monitors  such matters  as type of cattle, herd 
management,  feed and use of medicines.  This same system  had already  been 
tried and tested  for the Irish beef and is once again  being  used in Ireland  after  
the re-introduction  of Irish beef in May this year.
Whereas  Argentinean  beef  serves  a niche  market  for Albert  Heijn  due to the 
limited  availability  of this beef at the right price/quality  ratio, the Irish Albert  
Heijn  Greenfields  beef  has a far larger  potential  market.  At present,  we import  
between  1200 and 1500 head of cattle per week from Ireland.  During  special  
promotional  activities  this volume  increases  significantly.  We expect  a further  
structural  increase  in volume  once the supply  chain  has been fully optimised.
I will now discuss  in more detail the requirements  set by Albert  Heijn for 
Irish beef. Not only must  Irish cattle  farmers  comply  with stringent  guidelines,  
the processors  must  do so as well. For instance,  we only  want  continental  breed  
from suckler  herds,  weighing  at least  300 kg and at most  400 kg. We also try to 
limit the number  of movements  of the animals.  All cattle should  be traceable  
and be reared  in compliance  with certain  animal  welfare  and environmental  
guidelines. A logbook  must  be kept by the farmer  for registering  animal  health  
planning.  In order to ensure  a proper  production  process,  it is essential  that 
cattle  are clean  on arrival  at the slaughterhouse.
General  conditions  must also be met by the processing  companies.  
Compliance  to these conditions  (like Farm Quality  Assurance)  are checked  
during  audits  conducted  by Albert  Heijn.  Terms  and conditions  that have to be
143
met for the production  of meat for Albert  Heijn  are: carcass  weight,  pH value, 
refrigeration,  tenderisation  process  (i.e. refrigeration  and electro-  stimulation),  
temperature  during  processing,  storage  and transportation  to Albert  Heijn.  In 
addition  to the controls  carried  out by Albert  Heijn,  an independent  certified  
institute  controls  the whole  chain.
We expect  that the total  sales  volume  of Irish  beef  will increase.  It is however  
essential  that we continue  to ensure  a high quality  of the end product  both as 
regards  extrinsic  as well as intrinsic  values.
At the beginning  of the supply  chain, more attention  must be given to 
environmental  aspects.  The environment  is something  that concerns  each one 
of us. It is a production  aspect  which  has during  the past few years received  
much  attention  in the Netherlands.  The farmers  who  raise  cattle  for Albert  Heijn 
must therefore  do their utmost  to use farming  methods  which  do not place a 
burden  on the environment.  We intend  to ensure  that all cattle are delivered  
straight  from the suckler  herds to the meat processing  companies.  Cattle  must  
be traceable,  by means  of an integrated  control  system,  from birth right  through  
to the moment  they are supplied  to Albert  Heijn. As yet, there  are still too many  
loose links in the supply  chain which  could cause problems  in the process.  
Last but not least, a close  relationship  between  farmer  and the meat  processing  
company  is essential  for the fine-tuning  of the process.  Price is still the most  
important  factor.  Although  pricing  will always  remain  important,  it should  be 
given  its proper  place  amongst  other  equally  important  or more important  factors 
which  determine  a co-makership  relationship  between  farmer,  meat processor  
and Albert  Heijn.
As soon as we have been able to create  the perfect  environment  for a  perfect  
product  we will be able to let our customers  experience  the perfect  emotion.  
Meat,  after all, is a product  full of emotion.
144
r -■
r'X ’ :
'::k.:--';. ■'
■T r^< 'mr:.
' -
i. .." 4’ > ^ , ;i' *4
■- -i: ;
‘''''- ■: ' '--K  , 
■ Z ' ■— ■■ '--- ''=-'■■
■ -:V3®
■-'■.-’t >"c^■V  /:->
- >■ '-.-’-I;“"3
Irish Grassland  
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal
1999 VOLUME  33
Irish  Grassland  Association  
CORPORATE  MEMBERS  1999
AIB
Bank  of Ireland  
Bord  Bia
Dairygold  Co-operative  Society  
Dawn  Meats  
Glanbia
Greencore  Agribusiness
I.A.W.S.  Group  pic 
Irish Dairy  Board  
Irish Famers  Journal  
Irish Fertilizer  Industries  
Irish Charolais  Society  
Kerry  Agribusiness  
Merial  Animal  Health  
Premier  Molasses  Co. Ltd. 
Town  of Monaghan  Co-Op.  
Wexford  Milk  Producers  Ltd.
Teagasc  - Advisory  and Training  Services
Ballyhaise  Agricultural  College  
Cork  East  
Cork West
Kildalton  Agricultural  College  
Kerry  
Laois  
Limerick
Regional  Office  South,  Kildalton  
Regional  Office  North,  Grange  
Roscommon  
Tipperary  North
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 33 1999
Edited  by
SEAN  FLANAGAN
ISSN 0332-0588
Primed  by Wicklow  Press Ltd.. Wicklow
CONTENTS page
D. A. McGilloway, The  potential  for grassland  based ruminant  production
E. O’Riordan  systems  beyond  20003
D. H. Hides Maximising  the potential  of farm-produced  forage 
with new varieties17
I. A. Casey,
P. G. Dillon,Developments  to enhance  sward  intake  and 
quality  (mid-season)27
J. Maher, The  effect of level of daily grass allowance  on the
G. Stakelum  performance  of spring-calving  dairy cows
B. Buckley,  P. Dillon36
G. Ryan Grazing  management  of autumn  calving  cows 48
S. & A. Leonard Improving  cow performance  with increased  use of 
grazed  grass59
T. M. Butler Role of partnerships  in the future  of Irish dairy farms 64
P. B. Sprensen Trends  within  Danish  dairy farming 68
P. Baker Key factors  in growing  a business 85
J. Roskam Innovative  practices  to increasing  farm net worth 91
J. van der Poel Achieving  growth  in an unregulated  environment  - 
Principles  and lessons  for any environment94
A. Donovan
J. P. HanrahanArtificial  insemination  of sheep - Current  status and 
possible  developments99
D. L. Kelleher Genetic  evaluation  of sheep breeds  for meat traits 107
J. F. Quinlan Some observations  on animal  disease,  ill thrift 
and infertility119
D. J. O’Brien Ectoparasites  of sheep 122
W. McLauchlan Producing  quality  beef for the market 125
M. Drennan Breeding  policy  for the suckler  herd 132
A. Boon Marketing  beef in Holland 140
COUNCIL  1999/2000
President  : P. McFeely  
Vice-President  : J. Dwyer  
Past-President  : M. Dempsey
P. Baker,  B, Barnes,  J. Claffey,  N. Culleton,  B. Earley,  C. Hurley, 
M. Magan,  J. Maher,  D. McGilloway,  J. O’Brien,  M. O’Brien,  M, 
O’Donovan,  P. O’Keeffe,  F. O’Mara,  T. Pettit, P. Walshe.
Hon. Secretary/Treasurer  : S. Flanagan  
Irish Grassland  Association,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Tel: +353 91 845835 Fax: +353 91 845847 e-mail  mfg@iol.ie
2
The Potential  for Grassland  Based  
Ruminant  Production  Systems  Beyond  
2000
D. A. McGilloway  and e, O’riordan
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath
Grassland  in all its variety  and forms represents  one of Ireland ’s most  
important  national  resources.  From an agricultural  perspective  it provides  a 
low cost renewable  feed source  of high nutritional  value  and is the corner  stone  
on which our ruminant  production  systems  are based.  A range of diverse  
grassland  farming  systems  exists  but typically  they have in common  pasture  
grazed  in situ accounting  for the greater  portion  of the animals ’ diet. Such  systems  
comprise  four components;  a physical  resource  (the environment  upon which  
the production  system  depends),  a forage  resource,  an animal  resource  and a 
management  system.  The three resource  levels are interactive,  the degree  of 
interaction  being  strongly  influenced  by the system  of management  (Figure  1). 
How the system  and its individual  components  might  change  and evolve  in the 
post  millennium  era will form  the basis of this paper.  The  production,  harvesting,  
ensilage and  feeding  of conserved  grass in the form of silage,  although  important  
to the overall  system,  will not be dealt with in this paper.  Here, our attention  
will be focused  exclusively  on grazing.
Physical  resource
Ireland  occupies  a total land area of 6.89 m ha, of which  agriculture  and 
forestry account for  approximately  92% of the total.  Of this, grassland  and rough
Fig. 1 - A hierarchical  structure  of grassland  systems
Source:  Sheath  & Clark. 1996
Fig. 2 - Estimated  starting  
dates of the grazing  season  
in Ireland
Source:  Brereton,  1995
grazing  combined  occupy  81% (C.S.O., June 1998).  The dominance  of grassland 
Ts due in the main to the suitability  of the climate  for producing  grass.  In terms 
of physical  resources  we have few natural  advantages  over our EU neighbours  
who are favoured  with more agreeable  cereal and forage  maize  growing  
conditions,  but our temperate  humid  climate,  modified  as it is by North  Atlantic  
currents,  confers  significant  grass production  advantages  (Jones  and Carter, 
1992). Climate  largely  determines  the start and end of the grazing  season,  
beginning  in late February/early  March  in the more favoured  south-west  and 
becoming  progressively  later the further  north  and east the location  (Figure  2).
Even with the application  of all available  technologies,  there exists  at least 
a 3-week  gap between  north and south.  This gap is also present  at the end of
Fig. 3 - Model  estimates  of 
annual  dry matter  grass  
production  (t ha ')
Source:  Brereton,  1995
the grass growing  season,  where  again the south-west  has up to a 3-week  
advantage.  Thus,  for similar  soil types,  the effect  of geographic  location  means  
that annual  grass yields  range  from in excess  of 15 t DM ha ‘ in the south-west  
to less than 11 t DM ha ‘ in the north-east  (Figure  3). In terms of feed costs,  
the effect  of location  results  in costs  ranging  from  £37 in the south-west  to £52 
t DMD  (digestible  dry matter) in the north-east  (O’Kiely,  1994;  Brereton,  1995).  
Weather  can cause  huge variation  in year to year annual  grass production  (i.e. 
+ or - 20% difference  from the long-term  average)  and can alter production  
costs from £42 in the best grass growing  year to £63 f' DMD in the worst  
(Table  1). Soil wetness  can also increase  production  costs  from £47  on dry free 
draining  soils to £56 r‘ DMD on wet heavy  clay soils.
Table 1
Effect  of location,  weather  and soil type on grass production  costs
£f‘ digestible  dry matter
Location £37  in SW 
£53 in NE
Weather £42 in best grass growing  season  
£63 in worst grass growing  season
Soil type 347  on dry well drained  
£56 on wet poorly  drained
Source:  O’Kiely, 1994; Brereton,  1995
In effect therefore,  climatic  variation  means  that the farmer  cannot  know  
the quantity  or quality  of grass that will be produced  over the grazing  season  
or the conditions  that will prevail  for utilization.  With the exception  of soil 
drainage,  there  is little that can be done to control  these  factors.  However, whilst  
we have little hope of manipulating  the effect  of climate  and location  at farm 
level, the possibility  that our climate  itself  might  be changing  cannot  be ignored.
There  is now  a considerable  body  of scientific  data  to support  the hypothesis  
that a significant  change  in world  climate  is taking  place.  Whether  this is due 
to a natural  cycle  or is a result  of increased  concentrations  of greenhouse  gases  
is much  less clear. Carbon  dioxide  is the most important  of these greenhouse  
gases  and its concentration  in the atmosphere,  although  small,  is thought  to be 
increasing  by 0.5% per annum  of the total carbon  dioxide  concentration.  In 
Ireland  it is predicted  that by the middle  of the next century  the average  annual  
temperature  will increase  by 2°C and precipitation  will increase  by 5-10%  in 
winter  but decrease  by 5-10%  in summer.  (The average  global surface  
temperature  in 1998 set a new record,  surpassing  the previous  record  year of 
1995 by 0.2°C,  the largest  increase  ever recorded).  The effect  of such changes,  
principally  temperature  and rainfall  on crop production,  can be simulated  using 
a range  of crop climate  models.  Some  of the predictions  from  a range  of models  
are summarized  in Table 2.
Simulated  changes  in dry matter  yield of grassland  in a changed  climateTable 2
Model Climatic Soil % Yield Source
Condition Type Change
WATCROS Temperature  rise (3°C) Sand +5 Olesen  (1990)
Temperature  rise (3°C) Loam +2
Rainfall  increase  (30%) Sand -1-20
Rainfall  increase  (30%) Loam -f8
Hejmdal Temperature  rise (3°C) - -27 Olesen  (1990)
Rainfall  increase  (30%) - -1-32
COj increase  (325 ppmv)  
Temperature  rise (2°C)- -1-54
Hurley - -6 Thornley  et al (1991)
Pasture
ModelCOj increase  (250 ppmv) — -h65
Johnstown Temperature  rise (1°C) - + 12 McWilliam  (1991)
Castle Temperature  rise (3°C) - -1-38
Model and rainfall  increase  (30%)
Source:  Jones and Carter, 1992
As can be seen, the majority  of models  are predicting  DM yield increases  
from 2 to 65%.  An increase  (at modest  levels)  in total annual  DM production  
is to be welcomed  but how will this be distributed  over the year?  The winters  
will be wetter;  soil type will not change,  so utilisation  on many  Irish farms  will 
continue  to be a problem.  It is also possible  to envisage  a situation where  summer  
droughts  become  a regular  feature  on many grassland  farms  and maize  silage  
(grown  nation-wide)  acts to bridge  the summer  feed deficit!  For many  farmers  
cereals  either  grown  on farm or purchased  may offer a better  alternative  than 
silage,  but how then do we control  the massive  burst of spring  growth  which 
the ensiling  process  captures?
Exploitation  of physical  resources  from  a grassland  perspective is increasingly 
coming  under  pressure  from  environmental  interests.  For example,  when  cattle  
graze paddocks  either  late in autumn  or early in spring,  they can cause  treading  
damage  which  displaces  surface  soil and reduces  infiltration  rates.  As a result, 
the potential  for increased  water  runoff  and sediment  contamination  of waterways 
is increased  (Lambert  etal, 1985).  Sustainable  eco-friendly systems of the future  
will not countenance  such practices  if proven  to be environmentally  unsound. 
Similarly,  amenity  and tourism  groups  exert  considerable  financial  and political  
pressure  (witness  the proliferation  of golf courses  around  the country  and the 
designation of specific  areas of conservation  (SAC)). In the not too distant  future  
it can be envisaged  that increasing  emphasis  will be placed  on the protection  
and even expansion  of such areas.  This will very likely occur  at the expense  
of developed  grasslands
Forage  resources
Forage  resources  occupy  the second tier in the hierarchy  of interacting  levels.
The yield potential  and estimated  proportion  of grassland  suitability  classesTable 3
Suitability Yield Potential Ireland EC- 10
Class (t DM ha-‘) (proportion  grassland  area)
A 10 - 12 0.32 0.09
B 8 - 10 0.13 0.19
C 5 - 8 0.21 0.26
D 3 - 6 - 0.22
E 1 - 5 0.34 0.24
'Ranking  scale from A to E:
Source:  Lee, 1984A = well suited  for grassland;
E = very poorly  suited  to grassland
There  is little ‘natural  grassland ’ in Ireland.  What  exists  has been  brought  about  
by the activity  of man who cleared  forests  and cultivated  land for crops.  
Subsequent  development  of grassland  (including  moorland)  and its maintenance  
by centuries  of biotic  influence  has resulted  in the dominance  of the landscape  
by a range  of ‘artificial ’ vegetation  types.  A dated  but still useful  classification  
of grassland  types  is that presented  by Lee (1984)  who used climatic  and soil 
data to classify  the soils of Europe  into 5 suitability  classes.  These  ranged  from  
A = well suited  for grassland  to E = only poorly  suited  to grassland  (Table  3).
Three  soil or land properties  were assumed  to be of major  importance;  (i) 
soil moisture  availability,  (ii) poaching  susceptibility  and (iii) accessibility  to 
machinery.  Ireland  with 0.32 Class  A land has the highest  proportion  of this 
land category  in Europe.  Land in classes  A and B combined  represents  0.45 
of total grassland  in Ireland  and is considered  to be free from  major  limitations  
to production.  These  classes  compare  with 0.28 for the EU-10.  In addition,  the 
proportion of Irish  grassland  classified  under  Categories  D and E is considerably  
less than that of the EU-10  (0.34 compared  with 0.46). Grassland  in these  
categories  have a low yield potential  between  1-5 t DM ha ' annum  * due to 
unfavourable  soil climatic  conditions  and are not suitable  for mechanisation.
It takes  no great  insight  to appreciate that this resource  exists  within  a dynamic  
environment  in which  species  competition  and  quality  is related  to environmental  
factors  and the system  of management  imposed.  It is important  to appreciate  
that botanical  composition  is not in itself  a prime  determinant  of productivity  
but rather  it is the means  by which  the production  potential  of a given sward  
is realised.  Species  and varieties  have different  inherent  yield potentials.  All 
will be most productive  on warm,  humid  highly  fertile  soils but for any given 
site with a particular  combination,  temperature,  fertility  and management,  only 
one or two pasture  species  will be capable  of expressing  the full site potential.  
This is an important  consideration  since  in less favoured  situations  species  other  
than Loliumperenne  (perennial  ryegrass)  may prove  to be more  suitable.  Under  
simulated  grazing,  several  secondary  grass species  have been shown  to out- 
yield Lolium  perenne  at 0 and low N levels (Table  4).
Annual  dry matter  yields  (second  year) of a range  of secondary  grass species  
under  simulated  grazing  at different  N rates (kg ha ')Table  4
N rate (kg ha'‘) 0 120 480 0 120 480
Grass  species  (Lolium  = 100) DM DOM
Lolium  perenne  (L) 100 100 100 100 100 100
Agrostis  stolonifera  (L) 140 93 77 71 79 68
Cynosurus  cristatua  (L) 149 82 84 81 76 80
Festuca  rubra (L) 134 100 91 70 92 84
Poa pratensis  (L) 87 81 96 43 70 88
Holcus  lanatus  (L) 217 100 90 115 92 85
Source:  Frame  and Tiley, 1988
Lolium  with  a higher  OMD%  was superior  in DOM  yield  when  N was applied.  
The quality  of secondary  species is also known to decline  rapidly in early season.  
Given  a future  scenario  of low input extensive  grassland  farming  (REPs  etc.) 
on one hand and intensive  grassland  utilisation  (driven  by N) on the other, it 
can be expected  that secondary  grass species  will attain greater  prominence  
relative  to Lolium  (or some  ‘new ’ primary  grass?).  Factors  of animal acceptability 
and ease of grazing  management  will require  consideration  - the challenge  being 
to maintain  secondary  grasses  in a young  tillering  state - new sward height  
guidelines  may be required.
An increasing  reliance  on grass/clover  swards  can also be anticipated  in 
situations  where extensive  grassland  management  is practised.  Grass/clover  
swards  can reduce  production  costs  by savings  made  on N fertiliser  and improved 
growth  rates  due to the higher  feeding  value  of the clover.  Under  cutting,  grass 
and clover  swards  have been shown  to give DM yields equivalent  to 
monocultures  of grass  receiving  200 kg N annum  ' (Morrison,  1981).  How  these 
advantages  can be incorporated  into grazing  systems  still requires  work. For 
many,  systems  based  on grass/clover  are seen as carrying  high levels  of risk, 
with year to year variations  in herbage  and livestock  production  greater  than 
that from N fertilised  swards.  However,  Davies  et al. (1992)  have shown  that 
over 6 years at Bronydd  Mawr  (Wales),  lamb production  from grass/clover  
pasture  varied  from 80-114%  compared  with  75-125% for  grass  swards  receiving 
200 kg N ha-‘.
Poor growth  of grass/clover  swards  in the spring  is also a major  constraint  
limiting  production  at present.  Longer  term (with  climate  change?),  an increase  
in mean  soil temperature  will go some  way to easing  this problem.  However,  
in the short to medium  term there is much  that can be done with strategic  use 
of N fertiliser  and the inclusion  of more N tolerant  clover  varieties.  Progress  
has also been  made  in breeding  for improved  winter  hardiness  and spring  growth 
(Rhodes  and Webb, 1993).
The impression  amongst  many is that to opt for extensive  systems, technology
is ‘thrown out the window’ . The opposite  is in fact the case and a greater  degree  
of technical and  management  skill is required  to successfully  manage  a grassland  
system  based  on clover  as opposed  to N fertiliser.  In the future  we can expect  
clover-based  systems to evolve which  incorporate  both  continuous and rotational  
grazing,  swards  being  continuously  grazed  in the spring  and early summer  in 
order  to encourage  clover  development,  and then rotationally  grazed  in order  
to efficiently  utilise  the resultant  supply  of herbage.
On intensive  grassland  farms  Lolium  will continue  to be the predominant  
species  of choice,  principally  because  it is highly  productive  in response  to N 
fertiliser,  has high acceptability  to stock,  is relatively  persistent  if soil fertility  
is high,  is tolerant  of intensive  grazing  and cutting,  exhibits  rapid establishment  
and has good tillering  ability.  Under  non-limiting  conditions  of light, soil, 
moisture  and temperature,  potential  biomass  production  from  Lolium  dominant  
swards  has been  shown  to be in the order  of 65 t DM ha‘‘ (Parsons,  1988;  Gordon,  
1996). However,  because  of loss processes  associated  with respiration  and 
senescence,  harvestable  yield is only 20% of potential  at 13 t DM ha‘‘ (Table  
5). There is clearly  huge scope for reducing  losses.
Table 5
The potential  within  a Lolium  dominated  sward  defoliated  at intervals
t DM ha-'
Total photosynthesis 65.0
Respiration
Shoot -27.6
Roots (including  growth) -8.1
Shoot decay -16.3
Harvested  yield 13.0
Source:  Parson,  1988; Gordon,  1996
In Ireland,  under  optimum  conditions,  production  from grass  swards  can be 
very high. Culleton  and Murphy  (1987)  recorded  DM yields  of 17.5 t ha ‘ from  
Lolium  multiflorum  while Collins  (1985)  has obtained  17.2 t DM ha ' from  
Lolium  perenne.  At farm level,  production  is significantly  less than this, varying  
from 15 t DM ha ' in the extreme  south-west  to less than 11 t DM ha ' in the 
north-east  (Brereton,  1995).  The potential  for improvement  is great. For the 
best farmers  using  modern  technology,  a realistic  target  is likely  to be near 20 
t DM ha ' (Leafe,  1978).
Is there scope to increase  harvestable  yield?  Grass output  has been  near  static  
for decades.  The best  yielding  maturing  variety  on the 1998 Irish  Recommended  
List is the tetraploid  Anaconda  which,  relative  to the highest  yielding  variety  
in 1994 Bastion,  increased  production  by 0.41 f' DM ha or 0.03 t DM ha' 
annum  ' over the intervening  period,  hardly  a dramatic  increase  in production  
(Table  6).
Relative  increase  in annual  yield (t DM ha') of highest  yielding  early  
perennial  ryegrass  variety  on 1998 Irish Recommended  ListTable 6
Year Variety t DM ha *
’84’ Bastion 16.70
’95’ - ’98’ Anaconda  (T) 17.11
Source:  Irish Recommended  list, 1984-1999
A similar  story exists  with  regard  to late heading  varieties.  In terms  of overall 
system  production  costs, yield of DM ha * is important  and if it cannot  be 
improved  by conventional  means,  alternative  methods  such as genetic  
manipulation  or biotechnology  should  be investigated.
Other  criteria  are also important.  Ulyatt  (1981)  suggested  that an ideal plant  
would  have:-  “high  protein  content,  particularly  increased  sulphur  amino acids; 
high levels  of soluble  carbohydrate;  some features  such as thicker  cell walls  
in the soft tissues  or presence  of tannins  that would  either  slow the release  of 
soluble  protein  or render  it less soluble;  an easily  ruptured  epidermis,  vascular  
tissue  that is sufficient  to maintain  agronomic  merit but is fragile  to terms of 
(sheer)  strength; concentrations  of minerals  sufficient  to maintain  animal  health. ”
Add to this  a canopy  architecture  that affords  easy prehension  to the grazing 
animal  and the problem  would  be solved.  If only! We are now 18 years  further  
on and still awaiting  significant  progress.  However, there  are several  interesting  
developments  in the pipeline,  whilst  not necessarily  enhancing  the role of grass, 
should  ensure  its long-tenn  survival  in our systems  of production.  Research  
at IGER  has found  that some grasses  and forage  crops contain  high levels  of 
polyunsaturated  fats and that feeding  cattle  on these  crops  causes  the beef  itself  
to contain  higher  levels  of these healthier  fats. Green  plants  are a rich source 
of these  beneficial  acids  and early studies  show  that a small but useful  amount 
of forage  is absorbed  by the cattle and appears  in beef. Collaborative  work 
between  IGER  and Teagasc  Grange  is ongoing  in this area.
A major  problem  with our current  statutory  herbage  evaluation  system  is
Table 7
Cattle  grazing  preference  among  20 ryegrass  cultivars
Cultivar Heading  date Ploidy Preference  ranking*
Condessa Late Tetraploid 1
Bastion early Tetraploid 3
Hercules Late Diploid 7
Respect Mid Diploid 19
*l=highest  preference;  20=least  desirable 
Source:  O’Riordan,  1996
10
Table 8
Varietal  effects  on short-term  intake
Variety
A B sem
Sward  height  (mm) 238 243 4.4
Live leaf (%) 64 61 3.6
Intake/bite  (g DM) 0.8 0.9 0.06
Biting  rate (btes min ') 48 52 2.9
Intake/hour  (kg DM) 2.3 2.7 0.12
that it is based  on assessment  under  a cutting  regime.  For varieties  to sell and 
make money  for the breeder,  they have to be submitted  for evaluation  and 
essentially  found to yield better than the current  control  variety,  have high 
digestibility  and reasonably  persistency.  Nowhere  in our current  evaluation  
process  does the end-user  have anything  to say about  the quality  on offer. We 
are all familiar  with  the concept  of the customer  having  the final  say with  regard  
to quality,  real or perceived.  Why therefore  do we not apply  the same  rational  
to our four legged  brethren?  Some  work  caiTied  out in Grange  a few years  ago 
clearly  showed  animal  preference  for some varieties  over others  (Table  7).
What  are animals  displaying  here?  Call it preference,  choice  or palatability,  
but they are making  definite  choices.  It is not practical  or financially  viable  
to run  statistically  robust  animal  grazing  trials  to determine  the intake  potential  
of all varieties  submitted  for testing.  We need an alternative  approach:  how to 
gather  affordable  and repeatable  measurements  of animal  intake  for a range  of 
species,  varieties  or sward states?  An experimental  protocol  developed  to 
measure  short-term  intake  (1 hour) may offer some potential  if the results  in 
the short-term  can be correlated  with daily intakes  (Table  8).
Under  experimental  conditions,  variety  B had a significant  higher  intake  
potential  than variety  A. There  is a need to confirm  that differences  in intake  
bite ' also apply over the longer  term but in due course,  grasses  will be bred 
for increased  intake  at grazing.
Animal  resources
The animal  component,  our third tier in the system  hierarchy,  determines  
the demand  which  will vary for animal  type, genotype,  sex and physiological  
state.  Forage  resource,  location  and management  will all impact  on the success  
of the farmer  in providing  for the demand  of the animal.  Without  dwelling  unduly  
on this resource,  it is pivotal  to the system  and without  ruminants  to convert  
grass DM to animal  product,  grass would  have little value.
In terms of ruminant  livestock  numbers,  Irish  grassland  supports  in the region  
of 7.8 m cattle,  the vast majority  of which  are found  in beef  enterprises.  Sheep  
account  for approximately  8.3 m individuals  and others  such as horses,  deer,  
and goats  approximate  to 0.112  m (Table 9). In terms  of L.U. equivalents,  cattle
11
Table 9
Ruminant  livestock  numbers  in Ireland  June 1998
'000 head L.U. Equivalent
Cattle 7795 5646
Sheep 8373 1587
Others 112 80
Total 16280 7313
National  stocking  rate = 0.6 ha/LU (1.5 ac/LU)
Source:  CSO, June 1998
account  for 5.6 m compared  with 1.6 m sheep.  This equates  to a stocking  rate 
on the grassland  and rough  grazing  component  of utilised  agricultural  land of 
0.6 ha/LU  or 1.5 ac/LU."
Ruminant  production accounts  for 0.92 of gross  agricultural output  equivalent  
to £3 billion.  More  than half of this is accounted  for by beef, followed  closely 
by dairy  and lastly  sheep (Table  10). These  data  serve  to illustrate the importance  
of grass to the competitiveness  and sustainability  of our production  systems.
Table 10
Ruminant  production  as % of gross agricultural  output  1998
% Total*
Dairy
Beef
Sheep34
49
9
92 (=£3 billion)
*estimate
Source:  Fingleton  and Cushion,  1998
I would  argue  that over  the last 10-15  years,  researchers  and leading  farmers 
have focused  more on the animal,  looking  to breed  type and genetic  potential  
to make  a contribution  to overall  farm profitability.  In the dairy industry,  high 
genetic  merit  cows  have been introduced  which  are very efficient  at producing  
milk.  Arguably,  these animals  are of an extreme  type with  a high-energy demand  
and perhaps  less suited to low input systems  than the more traditional  cow. 
Certainly  there appear  to be fertility  and longevity  problems  associated  with 
these  animals.  Relative  to existing  standards  they  have the potential  to produce  
an extra  5 1 milk  day',  i.e. a 16% increase  in milk  yield  (Table  11). Such animals  
have an increased  intake  demand  which  has to be met from  grass. In the main 
this is achieved  by providing  increased  allowance  of high quality  feed.
In truth this has been achieved  by exploiting  existing  potentials  within  the 
grass crop, not by increasing  the grass potential  per se. Put differently,  we are
12
Table 11
Increasing  genetic  merit  - what happens?
P1N*,5  £9 vs PIN,, £61
Milk yield -1- 16% (5 litres/day  more milk)
Food intake + 4.2%
Milk yield/unit
food consumed + 11%
Liveweight  change
(kg/day;  150 days) +0.34 vs -0.02
* Profit index
so busy trying  to service  the increased  animal  potential  that nobody  is able to 
step back and look critically  at our raw material  with regard  to increasing  the 
potential  of the grass crop itself! In general  it would  appear  that the genetic  
potential  of breeding  stock in all grassland  systems  of production  is set to 
increase,  be it yield  of milk,  beef  or lamb.  It is therefore  likely that in the  future  
there will be increased  specialisation  of breed type for specific  purposes  and 
that the great  diversity  (inconsistencies)  witnessed  in our beef  herd will become  
a thing of the past.
Management  system
It is outside  the remit of this review  to address  specific  and detailed  
management  issues.  However,  certain  management  practices  may well change  
and evolve  in the times to come and so it is relevant  to at least consider  the 
essentials.  Management  system  is the uppermost  tier in our pyramid  which  can 
be sub-divided  into system  design and grazing  management.  A profitable  system  
will be a compromise  between  the feed demand  of the grazing  animal  and the 
pasture  supply  pattern  (+supplementation?).  Grazing  management  is the fine 
tuning  mechanism  and relates  to the day-to-day  decisions  such as ‘where  and 
when to move the grazing  animals ’.
It is a tall order  to develop  efficient  grassland  systems  that consume  cun'ent  
growth  when  approximately  60-79%  of annual  production  occurs  in 4 months.  
Consequently, systems  have  evolved  to the stage where  decisions  on oversupply  
(and deficit)  have to be made and implemented.  However,  the difficulty  lies 
in the fact that within  grassland  systems  there  are fewer  options  available  than 
in the more complex  production  systems  that use a range  of inputs,  produced  
either on the farm or produced  from outside  sources.
In simplistic  terms,  inputs  into grazing  systems  can be distilled  into stocking  
rate, nitrogen  (clover),  rotation  length  and severity  of defoliation.  These  are 
the factors  under  farmer  control.  By balancing  these inputs  the farmer  has to 
satisfy  3 basic objectives:
1. To achieve  the correct  balance  between  the land resources  available  and 
stock numbers  on the farm. Nitrogen  is the controlling  factor  here,
2. To ensure  that sufficient  silage is produced  for the winter  period.
13
3. Adjust  stocking  rate during  the season  to keep feed demand  and supply 
in the grazing  area in balance  as herbage  growth  rates change.
The land resources  available  and stock  number  on the farm are fixed.  These  
factors  in conjunction  with N determine  stocking  rate. High stocking  rates can 
only be sustained  with high levels  of N fertiliser  (@ 400 kg ha ') but at low 
stocking  rates a much  reduced  input of N or increased  dependence  on clover  
will suffice  (Table 12).
Table  13 summarises  the current  situation  existing  within  the EU in relation  
to legislation  enacted  or pending  to regulate  fertiliser  inputs.
Table 12
Stocking  rate and Nitrogen  requirement
Stocking  rate
L.U./haNitrogen  
kg ha '
1.5 0
2.1 100
2.4 225
2.8 300
3.0 390
Sample  of legislation  enactedTable 13
or pending  to regulate  fertiliser  input
Country
Norway Environment  tax on N fertiliser
Sweden Environment  tax on N fertiliser
NetherlandsLevy on Cadmium  in phosphate  fertilisers  
Mineral  balance  administration  system
Belgium Mineral  balance  administration  system
Ireland Cork County  Council  - restrictions  on N & P
Result  - long term downward  pressure  on inputs
From the grass farmers ’ perspective,  N inputs,  one of the few tools at his 
disposal  to control  grass supply,  is likely  to become  restricted  to a greater  or 
lesser  extent.  It will therefore  be important  to increase  the efficiency  of use 
of fertilisers,  organic  manures  and slurries.  Techniques  for rapid  in-field analysis 
of soil mineral  N have  been developed,  which  enable  fertilisers  to be used only 
in the amounts  required  to supplement  soil supplies  of nutrients  in relation  to 
herbage  production  targets.  Potentially  there  are savings  of up to 40% of fertiliser 
N use in intensive  systems  with no loss in production  and major  environmental  
benefits.  The impact  of GATT,  CAP, Agenda  2000 and general  consumer  
perceptions  must also be considered.
Aside from the input of N, there are not many input variables  left at the
14
farmer ’s disposal.  In terms  of a daily budget,  sward  height  and rotation  length  
are the main control  parameters.  Certainly,  some  of our current  guidelines  will 
alter depending  on the intake  requirements  of any particular  group  of animals.  
High merit cows at grass require  access  to tall leafy pasture  and cannot  be 
forced  to graze  as tightly  as current  recommendations  suggest  without  adversely  
affecting  performance.  Leaving  a high residual  herbage  mass  will cause  its own 
problems  with regard  to sward  quality  and will have to be removed.  This may 
necessitate  a second  group  of animals  behind  the leading  group  to clean out 
swards.  This is simple  in theory  but will further  complicate the grassland systems  
of the future.  Aids to increase  the precision  management  of grassland  farming  
in the future  will include  increased  use of strategic  and decision  support  models,  
equipment  for rapid analysis  of forage  quality  and ensiling  potential,  and for 
the assessment  of herbage  yield and green leaf mass for grazing.
Conclusions
We must look beyond  management  issues to sward genetics  to afford  
significant  progress  in grassland  production  systems, the objective  being  to raise  
the genetic  quality  and potential  of the grass  crop. In the short  to medium  term,  
factors  outside  farmers ’ control  are going  to dictate  the curse and direction  of 
change  with emphasis  being placed  on animal  welfare  and the environment  
before  the economics  of ruminant  production  at farm scale.  Grassland  systems  
have in the eyes of the public  a green  clean image  and perhaps  this will allow  
the product  to attract  a premium  price over and above other more intensive  
systems of production.  It is difficult  to envisage  major  changes  with our systems  
given the relatively  few input variables  at farmers ’ disposal.  Consequently,  it 
will be up to the breeders  and nutritionists  to ‘design ’ the herbage  varieties  of 
tomorrow.  However,  it is the responsibility  of the grassland/grazing  researcher  
to set the targets  - tell the breeder  what  is required.  To do this requires  a vibrant  
and visionary  research  programme  that is adequately  funded.
References
Brereton,  A. J. (1995).  Regional  and year-to-year  variation  in production.  In: Irish 
Grasslands  their biology  and management  (Eds. D. W. Jeffrey,  M. B. Jones and 
J. H. McAdam).  pp. 12-22. Royal Irish Academy,  Dublin.
Collins,  D. (1985).  Forage  production  in temperate  climatic  zones.  Research  Report  
1984. An Foras Taluntais,  Dublin.
C.S.O.,  June (1989).
Culleton,  N., and Murphy,  W. F. (1987).  Effects  of seeding  rate and of mixtures  of Lolium  
multiflorum  Lam.  and Lolium  perenne  L. on productivity.  Irish  Journal  of Agricultural  
Research  26, 93-104.
Davies,  D. A., Fothergill,  M. and Morgan,  C. T. (1992).  Assessment  of contrasting  
perennial  ryegrass,  with and without  clover,  under  continuous  sheep  stocking  in the 
uplands.  4. Animal  performance  in years  4-6. Grass  and Forage  Science  47, 245- 
258.
Fingleton,  W. A., and Cushion,  M. (1988). Irish  Agriculture  in Figures.  Rural  Economy,  
Teagasc.
15
Frame,  J. and Tiley,  G. E. D. (1988).  Herbage  productivity  of secondary  grass species.  
Proceedings  of I2th General  Meeting  European  Grassland  Federation,  Dublin  
Ireland,  pp. 189-193.
Gordon,  F. J. (1996).  Potential  milk production  from grass and limiting  factors. Irish 
Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association  Journal.  30, 103-114.
Jones,  M. B. and Carter,  T. R. (1992).  European  grassland  production  in a changing  
climate.  Proceedings  of 14tli General  Meeting  European  Grassland  Federation,  pp. 
97-110.  Lahti, Finland.
Lambert,  M. G,, Devantier,  B. P., Nes, P. and Penny,  P. E. (1985).  Losses  of nitrogen  
phosphorous  and sedimentary  run-off  from hill country  under different  fertilizer  
and grazing  management  regimes.  New Zealand  Journal  of  Agricultural  Research.  
28, 371-379,
Leafe, E. L. (1978).  Physiological,  environmental  and management  factors  of importance  
to maximum  yield of the grass crop. In: Maximising  yields  of crops. ADAS-ARC  
Symposium,  Harrogate,  H.M.S.O.,  London.
Lee, J, (1984).  Suitability  and productivity  of land resources  of EC-10  for grassland  
use. A study carried  out on behalf  of the European  Community,  pp. 101-131.  
Johnstown  Castle  Research  Centre.  An Foras Taluntais,  Dublin.
Morrison,  J. (1981).  The potential  of legumes  for forage  production.  In: Legumes  and 
fertilisers  in grassland  systems.  Winter  Meeting  1981, British  Grassland  Society,  
Hurley,  U.K. pp. 1-10,
O’Kiely,  P. (1994).  The cost of feedstuff  for cattle.  Technical  bulletin  No. 6. R&H Hall, 
151 Thomas  St.. Dublin,  Ireland.
O’Riordan,  E. G. (1966). Cattle  grazing  preference  among  ryegrass  cultivars.  Agriculture  
Research  Forum,  UCD, Dublin,  pp. 49-50.
Parsons,  A. J. (1988).  The effect of season  and management  on the growth  of grass  
swards.  In: The Grass Crop (Eds. M. B. Jones and A. Lazenby).  pp. 129-177.
Rhodes,  1. and Webb,  K. J. (1993).  Improvement  of white  clover.  Outlook  on Agriculture  
22. 189-194.
Sheath,  G. W, and Clark, D. A. (1996).  Management  of grazing  systems:  Temperate  
pastures.  In: The ecology  and  management  of  grazing  systems  (Eds.  J. Hodgson  and 
A. W. Illius).  pp. 301-323.  CAB International,  Wallingford,  U.K.
Ulyatt,  M. J. (1981).  The feeding  value of herbage:  can it be improved?  New Zealand  
Journal  of Agricultural  Science  15, 200-205
16
Maximising  the Potential  of Farm-  
Produced  Forage  with New Varieties
D. H. HIDES
Institute  of Grassland  and Environmental  Research,  Plas Gogerddan,  
Aberystwyth,  Ceredigion  SY23 3EB.
1) INTRODUCTION
Herbage  plant  breeding  has made  a significant  contribution  to the profitability  
of grassland  agriculture  and ruminant  production  and the Welsh Plant  Breeding  
Station,  now the Institute  of Grassland  and Environmental  Research  (IGER),  
founded  by Sir George  Stapledon  in Aberystwyth  in 1919, has played  a major  
role in this success.  The long term nature  of plant breeding  programmes  
necessitates  that breeders  plan well ahead  when setting  breeding  targets.  This 
is made  difficult  because  political  pressures  and policies  over the last 80 years  
have had more  impact  on grassland  agriculture  than changes  brought  about  by 
the industry  itself.  The development  of forage  plant  breeding  can therefore  be 
looked  at in three distinct  phases:
a) Breeding  in an era of increasing  production
For the first fifty years  after  the founding of the Welsh  Plant  Breeding  Station,  
plant improvement  was targeted  towards  providing  varieties  which  would  
increase  ruminant  output  per hectare.  This resulted  from the need to increase  
food  production  during  and after  the Second  World  War. Breeding  concentrated  
primarily  on increasing  dry matter  yield  (Breese,  1968)  and this generally  gave  
varieties  with high growth  potential  up to flowering.  Research  in the 50’s and 
60’s showed  that ryegrass  species  were the most useful  in temperate  regions  
because  they produced  good yields  of high quality  forage  (Raymond,  1969;  
Walters,  1975) and responded  well to nitrogen  fertilizer.  Therefore,  from the 
mid 60’s onwards  there was a rapid decline  in the use of other  species  and at 
present  over 90% of the grass seed sown in the UK is made up of perennial  
ryegrass,  Italian  ryegrass,  and hybrids  between  these  two species  (MAFF  1997).
b) Breeding  in an era of overproduction
Over production  of ruminant  products  from the early 70’s onwards  has led 
to a major  change  in breeding  objectives.  Current  targets  aim at increasing  the 
efficiency  of ruminant  production  to maintain  farm profitability  without  
necessarily  increasing  output.  While  a good dry matter  yield is still necessary,  
traits like nitrogen  use efficiency  (Wilkins  etal, 1997),  quality  (Wilkins,  1995;  
Humphreys,  1996) and an extended  growing  season  have become  the major  
targets.
c) Breeding  in an era of agricultural  sustainability
Present  thinking  on the future  direction  of grassland  farming  suggests  that 
there will be an increasing  emphasis  of sustainable  production  systems  where
17
both the output  of agricultural  products  and the development  of the rural  
countryside  will be given  equal  consideration.  A sustainable  grassland  agriculture 
will encompass  the whole  range of fanning  systems  from low to high input  
and all of these will rely increasingly  on farm produced  feed. Plant breeding  
objectives  must therefore  endeavour  to develop  new varieties  which  satisfy  all 
these requirements.
2. RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS  IN GRASS  VARIETY  PRODUCTION
Grass varieties  currently  emanating  from breeding  programmes  at 
Aberystwyth  reflect  the emphasis  placed  on improving  the efficiency  of 
production  of ruminant  products.  The multidisciplinary  approach  to plant  
breeding  at Aberystwyth  has enabled  a wide range of breeding  objectives  to 
be considered.  Basic research  on genome  mapping  and genetic  engineering  
provides  the know how and material  for selecting  for novel traits while the 
ruminant  nutrition  group  has enabled  breeders  to give increased  attention  to 
traits which  influence  the efficiency  of the ruminant  animal.
a Nitrogen  use efficiency  (NUE)
Nitrogen  is a key requirement  both for plant  growth  and as a building  block  
for plant proteins.  Making  more efficient  use of nitrogen  both inorganic  and 
organically  fixed  by white clover  will both lead to cheaper  fodder  and hopefully  
reduce  nitrogen  leaching  thereby  assisting  with environmental  protection.  One 
approach  to improving  nitrogen  use efficiency  (NUE)  is to even  out the normal  
seasonal  growth  curve  of ryegrass  to give increased  early spring  and autumn  
production  whilst  maintaining  high yields  for conservation.  AberElan,  the first 
variety to  be developed  from  this programme  shows  improved  nitrogen  recovery  
at low and high levels of inorganic  nitrogen  application  and improved  grass  
clover  compatibility  (Fig. 1). The latest  variety,  AberDart,  combines  high  yields  
of good quality  forage  with significantly  better  spring  and autumn  production  
than other comparable  varieties  (Fig. 2).
Grass  only With white  clover  
■ Talbot  BCondesa  □ Jumbo  □ AberElan  
Figure  I - Improved  nitrogen  recovery  of AberElan
b) Herbage  quality
During  the last thirty years,  breeders  have concentrated  on improving  the 
energy  value  of forage  and the value  of this to the ruminant  animal  is a product  
of intake x digestibility  x utilisation.  Research  in the 60’s and 70’s (Green,
1994
■ AberDart  □ Talbot
Figure  2 - Seasonal  yield  of AberDart
RvP - Leaf —■- Bb1277  - Leaf 
■ RvP - Stem —M ■ Bb1277  - Stem  
Figure  3 - Decline  in % D.M.D.
19
HIGHER  QUALITY  
MEANS  MORE  MILK!
Results  from an independent  trial over  2 years  on 6 commercial  farms
□ RvP BTribune
Dry
Maner
Digestibiitty75
65
55
Spring
Extm  milk 
per cow 
daily  
from
TRIBUNE
Vy pintSummer
1 Vj pint 1 pint
OVERALL  = 6% MORE  MILK FROM  TRIBUNE
Figure  4 - Milk  production  from  Tribune  and RvP
1968) established  that digestibility  declined  as yield increased  and breeding  
would  therefore  need  to look  at the balance  between yield  and quality.  Laboratory 
based  pepsin-cellulase  techniques  were  developed  enabling  cheap  and repeatable  
measurements  to be made  on breeding  material.  It was also found that the water  
soluble  carbohydrate  content  (WSC)  of grasses  is an important  element  of 
digestibility  being the readily  digestible  component  of the plant cell. Present  
breeding  programmes  have had considerable  success  in using  these  techniques  
for improving  nutritive  value of perennial,  Italian  and hybrid  ryegrasses.
In Italian  ryegrass,  material  collected  in the Po Valley  region  of Italy  (Bp  1277) 
was found  to have high levels of stem digestibility  and WSC combined  with 
high autumn  yield, rapid regrowth  and good persistency  but had poor  
conservation  yield,  poor disease  resistance  and low cold tolerance.  It was also 
found that the high stem digestibility  which  is so important  for good silage  
production  was slower  to decline  than in other comparable  varieties  (Fig 3). 
A concentrated  breeding  programme  using  this material  had led to three  varieties 
which  are currently  on UK Recommended  Lists (Tribune, Trajan,  AberComo).  
Tribune,  the first of these,  was tested  on six commercial  dairy farms  and gave 
significantly  higher  milk yields  than a commercial  variety  used widely  at the 
time (Fig. 4). This information  has helped  to confirm  the benefits  of high DMD 
& WSC  and has led to the development  of the other  two varieties.  These  varieties 
have been a significant  step forward  in providing  a long  grazing  season  combined 
with high conservation  yields of high quality  forage.
Perennial  ryegrass  material  collected  in Switzerland  and Hungary  was found  
to have  high levels of WSC  but poor  disease  resistance  and work  at IGER  (Munro  
et al, 1992) showed  clearly  this material  had the potential  to improve  Iamb  
production  (Fig. 5) giving breeders  the incentive  to develop  these  lines.  Breeding
20
Lamb  
production 
(Kg/ha  
2 year mean)
350
High Low 
WSC WSCHigh Low 
WSC WSC
Lowland  Upland
(Morfa  Mawr) (Bronydd  Mawr)
Figure  5 - Lamb  production  from  perennial  ryegrass  with contrasting
WSC  content
aimed  at improving  dry matter  yield and its distribution  and disease  resistance  
whilst  maintaining  the high WSC levels  has led to the development  of a late 
flowering  diploid  ryegrass  variety  which  is currently  in official  trials  in the UK. 
An experimental  variety  of perennial  ryegrass  exhibiting  high levels  of WSC  
throughout  the growing  season  is currently  being  fed to dairy cattle  in a zero 
grazing  trial at IGER  in a project  funded  by MDC,  MAFF  and Germinal  
Holdings.  Early results  (Table 1) are extremely  encouraging  showing  
significantly  higher  milk production  from this variety  than the IGER  variety  
AberElan  which  has the best simulated  grazing  yields  on the NIAB recommended  
List. This work  has also shown  that dairy  cattle  have  greater  intakes  on the high 
WSC material  than AberElan  and are converting  more of the plant protein  
into milk as shown  by the reduced  production  of ammonia  and N in the urine
Table 1
Mean  effect of treatment  on feed intake,  diet, dry matter  digestibility,  milk 
yield and milk consumption,  adjusted  for covariate
Grass Variety: AberElan AberDove s.e.d. Sigf
Forage  DM intake,  kg/d 10.8 12.5 0.65*
Diet DM digestibility,  g/g 0.64 0.71 0.014 **
Digestibility  DM intake,  kg/d 9.16 11.31 0.381 **
Milk yields,  kg/d 12.6 15.3 0.87*
Milk yield/digestibility  DM 1.38 1.35 0.065
Intake,  kg/kg
tSignificance  of effect: *=P<0.05,  **=P<0.01
21
Table  2
Mean  effect  of treatment  on N partitioning
Variety: AberDove AberElan s.e.d. Probability
N intake,  g/d 268 278 14.2 0.530
N output,  g/d 
Urine 71 100 5.0 0.001
Faeces 103 113 10.9 0.400
Milk 82 69 6.2 0.075
Total 256 282 9.4 0.035
N balance,  g/d 12 -4 10.3 0.180
(Table  2). This early finding  has important  implications  for future breeding  
objectives  where  the target  of improved  rumen efficiency  is now a viable option. 
A new variety,  AberDart  (Fig. 6), which  combines  high levels  of digestibility  
and WSC  with high  dry matter  yield and a long  growing  season  will be available 
in the UK in 20(X).
c) Hybrid  ryegrass
Hybrid  ryegrasses  are relatively  new species  where  the aim has been to 
combine  the best attributes  of perennial  and Italian  ryegrass.  Italian  ryegrass  
possesses  considerable  growth  potential  with a long growing  season  but its 
persistency  in response  to grazing  and climatic  stress  is limited,  while  re-growth  
is often  stemmy  and of low quality.  Perennial  ryegrass  is more  leafy,  persistent  
and shows  better  environmental  stress  tolerance  but does not have the growth 
potential  of Italian  ryegrass  for conservation.  The aim is therefore  to provide  
flexible  varieties  suitable  for both  grazing  and conservation with  improved  stress
1994
■ AberDart  □ Talbot
Figure  6 - Seasonal  trends  in digestibility
22
Dry Matter  
YieJd  in t/baGround  CoverMid-Season  D 
value  
□ ROBERTA  
B ABEREXCEL
Figure  7 - Performance  of AberExcel  in 4th harvest  year
tolerance  giving  a life span of between  4 and 6 years.  The first varieties  developed  
at IGER  were closer  in type to the Italian  ryegrass  parent  and Augusta,  which  
has been widely used  for a number  of years,  showed  improved  intake  and quality  
leading  to improved  beef  live weight  gains  compared  to diploid  Italian  ryegrass  
on six commercial  farms.  New  hybrids  being  developed  at IGER  are a significant  
improvement  on Augusta  and combine  the best traits of the two parent  species.  
The newest  of these, AberLinnet  and AberExcel,  have recently  been  
recommended  for use and combine  high  mid-season  ‘D’ value and  WSC  content  
with a long growing  season,  high conservation  yields and good persistency  
(Fig. 7). At present  ryegrass  hybrids  are being underutilized  and there are 
considerable  opportunities  in the dairy sector  where a long grazing  season  
combined  with high quality  conservation  is essential.
4) FUTURE  DIRECTION  AND OPPORTUNITIES
There are some exciting  but increasingly  challenging  opportunities  for 
herbage  breeding  in the new Millennium  with an increasing  emphasis  on 
agricultural  sustainability  and the consequent  increased  dependency  on home  
produced  ruminant  feed.
a) Efficient  use of forage  production
A key element  in the efficiency  of these systems  will be to optimise  the 
protein/energy  balance  in the rumen.  While  breeders  have made significant  
advances  in improving  the energy  value  of grasses  through improved  digestibility  
and water  soluble  carbohydrate  (WSC) content,  recent  developments  following  
the BSE crisis and the reduced  public  acceptance  of using  feeds  like fishmeal  
suggest  that there  is now an urgent need to produce  more  on-farm  plant  protein.  
Increasing  the usage  of legume  protein  is one method  of satisfying  this demand
23
Highly  soluble  
Plant  Proteins
Urea
Urine
HemicellulosefnemiceuL  Mainly {cellulose
Figure  8 - Ruminal  N metabolism
but sustainable  systems  of ruminant  production  are impeded  by generally  low 
utilisation  of forage  protein.  Up to 40% of the dietary  nitrogen  (N) in fresh  
forage  may be lost as ammonia  because  of the inability  of rumen  microbes  
to capture  the non-protein  nitrogen  (NPN)  release  during  the proteolysis of plant  
proteins  (Fig. 8). Leaf proteins  are rapidly  attacked  by plant and microbial  
proteases  on ingestion.  If release  of NPN and energy  in the rumen  are 
asynchronous,  large quantities  of ammonia  may be absorbed  before  microbe  
assimilation  into protein  occurs.  Significant  improvements  in the use of forage  
protein  can be made  by providing  additional  energy  to increase  the N capture  
by rumen  microbes.  The development  of high WSC accumulating  gasses  
(Humphreys,  1989)  has, to some  extent,  achieved  this but further  potential  to 
increase  utilisation  of forage  protein  by breeding  to reduce  protease  activity  
may also exist. The important  role that plant  proteases  can have  in rumen  protein  
degradation  has only  recently  been appreciated  (Theodorou  etal, 1996),  although 
proteolysis  mediated  by plant enzymes  during  ensilage  is well documented  
(Wetherall  etal, 1995).  Breeding  grasses  to modify  plant  protease  activity could 
therefore  have  far reaching  consequences  in terms  of efficient  use of N in animal 
production.  For example,  a naturally  occurring  mutant  gene  has been  transferred  
from meadow  fescue  to ryegrass  which  reduces  the normal  breakdown  of 
chlorophyll  binding  protein  during  leaf  senescence  and thus reduces leaf  protein  
degradation  (Thomas  & Smart,  1993).  The combination  of high energy  (WSC, 
digestibility)  with reduced  protein  degradation  in one variety  is an exciting  
prospect.
b) Healthier  ruminant  products
At present  the consumption  of ruminant  products  is suffering  severely  in 
the aftermath  of the BSE crisis with a need to demonstrate  that meat and milk 
are safe, healthy  products.  Supermarkets  and consumers  are increasingly  
dictating  the quality of the product  they require  so breeders  must  begin  to develop
24
Figure  9 -Linolenic  acid levels  in grass  species
new and novel  breeding  objectives.  For instance,  ryegrass  species,  especially  
Italian ryegrass,  contain  high levels  of unsaturated  fatty acids  which  could  help  
reduce  blood cholesterol  levels through  their incorporation  into ruminant  
products (Fig. 9). Thus, plant  breeders  are currently  developing  selection  criteria  
for increasing  the levels of omega-3  linoleic  acid in their breeding  material.
c) Improved  ruminant  intake
Having  increased the yield  and quality  of grasses and lengthened  the growing  
season,  plant  breeders  would  dearly  like to increase  the intake  of the ruminant  
animal to improve  utilisation.  Breeding  for intake has, however,  been hampered  
by a lack  of knowledge  about  the traits  that control it. Grazing  behaviour  research  
both  at IGER  North  Wyke  (Penning  et al, 1998)  and in Ireland  is giving a  valuable  
insight  into these  factors  that influence  variation  in intake  by ruminant  animals.  
In the near  future we should be able to determine  which  plant  traits  are important  
and therefore  begin  to actually  improve  this important  component  of ruminant  
production.
CONCLUSION
Plant breeding  has and is making  a significant  contribution  to maintaining  
the profitability  of the grassland  sector. Future  changes  in CAP  payouts  and 
consumer  preferences  will dictate  that farmers  will have to rely increasingly  
on home-produced  ruminant  feed  to remain  viable.  As Ireland  probably  has the 
best climate  for forage  production  within  the EU and certainly  some  of the best 
farmers  then this should  pose no major  challenge.  There  is however  a need to 
give grass a true status as a crop which  forms the cornerstone  of ruminant  
farming.  To maximise  the potential  of this crop farms  should  have a realistic  
reseeding  policy to ensure  that they keep up with the developments  being  
introduced  into new varieties  by plant breeders.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Herbage  plant breeding  programmes  at the Institute  of Grassland  and
25
Environmental  Research  (IGER)  are funded  by the Ministry  of Agriculture,
Fisheries  and Food (MAFF)  and Germinal  Holdings  Ltd.
References
Breese,  E. L. (1968).  Improving  Britain ’s grassland  output.  SPAN II, 3.
Green,  J. O. (1968).  Yield  and digestibility.  Grass  Conservation  Handbook.  Nat. Grass.  
Cong. Conference,  Bristol 1967, 22-30.
Humphreys,  M. O. (1989).  Water-soluble  carbohydrates  in perennial  ryegrass  breeding.  
II. Cultivar  and hybrid  progeny  performance  in cut plots.  Grass  and Forage  Science,  
44, 37-244.
MAFF  (1977).  Seed Traders  Annual  Return  Summary.
Miller,  L. A., Neville.  M. A., Baker,  D. H., Evans,  R. T, Theodora,  M. K., MacRae,  
J. C., Humphreys,  M. O. and Moorby,  J. M. (1999).  Milk production  from dairy  
cows offered  perennial  ryegrass  selected  for high water soluble  carbohydrate  
concentrations  compared  to a control  grass.
Munro,  J. M. M., Davies,  D. A., Evans,  W. B. and Scurlock,  R. V. (1992).  Animal  
production  evaluation  of herbage  varieties.  I. Comparison  of Aurora  with Frances, 
Talbot  and Melle  perennial  ryegrass  when grown  alone and with clover.  Grass & 
Forage  Science,  47, 259-273.
Penning,  P. D., Gibb,  M. J., Parsons,  A. J., Orr, R. J. and Harvey,  A. (1998).  Behavioural  
and physiological  factors  limiting  intake  by grazing  ruminants.  In: Extensification 
of Beef and Sheep  Production  on Grassland.  Occasional  Publication  No. 3, EU 
Concerted  Action  CT93-0947,  Dublin,  Sept. 1996.
Raymond,  W. F. (1969).  The nutritive  value of forage  crops.  Advances  in Agronomy,  
21, 1-107.
Theodorou,  M. K., Merry,  R. J. and Thomas,  H. (1996).  Is proteolysis  in the mmen  of 
grazing  animals  mediated  by plant enzymes?  British  Journal  of Nutrition,  75, 507.
Thomas,  H. and Smart,  C. M. (1993).  Crops  that stay green.  Annals  of Applied  Biology,  
123, 193-219.
Walters,  R. J. K. (1975).  Variation  between  grass  species  and varieties  in voluntary  intake.  
Proc. 5th Gen. Meeting,  European  Grassland  Fed., Uppsala,  1973, 184-192.
Wetherall,  J. A., Armstrong,  D. G., Finlayson,  H. J. and Rooke,  J. A. (1995).  Reduction  
of proteolysis  during  ensilage  of perennial  ryegrass  by protease  inhibitors.  Journal  
of the Science  of Food and Agriculture,  68, 497-505.
Wilkins,  P. W. (1995).  Independence  of dry matter  yield and leaf yield among  perennial  
ryegrass  varieties  differing  in seasonal  yield distribution.  Grass & Forage  Science,  
50, 199-208.
Wilkins,  P. W., MacDuff,  J. H., Raistrick,  N. andCollison,  M. (1977). Varietal  differences  
in perennial  ryegrass for  nitrogen  use efficiency  in leaf  growth following  defoliation:  
performance  in flowing  solution  culture  and its relationship  to yield  under  simulated  
grazing  in the field. Euphytica,  98, 109-119.
26
Developments  to Enhance  Sward  Intake  
and Quality  (Mid-Season)
I. A CASEY  and P. G. DILLON  
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fennoy,  Co. Cork.
1) Introduction
Prior  to the introduction  of milk  quotas  in Ireland,  the objective  on intensive  
dairy farms was to maximise  sales from the farm. This was achieved  by 
increasing  cow numbers  and milk yield per cow. This strategy  resulted  in very 
rapid growth  in milk quota  in Ireland  (55 per year) and this rate of increase  
was higher  than in other  European  countries.  The introduction  of milk quotas  
resulted  in quota  size rather  than land area being the limiting  factor  on many  
dairy farms.  The blueprint  for efficient  dairying  in Ireland  recommended  from 
Moorepark  changed  to reflect  this new reality.  Profit is now maximised  by 
cashing  in more on grass.  This has been achieved  on spring-calving  herds by 
(1) calving  cows closer  to the start of the grazing  season  i.e. Lebruary/March  
calving,  (2) Turning  cows  out earlier  to spring  grass,  (3) Reduced  stocking  rate, 
thereby  increasing  the supply  of grass efficiently  in spring  and autumn.
This has resulted  in an increase  of 72% to 85% of total milk produced  from  
grazed  grass.  The level  of milk  production  as well as improved  milk  composition  
is important  in maximising  profit.  Milk  protein  and composition  will be largely  
influenced  by the quantity  of grass eaten/cow/day.  Therefore  the factors  that 
influence  daily herbage  intake  will be important. The main  factors  are the intake  
and quality  of grass supply.  To enhance  performance  further  we must  continue  
to improve  these factors.
The paper  will examine:  (1) the need to improve  the intake  and quality  of 
grass  supply  and the work  ongoing  to achieve  this, (2) The links  that have  been 
established  between  the industry,  production  research  and plant breeders  to 
achieve  this objective.
The need to increase  intake
The intake  requirements  of the dairy cow are increasing  and we will have  
to enhance  our swards  to suit this. The increase  in intake  requirements  of cows  
at Moorepark  clearly  illustrate  this (Tables  1 and 2).
The demand  of the animal  is controlled  by the drive of the animal  to feed.  
This drive  is controlled  by the breed,  age and reproductive  stage  of the animal.  
This has been highlighted  with the work on high genetic  merit animals  at
Table 1
Daily grass intake  (kg DM/cow)  measured  at Moorepark  for cows at various  
levels  of milk yield (May to .luly period)
Milk yield (kg/cow  4,681  5,617  6,553  7,490
Dry matter  intake  (kg DM/cow/day)  15.2 16.8 18.6 20.3
27
Table 2
Intake  requirement  for cows with different  yield potential  on a grazed  pasture
(mid-May  period)
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 25 30 35 40
Liveweight  (kg/day) 540 545 550 555
Liveweight  change  (kg/day) +0.2 +0.2 +0,2 +0.2
M.E. requirement
Maintenance 57 58 58 59
Milk yield 128 154 179 205
Weight  change 7 7 7 7
Total (MJ) 192 219 244 271
DM1 (kg/day) 16.0 18.2 20.3 22.6
Moorepark  where  the requirements  and demands  of the high genetic  animals  
have been shown  to vary. The results  show  that the high genetic  merit  animals  
have a higher  intake  which  was achieved  with a higher  biting  rate rather  than 
an increased  grazing  time (Table  3). The potential  of these  animals  to increase  
biting rate suggests  a high potential  to increase  intake in optimum  sward  
conditions.  These  optimum  conditions  must  be understood  in order  to maximise  
the potential  of this increased  animal  demand.  The programme  at Moorepark  
is currently  addressing  these issues.
RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS  TO INCREASE  GRASS  INTAKE
1. Precision  management
In the past, emphasis  was on the quantity  of the grass supply  and animal 
performance  was assessed  using  milk yield. Recently  significant  progress  has 
been made  in bringing  the feeding  of herbage  by grazing  to the same level of 
precision  and control  as can be achieved  indoors. The use of a precision  feeding  
at pasture  has overcome  the control  of quantity  of grass reaching  the animal 
(O’Donovan  and Dillon  1997).  The development  of precision  management  of 
this kind means  that irrespective  of periodic  fluctuations,  herbage  production  
potential  is fully exploited.  These  developments  were  explained  in detail  at the 
1998 Spring  conference.
Table 3
The effect  of cow genetic  index on grazing  behaviour
High RBI Medium  RBI
Grazing  time (hrs) 10.2 10.2
Biting  rate (No/min) 54.5 48,7
Grazing  bouts (No) 5.5 4.8
Ruminating  (% of time) 26.4 21.0
O’Connell  el al, 1999
28
2. Identification  and control  of sward  structural  factors  affecting  intake
We have now a method  to manage  grass supply  (precision  management).  
We need to also ensure  that the sward  is presented  in a manner  that can optimise  
intake.  This for example  could allow the increased  demand  of higher  genetic  
merit  animals  to be fully exploited.  An understanding  is required  of what  these  
optimum  sward  conditions  are, and what  effect  their  link to intake  is? This must  
be achieved  to optimise  the potential  of different  animal  feed demands.  In the 
past there was inadequate  information  on the traits that could  enhance  grass  
intake and utilisation  so as to overcome  these restrictions.  This type of 
information  is critical  for plant breeders.
Would  an increase  in height  or density  of the sward increase  intake?  Recently  
production  research  work at IGER  in the UK, at Crossnacreevy  in Northern  
Ireland  and at Moorepark  is helping  to gain an understanding  of the plant-animal  
interface  in detail  and so address  these issues.  It has allowed  the identification  
of the relationship  of sward  structural  features  to grass intake.  The work has 
resulted  in an understanding  of the grass canopy  structure  and height  suitable  
to optimise  the relationship  between  herbage  offered  and herbage  intake.  Also, 
techniques  have evolved  that allow the assessment  of different  varieties  of 
varying  structure.  This approach  has led to a clearer  understanding  of plant  
structural  features  that limit intake  and utilisation  (Casey,  Brereton,  Laidlaw  
and McGilloway  1997).  This level of detail has indicated  that the leaf density  
of a sward  has a direct  effect  on bite size.  A decrease  in all sward  bite dimensions  
also occurred  with decreasing  leaf density  (Table  4).
However, the height  of the sward  has been  shown to  have  a greater  influence.  
Using  these  techniques  the effect  of stem and other  structural  features  can also 
be explored. At mid-season  there  is likely  to be increased  selective  grazing  due 
to the presence  of stem. The identification  of, and control  of these midseason  
structural  features  that effect  intake  should  therefore  also enhance  utilisation  
at this  time of year. Consideration  of the control  of these  structural  differences  
was also examined  by detailed  leaf  development  work  (Casey,  Brereton,  Laidlaw  
and McGilloway  1999).  The potential  for selecting  for sward  structural  character  
is also being explored.
Table  4
Technique  to assess  the effect  of sward  leaf density  on bite size
High Leaf Intermediate Low Leaf
Sward  bite (g DM) 1.27 1.14 0.66
Fistulate  bite (g DM) 1.21 1.04 0.95
Bite depth (cm) 13.3 12.4 10.4
Bite area (cm^) 67 60 59
Bite volume  (cm^) 918 749 610
HL = High Leaf Density
IL = Higher  Intermediate  Leaf Density
LL = Lower  Leaf Density
29
This work  is leading  to the understanding  of the structural limitation imposed  
by the sward.  This information  has been urgently  needed  by plant breeders  so 
that they can consider  plant structural  traits of importance.  Information  on the 
structural  features  that affect  intake are important  to avoid  any knock-on effects  
on sward utilisation  and regrowth  potential  when selecting  grasses  of high 
digestibility.  This issue has been emphasised  and this has highlighted  the 
importance  for information  in this area (Laidlaw  and Reed 1993).
3. Restriction  due to sward  structure  at farm level
An example  of the restriction  on intake  due to structure  is given here. In 
general  a low grazing  height  was much  more  evident  on farms rather  than high 
post-grazing  height  (O’Donovan,  Dillon  and Stakelum,  1998).  Severe  grazing  
at pasture  obviously  results  in a restricted  intake,  but also even at normal  
recommended  grazing  intensities  intake  is restricted  (Figure  1).
This is due to the physical  restriction  imposed  on the animal  by the structure  
of the sward  (Figure  2). Not only does this arise due to decreased  quantity  of 
leaf and reduced  height  as the sward  is depleted  but it is also due to increased  
time  spent  selectively grazing  against  stem.  Although  recommended  tight  grazing 
at pasture  may have beneficial  effects  for regrowth  it has a negative  effect  on 
intake.
£30
25
M 20
T)
« 15I
"O
O)•oaa>
X
lU10
0 1
days resident
Figure  1 - The restrictions  on intake  as the sward  height  is depleted
30
Figure  2 - The reduction  on intake  associated  with increased  residence
time on pasture
The need to optimise  quality
An optimum  quality  sward  is one that suits the nutritional  requirements  of 
the animal.  The quality  of the sward  has been shown  to directly  effect  the milk  
yield of the cow. This work at Moorepark  has highlighted  that the sward  must  
have a suitable  dry matter  digestibility,  water  soluble  carbohydrate  and crude  
protein  content  (Table  5). There  is a need  to more  objectively define  the chemical  
qualities  required  to suit the nutritional  demands  of the animal.  For example  
increased  rumination  was observed  in high genetic  animals.  A decrease  in 
rumination  time may be possible  if quality  to enhance  digestion  in the rumen  
was more clearly  defined.  This would  allow more time for grazing.  More
Table 5
The effect of grass organic  matter  digestibility  on (OMD)  intake
High Medium Low
OMD (%) sward 79.6 77.1 74.4
DMI kg/cow/day 19.8 14.3 12.6
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 19.5 18.3 17.2
Stakelum  and Dillon, 1989
31
emphasis  recently  has been placed  on increasing  efficiency  of ruminant  
production  by enhancing  sward  quality.  This issue has been highlighted  by the 
industry,  particularly  at mid-season,  when alterations  in milk quality  are 
particularly  associated  with a reduction  in sward  quality.
Recent  developments  to enhance  quality
1. Identification  of factors  affecting  sward  quality
Variation  in the morphological  and chemical quality of the grass swards  needs 
to be considered.  Morphological  variation  occurs  because  there are two types  
of tiller, leafy vegetative  and stemmy  reproductive.  At mid-winter  there is a 
mass conversion  of tillers from the vegetative  to the reproducing  stage. Not 
only is there a difference  in nutritional  quality  between  these tiller types but 
also the reproductive  tillers increase  the time spent selectively  grazing  and 
thereby it affects grass intake.  Work  carried  out by Dillon  and Stakelum  indicated  
that defoliation  at the correct  time  should  overcome  this problem, by decapitating  
reproductive  tillers. However  year to year variation  in weather  conditions  in 
spring  influences  both the rate of tiller recruitment  and the duration  of tiller  
recruitment  with the result  that the amount  of reproductive  material  in summer  
is variable.
2. Controlling  sward  quality  
A. Morphology
Work is ongoing  to examine  the relationship  of reproductive  tiller  
development  and tiller appearance  to spring  temperature.  The aim of the work  
is to allow herbage  growth  and quality  in mid-season  to be predicted  and to 
develop  a management  programme  that will overcome  the problem  of late 
flowering  tillers.  This information  will allow farmers  to predict  and control  
summer  grass  quality.  This information  could  be incorporated  into the Teagasc  
growth  model so that grass growth  and quality  can be predicted  and action  
taken to minimise  adverse  effects  of a high proportion  of reproductive  tillers.  
The relationship  is different  for different  varieties.  The work is expanding  to 
examine  variation  under real grazing  conditions  to avoid bias caused  by 
examining  swards  under  simulated  grazing  conditions  alone.
To complement  this work  area, Aberystwyth  has indicated  that it is possible  
to breed a variety  that does not head. A research  programme  is targeted  at 
developing  varieties  that have improved  vegetative  growth  (Wilkins and Davies,  
1994).  A knock-on  effect  on dry matter  yield  must  be avoided.  The development  
of these vegetative  grasses  in conjunction  with the model above are 
complimentary  and should  allow more control  over morphological  variation  
in mid-season.
B Chemical  composition
Improving  the actual  digestibility  of the tillers  has generally  been reported  
to increase  the drymatter  intake.  The water soluble  content  of the grass has 
been shown  to be an important  element  of digestibility  (Figure  3).
There  is a positive  correlation  between  the water  soluble  carbohydrates  and
32
milk  production.  This  is associated  with  the higher  carbohydrate  energy  available  
which  enhances  protein  utilisation  and reduces  nitrogen  losses  in the rumen.  
It is, however,  insufficient  to select  for this trait alone as this increased  water  
soluble  carbohydrate  must also be accompanied  by enhanced  cell wall 
digestibility.  This is required  as increased  carbohydrate  levels  decrease  rumen  
pH, reducing  the ability  to breakdown  cell walls.  The leaf development  work  
on sward structure  has begun  to show how the quantity  of these chemical  
components  are likely  to be influenced  by management  and variety.  Cell structure  
of the leaf responds  to different  environment  conditions  (Casey,  Brereton,  
Laidlaw  and McGilloway,  1999).  This is also likely  to affect  the contribution
Figure  3 - The effect  on time of year  on the water  soluble  carbohydrate  
content  of grasses,  estimated  using  the Parson  and Thornley  model  of
grass  growth
33
of components  such as water soluble  carbohydrates  to the plant. The 
environmental  conditions  under  grazing  are quite  different  to simulated  grazing  
and therefore  the levels  of these traits need also to be assessed  under  grazing.
3. Sward  quality  under  grazing
In conjunction  with the developments  above  new grass varieties  are now 
being  examined  under  grazing  under  Irish conditions  at Moorepark.  Very little 
information  is available  in this area although  some studies  have been carried  
out in Holland  (Table  6). These  trials will involve  detailed  sward  measurement  
and the measurement  of water soluble  carbohydrates.  The detailed  sward  
measurement  will be carried  out in conjunction  with animal  production  trials 
at farmlet  and production  scale to assess if desirable  traits are transferred  in 
a grazing  situation.  The realistic  gain from these traits can then be monitored  
in terms  of milk production.  Management  may need to be refined  to optimise  
the expression  and subsequent  profit  from these  new traits. This is the beginning  
of a far larger  programme  in this area to ensure  the transfer  of the full potential  
of recent  developments  in plant breeding  to profit at farm level.
Future  developments
The problems  associated  with seasonality  of production  is also an issue  that 
is continually  being  discussed  by the industry.  One aim in this area is to produce  
the same production  in the second-half  of the season  as in the first-half  of the 
season.  Spring  growth  is restricted  by temperature  rather  than light while in 
autumn  light is the limiting  factor.  Recently  genetic  material  may be available  
to overcome  these limitations.  Although  breeding  for varieties  out of season 
is a high possibility,  sward  damage  and poor utilisation  cannot  be overlooked.  
A combination  of traits will need to be carefully  explored  if this is to occur  
successfully.  The Nitrogen  use efficiency,  regrowth  and winter-hardiness  are 
areas  where  there  is great  potential.  The next  issue  must  be to assess  the efficiency 
of these varieties  in grazing  conditions  and to monitor  their  efficiency  carefully. 
There  is a very large potential  for improving  our grass supply  with the wide 
range  of genetic  material  that is available.  There  is sufficient  genetic  variation  
in many traits to justify  breeding  for them. The identification  of the critical  
traits however  is an essential  part of this work.  In the future  climate  of demand
Table 6
Effect  of cultivar  on intake  and cow milk production
Wendy  (D)Cultivar
Condesa  (T)
Daily herbage  intake 17.1 17.6
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 28.4 29.6
Milk protein  (%) 3.39 3.48
WSC protein  {%) 9.9 83.0
digestibility  (DMD  %) 83.0 83.0
34
for lower  inputs  and high  quality and  change, we will need  to continually  consider  
our options. Ruminant  nutritionists,  agronomists  and production  researchers  
can only provide  the links to do this successfully.
Summary
In the future,  emphasis  is more  likely  to be placed  on the quality  of product  
and efficiency  of production  rather  than quantity  of product  output.  Considering  
that we have successfully  developed  precision  management  to enhance  quantity  
of supply  we now need to link with breeders  to optimise  efficiency  by seeking  
a grass supply  that is of high physical  nutritional  character,  a long growing  
season  and rapid regrowth.  In the past it has been a serious  omission  that we 
could  not tell farmers  the difference  in quantitative  terms  between  the realistic  
production  of grass  varieties.  To achieve  this requires  the co-operation  of plant  
breeders,  animal nutritionists  and production  research. The goal is the beginning  
of a longer  term  co-operation between production researchers and plant  breeders.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Dr. A. J. Brereton  and Dr. S. Crosse  for their helpful  
contributions.
References
Casey,  I. A., Brereton,  A. J., Laidlaw,  A. S., McGilloway,  D. A. J. 1997. Assessment 
of methodology for  short term grazing  behaviour  of cattle.  Proceedings  of the British  
Grassland  Society  England,  45-51.
Casey,  I. A., Brereton,  A. J., Laidlaw,  A. S., McGilloway,  D. A. ]. 1997. The effect  of 
sheath  tube length  on the leaf development  of Lolium  perenne.  Annals  of Applied  
Biology  (in press).
Laidlaw,  A. S. and Reed, K. F. M. 1993.  Plant  improvement.  The evaluation  and extension  
processes.  Proceeding  of the XVII International  Grassland  Congress,  Palmerston  
North, 1993, pp. 385-392.
O’Donovan, M. and Dillon, P. 1997,  Using  pasture  measurements  to monitor  performance  
on intensive  dairy farms. Proceedings  of Irish Grassland  Association,  Dairy  
Conference  Limerick,  p. 21-34.
O Donovan,  M. Dillon,  P. and Stakelum,  G. 1998. Grassland  management:  the effect 
on animal  herd performance.  Proceedings  of Irish Grassland  Association,  Dairy  
Conference  Limerick,  p. 39-54.,  167-175.
Smith, K. F., Reed,  K. F. M. and Foot,  J. Z. 1997.  An assessment  of the relative  importance  
of specific  traits for the genetic  improvement  of nutritive  value in dairy pasture.  
Grass  and Forage  Science  52, 167-175.
Stone,  B. A. 1994. Prospects  for improving  the nutritive  value  of temperate  perennial 
pasture  grasses.  New Zealand  Journal  of Agricultural  Research.  37, 349-363.  
Wilman,  D., Goa,  Y. and Altimimi,  M. A. K. 1996. Differences  between  related  grasses, 
times of year and plant parts and digestibility  and chemical  composition.  Journal  
of Agricultural  Science,  Cambridge.  127, 311-318.
Wilkins,  P. W., Davies,  R. W. 1994. Progress  in combining  high dry matter  yield with 
reduced  flowering  and improved  digestibility  in perennial  ryegrass,  Proc. Eucarpia  
fodder  Crops Section  for 1994, 247-252.
35
The Effect  of Level of Daily Grass  
Allowance  on the Performance  of 
Spring-calving  Dairy  Cows
J. MAHER,  G. STAKELUM,  F, BUCKLEY  and P. DILLON  
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Introduction
The main effect of Agenda  2000 for the Irish Dairy sector  will be the 
considerable  reduction  in milk prices  at farm level. Euture  expected  changes  
will continue  to remove  the relatively  high level of protection  engaged  by the 
EU countries.  Market  forces  are likely to determine  producers  returns  much  
more  in the future.  Therefore,  with lower  milk  prices  likely,  Irish dairy  farmers  
will have to become  more efficient  producers  of milk. Grass when grazed  
efficiently  is by far the cheapest  feed available  on the dairy farm (Dillon  et al, 
1991).  Since  grazed  grass  is the most  cost-effective  feed available  on the farm, 
greater  emphasis  has to be placed  on achieving  high performance  at pasture  
by dairy cows.  This is achieved  by high intakes  of high quality  grass by cows  
as a very  strong  relationship  exists  between  the amount  of grass  eaten  and daily 
milk production.  However,  O’Donovan  etal (1997)  monitored  performance  of 
grazing  diary  cows  on intensive  dairy  farms  and found  that many  dairy  farmers  
are not achieving  the potential  performance  from their  cows  on grazed  pasture.
This paper  highlights  how to  achieve  high  intakes  of grazed grass and  thereby 
ensuring  high performance  from grazing  dairy cows.  The consequence  of this 
will be to reduce  the costs  of milk  production  and increase  returns  by improved  
milk yield and composition.
Grazing  management
The supply of feed in the form  of grazed  grass  matches  or exceeds the demand 
for feed by spring  calving  dairy cows from mid-April  to mid-September  for 
systems  of milk production  generally  recommended  in Ireland  (Dillon  et al, 
1995).  Major  grass budget  decisions  are made  with regard  to overall  stocking  
rate, nitrogen  input and conservation  management  that help to ration  grass on 
a long term  and medium  term  basis.  This  is because  there is a limit  to the quantity 
of grass grown  each year on a farm and its growth  pattern  is very unevenly 
distributed  across  the year. The objective  in grazing  cows is to achieve  high 
intakes  of high quality  grass every day if possible.  This is achieved  firstly  by 
keeping  an adequate  supply  (1600-2000  kg DM/ha)  of high  quality  grass  ahead  
of the cows.  Monitoring  the supply  of grass  by walking  the farm on a regular  
basis as outlined  by O’Donovan  et al (1997)  will enable  the farmer  to have 
high quality  grass  in front  of the cows  throughout  the grazing  season.  Surpluses  
(or deficits)  in grass  supply  are established  at an early stage  and can be tackled  
before  supply  goes out of control.  Secondly,  enough  grass must be offered  to 
the herd each day (or over a 2-3 day period)  so that the herd can consume
36
enough  grass  to sustain  their yield of milk. However,  because  of the tendency  
of grass to deteriorate  in quality  (digestibility),  it is also extremely  important  
to avoid offering the herd  too much  (i.e. leaving  too high a residue  in paddocks  
when moving  on to the next paddock.)
Intake  of grass
The grass intake  i.e. the amount  of grass eaten by dairy cows is affected  
by factors  which  relate  to the animal and  pasture/management.  The animal factors  
determine  the herd  demand  for grass.  The pattern  of feed demand  is determined  
by the date of calving  and calving  spread.  The cow factors  influencing  the herd 
demand  relate  to size of the animal,  its potential  production  in terms  of yield,  
stage  of lactation (see Dr. Ryan ’s paper)  and body  condition  at calving  (Grainger  
et al, 1982).  However,  the two main factors  that determine  how much grass  
cows need are as follows:  Firstly,  the bigger  the size of the cow, the more  feed 
she needs  to maintain  herself.  As size of cow increases,  demand  increases  by 
1.5-2.0  kg DM/100  kg liveweight  (Stakelum  and Connolly,  1987).
Secondly,  a cow ’s genetic  potential  will determine  her ability  to produce  
milk. A cow yielding  6.5 gallons  of milk  per day will consume  more  grass  than 
a cow yielding  4.5 gallons  of milk at the same stage of lactation.  This factor  
is discussed  further  later  in this paper.  A complicating  factor  is the loss of weight  
by cows in early lactation  and the gain in weight  by cows from mid-lactation  
onwards.  When cows lose weight  in early lactation,  they are in effect  
supplementing  their intake  of feed in order  to assist  milk production.  They  can 
by this mechanism  produce  high  yields  than  is possible  from  their  dietary  intake  
of grazed  grass.  Additionally,  when cows are preparing  for the next lactation  
and gaining  in weight,  they require  more  intake  of feed than is required  by their  
output  of milk and maintenance.
Management/Pasture  factors  affecting  intake  of grass
Three  important  factors  impact  on the ability  of the cow to eat enough  grass.
1. How much grass is offered?
2. What is the quality  (digestibility)  of the grass?
3. Ground  conditions  during  grazing.
Grass  quality
When  the quantity  of pasture  available  is not limiting,  the primary  factor  
influencing  the intake  of grass by cows relates  to the digestibility  of the grass  
consumed  (Hodgson  et al, 1977).  The rate of passage  of ingested  material through  
the rumen  increases  as the digestibility  of the feed improves.  The digestibility  
of the grass exhibits  a characteristic  pattern  during  the year. Spring  grass has 
the highest  digestibility  and summer  grass  has generally  the lowest  digestibility.  
The changes  in digestibility  are generally  associated  with changes  in the 
concentrations  of green leaf, mature  stem and dead material,  and therefore  
influence  the feeding  value  of the herbage  (Ulyatt,  1981),  Green  leaf is highly  
digestible.  Grass  will be low in digestibility  when it has a lot of stem, flower
37
heads and dead material  through  the pasture.  The problem  with this type of 
pasture  is that intake  will be low because  cows  don ’t like the material  offered. 
They  find it difficult  to graze  and they digest  it less, i.e. they extract  less nutrients 
from it.
Grass  allowance
The single  most  important  factor  influencing  the intake  and performance  of 
grazing  dairy cows is amount  of pasture  offered,  i.e. Grass Allowance.  Daily 
grass allowance  is basically  the utilisable  grass in a paddock  divided  by the 
number  of cows grazing  on that paddock  and then divided  by the number  of 
days the herd stays in the paddock.  It is a very important  concept  in grazing  
management.  The amount  of pasture  available  to cows is controlled  to some 
degree,  by forcing  them to graze  close to ground  level. If the allowance  is too 
low, the herd intake  will also be low. The herd will graze out the paddock  
extremely  well. Therefore,  as daily allowance  is reduced,  intake  falls and the 
amount  of grass left behind  in the paddock  after  grazing  also falls. In addition,  
the opportunity for  the cows  to select  from  pasture  is reduced  and the digestibility 
of the herbage  consumed  may also be depressed.  In practice  grass allowance  
is dictated  to a large  extent  by the stocking  rate. Recent  assessment  of grazing  
management  on farms  (O’Donovan  et al, 1998)  suggests  that many dairy  farms 
are highly  stocked  especially  in the April - June period.  As a result cows are 
not allocated  enough  grass,  cows graze  very tight and intake  is low. This may 
also occur  in periods  of poor growth  as the farmer  tries to maintain  a 21-day 
rotation  with little or no supplementation.
The Moorepark  research  programme  on the feeding and management  of dairy  
cows  focuses  heavily  on achieving  very high  performance  from cows on grazed 
pastures.  The key to this is to ensure  that high intakes  of high quality  grass 
are achieved  on a daily basis. During  1995 and 1996 a series of experiments  
were carried  out to examine  the effect  of daily grass allowance  on dairy cow 
performance.  Daily  grass allowance  is defined  as the quantity of grass dry matter  
(DM)  offered  to a cow on a daily  basis  above  a height  of 4 cm. The  DM content  
of grass varies  across  the grazing  season.  Initially  in early spring  (February/  
March)  grass DM content  is very high (18% to 25%),  much lower  in April- 
June (14% to  17%),  in July-September  (15% to 19%)  and in October-November  
(13% to 15%). Grass  availability  is defined  as the quantity  of grass available  
above  a height  of 4 cm as it is almost  physically  impossible  for cows  to graze 
below  this height.
Different  groups  of Spring-calving  (February/March)  cows were allocated  
Low (16-17  kg DM/cow/day),  Medium  (20 kg DM/cow/day)  or High (23-24 
kg DM/cow/day)  levels of grass allowance  on a daily basis.  The experiment  
began  in early May but terminated  early in late August  because  of a drought. 
The cows  grazing  in 1995 had a RBI ’95 of 107 and in 1996 a RBI ’95 of 113.
The quantity of grass immediately ahead  of each herd  of cows was determined  
on a regular  basis. The DM of the grass was also established.  The DM yield  
was calculated  and each herd was allocated  a grazing  area on the basis of this
38
yield  and particular  allowance.  Temporary  electric fences  were  erected  to allocate  
grass to cows. All grazed  areas were topped  to prevent  any sward  quality  
imbalances  arising  in future  rotations.  An example  of how the grazing  area is 
calculated  is shown  as follows.
Amount  of grass DM per ha (10,000m-  = 1,600 kg DM/ha
Grass allocation  (DM) per cow = 20 kg DM
Grass allocation  (DM) per 40 cows = 800 kg DM (Herd  Demand)
Area to be given to 40 cow herd
= Herd Demand  (kg DM)
Amount  of grass per ha (kg DM)
= 800 
1600
= 0.5 ha (1.25 acres)
The following  series  of tables  show both the quantity  and quality  of grass  
offered  and the resulting  cow performance  from it. The amount  of grass left 
behind  is also shown.
Table 1
Results  from 1995 experiment
Effect  of grass allowance  on cow performance  (May ’95 - August  ’95)
Grass Allowances
Low Medium High
Grass allowance  (kg DM/cow) 16 20 24
DM intake  (kg) 15.3 16.5 17.1
Milk yield (gals) 4.4 4.8 4.9
Fat % 3.83 3.84 3.75
Protein  % 3.25 3.28 3.36
Average  bodyweight  (kg) 572 574 575
Condition  score 2.17 2.32 2.33
Chemical  composition  (%) of grass offered  (May ‘95- August  ’95)
Grass  Allowances
Low Medium High
Crude  protein  17.7 18.4 17.4
Ash 9.0 9.1 8.6
MAD fibre 19,6 19.8 19.7
OM digestibility  82.3 82.3 81.8
Yield (kg DM/ha)  and height  (cm) of grass offered  and residual  pasture
Grass Allowances
Low Medium High
Yield of grass grazed 2316
Height  of grass grazed 18.4
Post-grazing  yield  310
Post-grazing  height  4.42420
18.1
464
5.52481
18.1
591
6.5
39
These  series  of experiments  were  true grass  allowance  experiments  as cows  
in all treatments  were  presented  with swards  of similar  DM yield  (Tables  1 and
2), sward  height  (Table 1) and chemical  composition  (Tables  1 and 2).
Table 2
Grass  yield (kg DM/ha)  & digestibility  (OMD%)  of grass offered  during  ’96
LowGrass  Allowance 
Medium High
Late Spring/Early  Summer: OMD
Grass yield
Late Summer/Early  Autumn:  OMD
Grass yield
Late Autumn/Early  Winter: OMD
Grass yield84.9 84.8
1899 1991
82.7 82.5
1886 2045
81.2 80.9
2776  276184.3
1955
83.2
2099
81.1
2789
Table 3
Cow performance  during  1996
Effect  of grass allowance  on cow performance  (May ’95 - August  ’95)
Grass  Allowances
Low Medium High
Milk yield (gal/cow/day) 5.2 5.3 5.6
Fat % 4.16 4.10 4.04
Protein  % 3.41 3.46 3.43
Effect  of grass allowance  inlate Spring/early  Summer  ’96
Grass  Allowances
Low Medium High
DM intake (kg) 15.2 16.5 16.8
Milk yield (gal/cow/day) 3.6 3.9 3.9
Fat % 4.69 4.68 4.56
Protein  % 3.47 3.54 3.62
Effect  of grass allowance  inlate Autumn/early  Winter  ’96
Grass  Allowances
Low Medium High
DM intake  (kg) 15.1 15.6 16.1
Milk yield (gal/cow/day) 2.0 2.0 1.9
Fat % 5.38 5.09 5.45
Protein  % 4.08 4.11 4.23
40
Cow intake  and milk production
The series of experiments  outlined  above  demonstrate  the effect of grass  
allowance  on DM intake  and milk production.  There is a strong  positive  
relationship  between  grass  intake and  daily  milk  production. Cows  with a genetic  
index  of RBr95  of 110 -115  need  to be allocated  21-23  kg Dm/cow/day  (above  
4cm) (Table  3) to optimise  performance  from grazed  grass in early lactation.  
This will allow the cows to consume  17-18 kg of grass DM/cow/day.  As the 
lactation  progresses,  the demand  of the cow is reduced.  Therefore  allocating  
20 kg DM/cow/day  will allow the cow eat 16-17 kg of DM/cow/day  (Table 
1 and 3) which  is adequate  to meet her metabolic  requirements.  Although  the 
level of milk production  is low in late lactation,  intake  of grass is reasonably  
high at approximately  15-16  kg DM/cow/day  (Table  3). Firstly,  this is because  
cows  are gaining  in body condition  and advancing  in pregnancy.  Secondly,  the 
energy  value  of autumn grass is low even  though  the digestibility  of it is relatively 
high (Givens,  1993)  therefore  the cow has to consume  more DM to obtain  an 
adequate  ME (or NE)  intake.  This is one of the reasons  why the best responses  
in milk production  to concentrate  supplementation  are achieved  in the late 
autumn  period  despite  spring-calving  cows  being  in late lactation.  Throughout  
all of the above  experiments,  grazing  cows  to a height  of 6 cm  will enable  cows  
to perform  very close  to their  genetic  potential  from  a diet of grazed  grass.  This 
will ensure  that the cow is well fed. However,  little is known  of level of intake  
being achieved.
Table 4
Effect  of grass allowance  on post grazing  height  (cm)
Low Medium High
Late Spring/Early  Summer: 4.7 5.5 6.6
Late Summer/Early  Autumn 5.1 5.8 6.7
Late Autumn/Early  Winter: 4.4 5.3 5.9
Milk composition
Throughout  all the experiments,  there was no significant  effect of grass  
allowance  on milk fat content.  However,  a very obvious  trend  was evident.  As 
grass allowance  increased,  milk fat content  was reduced.  This is most likely  
due to a combination  of reasons.  Firstly,  that the digestibility  of the pasture  
selected  is generally  lower  and fibre content  higher  as cows graze  tighter  into 
the sward.  A greater  proportion  of stem and dead material  exists  in the lower  
strata  of the sward structure.  Secondly,  intake and  therefore  milk  yield  improved  
as grass allowance  increased.  This suggests  that the concentration  of fat would  
be diluted.
The milk content  improves  substantially  as grass allowance  increases  
particularly  in the summer/autumn  period.  Cows allocated  a high pasture  
allowance  will graze  lax and therefore  will eat more  but also consume  a greater  
proportion  of leaf than either  stem or dead material.  The digestibility  of the 
pasture  consumed  is improved  thereby  enhancing  energy  intake.  This effect  
was evident  but very small when analysed.  It is therefore  more likely  that the
41
higher  level of intake  (Bryant,  1979) rather  than the higher  energy  intake  has 
a greater  influence  on milk  protein  content.  Therefore,  offering  cows  generous  
amounts  of grass  (i.e. grazing  cows  laxly) may  not result  in significant  increases  
in milk yield. However  the protein  content  of the milk will be substantially  
improved.
Cow liveweight  and body condition
Many  other  experiments  have shown  allowance  effects  (Bryant,  1980;  Glassey 
et al, 1980)  and intake  effects  (Hodgson  and Wilson,  1967)  on cow liveweight  
and body  condition.  These  experiments  demonstrate  little or no effect  of pasture  
allowance  on liveweight  gain or cow body condition.  However  the levels of 
intake  achieved  were high and therefore  cows were reasonably  well fed unlike  
other experiments.
Post-grazing  sward  height
Sward  height  has been advanced  as a major  tool in controlling  grazing  
management  in order to optimise  cow performance  from pasture.  The results  
of these experiments  and previous  research  (Stakelum  and Dillon, 1990) at 
Moorepark  clearly  show major  advantages  to grazing  to a residual  sward  height  
of 6 cm particularly  in the April  to June  period  without  affecting  milk  production  
and thereby  optimising  cow performance  from pasture.  A post-grazing  height  
of 6 cm implies  that a mosaic  of well and not so well grazed  areas will appear  
on the paddock.  These  tall and short  grass  areas are the inevitable  consequence  
of cow grazing.  Cows  will graze  the areas around  the dung  deposits  less severely  
than the clean areas.  To attempt  to graze the paddock  so as to force the cows  
to eat out all of the tall grass  areas  will severely  depress  intake. The  compromise  
is to leave the paddock  grazed  to a degree  where  the tall or partially  rejected  
areas comprise  around  20-25%  of the paddock  area and are reasonably  well 
grazed.
Although  cow performance  may improve  somewhat,  offering  high daily  
allowances  of grass  or grazing  laxly  (>7cm)  will result  in a higher  residual  yield  
or sward  height.  As a result,  the nutritive  value of the pasture  will be reduced  
in subsequent  grazings  to the extent  that cow performance  also declines  (Stakelum 
and Dillon,  1990).  However,  removal  of high  residual  yields  by topping  pastures  
after  grazing  will eliminate  the adverse  effects of lax grazing on cow performance  
(Stakelum  and Dillon,  1990).
Genetic  merit
The average  herd demand  for grass in Ireland  is around  16-18  kg DM daily,  
depending  on genetic  potential.  The national  RBI is around  105-110.  Top dairy  
farmers  are closer  to 115 and their herd demand  is likely  to be about 18 kg of 
grass DM daily/cow.  However  the rate of gain in the genetic  merit  of the national 
dairy herd in Ireland  is now quite rapid (about 1.5%/yr).  Studies  from New 
Zealand  have shown  that cows of high genetic  merit  at pasture  consume  more  
grass (5-20%),  produced  more  milk (20-40%)  and were  more  efficient  converters  
of food into milk (10-15%)  than cows of lower  genetic  merit  (Holmes,  1988).
42
Table 5
The pedigree  index of the two genotypes  being compared
Genotype RBI 95 Milk
(kg)Fat
(kg)Protein
(kg)Fat
(%)Protein
(%)
HGI 134 620 23 20.5 -0.02 0.00
MGl 117 120 10 7.1 +0.09 +0.05
In the autumn  of 1994, two contrasting  groups  of in calf-heifers  were  
assembled  at Moorepark.  The pedigree  index of the two groups  is shown  in 
Table  5. The animals  of high genetic  index  (H.G.I.)  had an RBI ’95 of 134 and 
medium  genetic index  (M.G.I.)  an RBI ’95 of 117. It should  be noted  that average  
RBI '95 for first lactation  animals  in 1995 nationally  was 104 (IDRC).
Three  different  feeding  systems  were compared  with each genotype.  The 
Moorepark  feeding  system  (System  A) incorporates  high stocking  rate 2.54 
cows/ha),  high nitrogen  input (440 kg N/ha) and a planned  concentrate  input  
of 500 kg/cow  (Dillon  et al, 1995).  System  B had a similar  stocking  rate and 
nitrogen  input to System  A, but twice  the level of concentrate.  System  C had 
a similar  level of concentrate  and nitrogen  to System  A but with unrestricted  
levels  of high  quality grass  throughout  the year.  To maintain System  C, achieving  
second-cut  silage was not a priority.  The feeding  systems  were applied  from  
mid-April  to end of November.  A total of 48 H.G.I.  and 48 M.G.I.  animals  were 
used. Excess  grass was harvested  as wrapped  baled silage  to maintain  grass  
quality.  Grass was considered  to be in excess  when pre-grazing  yields were 
greater  than 2000 kg DM/ha.  In 1996, a total of 3.2 ha in System  A, 3.8 ha 
in System  B, and 4.8 ha in System  C were harvested  in this manner.  Table  6 
shows  the milk  production  for both genotypes  (averaged  across  the three feeding  
systems).
Table 6
Effect  of cow genetic  index on milk production  (1996)
M.G.I. H.G.I.
Milk (gallons/cow) 1,465 1,659
Fat % 4.02 3.89
Protein  % 3.43 3.41
Source:  F. Buckley  and P. Dillon
The H.G.I.  cows  produced  significantly  more  milk (-1-194  gals) with similar  
protein  content.  The average  daily milk production  for M.G.I.  and H.G.I.  cows  
was 4.8 gals and 5.5 gals per cow over the lactation.
Grass  allowances,  intake  measurements  and post-grazing  heights  are shown 
in Table 7. During  the 3 measurement  periods  (June to September),  cows on 
feeding  Systems  A and C were on grass only while cows on feeding  System  
B received  3 kg of concentrates  daily per cow. The H.G.I.  had higher  intakes
43
Table 7
Effect  of cow genetic  index  and feeding  system  on grass allowance,  intake  and
post grazing  height
Feeding  systemABC
H.G.I. M.G.I. H.G.I. M.G.I. H.G.I. M.G.I
Grass allowance  (kg DM/cow/day 26 24 23 21 29 27
Grass DM intake  (kg) 20.3 18.6 19.6 18.3 20.7 19.2
Total DM intake  (kg) 20.3 18.6 22.2 20.9 20.7 19.2
Grazing  height  (cm) 5.8 6.1 6.4
and were allocated  greater  daily allowances  of grass  to achieve  these intakes.  
Supplementation  with concentrates  at pasture  (System B) significantly  increased  
total dry matter  intake  and milk yield (Table  8) with only a small reduction  
in grass dry matter  intake.  Allocating  larger amounts  of high quality  grass  
(System  C) improved  intake  on average  by 0.5kg  DM per cow per day. However, 
this extra intake  resulted  in improved  milk protein  content  rather  than an 
improvement  in milk yield.  This is similar  to earlier  observations  in this paper  
with  cows  of lower  genetic  merit.  Similarly,  grazing  cows of high genetic  index  
to a height  of 6 cm (Table  7) will enable  the cow to perform very  well at pasture.
How to estimate  the level of intake  achieved  in a paddock
Very many  Irish dairy farmers  cannot  judge  how much  pasture  is available  
for grazing and how much  was  eaten  in a particular  paddock.  In order  to improve  
the ability  of the farmer  to feed the cows properly  at pasture,  those two basic  
points  need to be learned.  This can only be taught  and demonstrated  in the field 
and if the farmer  wants  to increase  his skills  in this regard  he must  spend  more  
time studying  his paddocks  and assessing  grass supply.  Experience  and 
participation  in one of the 235 Teagasc  Dairy  Discussion  Groups  will improve  
your ability.
Establishing  the level of intake  being achieved  is a simple  sum when the 
grass yield level before  and after grazing  in a particular  paddock  in known  or 
is estimated.  An accurate  procedure  for estimating  the amount  of grass  available
Table 8
Effect  of cow genetic  index and feeding  system  on milk production
Feeding  system
H.G.I. M.G.I. H.G.I. M.G.I. H.G.I. M.G.I
Milk yield (gal/cow) 1630 1405 1739 1543 1606 1450
Fat % 3.76 4.11 3.97 3.96 3.96 4.03
Protein  % 3.37 3.39 3.41 3.45 3.45 3.45
44
(above  4 cm) was outlined  by O’Donovan  et al (1997).  This method  was 
developed  because  of much  lower  potential  errors  associated  with it as compared  
to the plate  meter  or grass  probe.  The procedure  is also  based  on yield  of available  
grass i.e. the yield above  4 cm.
When  establishing  the intake figure,  it will be more  meaningful  if done  across 
a number  of paddocks  (say 5-6), as any error will be evened  out somewhat.  
If the intake  is very much  out and is not a meaningful  figure,  it is very likely  
that the estimation  of pre-grazing  grass yield is inaccurate.  In most cases the 
post-grazing  yields  will be estimated  much better.  A knowledge  of how daily 
milk yields  are progressing  will indicate  gross  inaccuracies.  A less likely  cause  
is that the paddock  area is wrong. However,  an accurate  measurement  of paddock 
areas is a help.
The following  is an example  of how intake  can be calculated  based  on yield 
assessments.
1) Pre-grazing  = 2000 kg DM/ha  (above  4 cm).
2) Post-grazing  = 300 kg DM/ha  (above  4 cm).
3) Paddock  size = 0.81 ha (2 acres).
4) Residency  time in the paddocks  = 2 days (4 grazings).
5) Herd size = 40 cows.
Then intake/cow/day  can be calculated  as (1-2) x 3
eg-4x5
(2000-300)  X 0.81 = 17.2 kg DM
2 X 40
Wet ground  conditions
Soft ground  conditions  are quite  anatagonistic  to good  utilisation  of pastures  
(Wilkins  and Garwood,  1985) and these conditions  are more prevalent  at the 
beginning  and at the end of the grazing  season.  Even where  cows  have enough  
pasture,  intakes  are often  low because  grass  becomes  soiled  due to walking  and 
poaching.  Deposition  of soil on pasture  renders  grass  less palatable  and thereby  
reducing  cow intake.  In these  conditions,  the aim is to minimise  damage,  reduce  
soiling  and maintain  cow performance.  A lot of time and money  is spent on 
developing  facilities in the farm  yard.  However,  cows  spend  most  of their  lifetime  
at pasture.  Having  a good network  of farm roadways,  adequate  if not multiple  
access  to paddocks  and plenty  of drinking  points will greatly  improve  the 
potential  to utilise  grass especially  when grazing  conditions  are difficult.  
Different  grazing  techniques  are shown  in Fig. 1 that aid grass utilisation  in 
early spring/late  autumn  or at any other time when grazing  conditions  are 
marginal.  All of these  techniques  may be useful  under  different  circumstances  
and conditions.  Cow Walks  (A) have been used to great  effect  on the Wetland 
Research  Farm at Kilmaley,  Co. Clare where  grazing  conditions  are often  
marginal  and are also in use on the Dairy  Farm  at Kildalton  Agricultural  College,  
Co. Kilkenny.  When  grazing  silage  ground,  the Spokes  of Wheel  (B) technique  
may be useful  in early spring  especially  when there is only a single  drinking
45
point (normally  at the entrance).  During  periods  of poor grazing  conditions,  
cows should  be allocated  freshydean  grass after every milking  if out fulltime  
or every  day if out by day only. Cows  should  not walk over previously  grazed 
areas. All these techniques  (Fig. 1) try to facilitate  this objective.  However,  
cows in early lactation  will give an economic  response  (milk  production  and 
reproductive  performance)  to concentrate  supplementation  when  the supply  of 
grass is poor and/or  when difficult  ground  conditions  prevail  (Dillon,  1996).
Conclusions
In the future successful  dairy farming  will remain  very dependent  on the 
efficient  conversion  of grass into milk. Grazing  management  must succeed  in 
keeping  the cow well fed throughout  the grazing  season.  High performance  of 
cows at pasture  can only be achieved  by having  high quality  grass in front of 
the cows  but more  importantly  by offering  enough  grass  to the herd on a regular  
basis. Grass  can be allocated  to cows after every milking,  on a daily basis or 
over 2 days but they must be offered  enough.  In summary,  the amount  of feed 
(as grazed  grass)  the herd (RBr95  105-115)  will need each day will be about  
16-18  kg DM/cow. Therefore,  20-23  kg of grass  DM/cow  must  be offered daily.  
If there is insufficient  grass available  and/or  poor ground  conditions  to allow  
for an intake figure of this magnitude  then supplementary  feeding  may be 
necessary.  Cows  of higher  genetic  merit  (RBr95  120-t-)  must be offered  more  
grass as more  needs  to be consumed.  To simplify  matters,  if the cows  eat down 
to a post-grazing  height  of 6 cm in the paddock  and are then moved  on to the 
next paddock,  the farmer  can be satisfied  that the herd is well fed. This is also 
important  for controlling  the quality  of the grass that  will be subsequently  offered 
for grazing  in the following  grazing  rotations.
Cc>w Walk (A) Spokes  of 5 B}BltxikSinp  Orazang  (Di
Figure  1 - Grazing  techniques  during  periods  of marginal  ground  conditions
46
References
Bryant,  A. M. (1979).  Effects  of nutrition  on milk  composition.  Proceedings  ofRuakura  
Fanners ’ Conference,  pp. 121-129.
Bryant,  A. M. (1980).  Effect  of herbage  allowance  on dairy performance.  Proceedings  
of llie New Zealand  Society  of Animal  Production,  40, 50-58.
Buckley,  F. and Dillon,  P. (1998).  The effect of genotype  and feeding  system  on the 
performance  of Holstein  Friesian  cows at pasture.  Proceedings  of Irish Grassland  
Association  Dairy Conference,  pp. 1-15.
Dillon,  P., Crosse,  S., Stakelum,  G. and Flynn,  F. (1995).  The effect  of calving  date and 
stocking  rate on the performance  of spring-calving  dairy cows. Grass  and Forage  
Science,  50, pp. 286-299.
Dillon, P, (1996).  Maximising  profit  in creamery  milk production  using  current  research  
and technology.  Proceedings  of  Irish  Grassland  Association  50th  Anniversary  Dairy  
Conference,  pp. 5-26.
Dillon,  P, Cliffe,  D. and Hurley,  C. (1991).  Scope for reducing  the costs of milk 
production.  Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association  Journal,  25, pp. 
68-79
Givens,  D. I. (1993).  Influence  of growth  stage and season  on the energy  value  of fresh  
herbage.  1. Changes  in the metabolising  energy  content.  Journal  of the British  
Grassland  Society,  48, pp. 166-174.
Glassey,  C. B., Davey,  A. W. F. and Holmes,  C. W. (1980).  The effect  of herbage  allowance  
on the dry matter  intake  and milk production  of dairy  cow  s. Proceedings  of the New 
Zealand  Society  of Animal  Production,  40, 59-63.
Grainger,  C.. Wilhelms,  G. and McGowan,  A. (1982).  Effect  of body condition  at calving  
and level of feeding  in early lactation  on milk production  of dairy cows.  Australian  
Journal  of E.xperimenta!  Agriculture  and Animal  Husbandry,  40, 9-17.
Hodgson,  J. (1977).  Factors  limiting  herbage  intake  by the grazing  animal.  In: Animal  
Production  from Temperate  Grassland  (International  Meeting),  pp. 70-75 (Ed. B. 
Gilsenan),  Dublin: Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association,  An Foras  
Taluntais.
Hodgson,),  and Wilkinson,  J. M. (1967).  The relationship  between  liveweight and herbage  
intake  in grazing  cattle.  Animal  Production,  9, 365-376.
Holmes,  C. W. (1988).  Genetic  merit and efficiency  of milk production  by the dairy  
cow. In: Nutrition  and lactation  in the dairy' cow (Ed. P. C. Garnsworthy),  
Butterw'orths,  U.K.
O’Donovan,  M., Dillon,  P, Stakelum,  G. and Crosse,  S. (1997).  Using pasture  
measurements  to monitor  performance  on intensive  dairy farms. Proceedings  of 
Irish Grassland  Association  Dairy Conference,  pp. 21-33.
O’Donovan,  M., Dillon,  P, Stakelum,  G. (1998).  Grassland  management  - the effect  
on herd performance.  Proceedings  of  Irish Grassland  Association  Dairy  Conference,  
pp. 39-53.
O’Donovan,  M. Dillon,  P., Stakelum,  G. Harrington,  D. and Rath, M. (1999).  An 
evaluation  of four different  techniques  of pasture  mass  estimation.  Irish Grassland  
and  Animal  Production  Research  Forum,  25th  Meeting  U.C.D.  Belfield,  pp. 99-100.
Stakelum,  G. and Dillon,  P. (1990).  Influence  of sward  structure  and digestibility  on 
the intake  and performance  of lactating  and growing  cattle. In: Mayne,  C. S. (ed). 
Management  issues  for the grassland  farmer  in the 1990 ’s. Occasional  publication  
No. 25, British  Grassland  Society,  pp. 30-42.
Stakelum,  G. and Connolly,  J. (1987).  Effect  of body size and milk yield on intake  of 
fresh  herbage  by lactating  dairy  cows  indoors.  Irish  Journal  of Agricultural  Research,  
26, 9-22.
Ulyatt,  M. J. (1981).  The feeding  value  of temperate  pasture.  In: Morley,  F. H. W. (ed). 
Grazing  Animals,  pp. 125-141.
Wilkins,  R. J. and Garwood,  E. A. (1986).  Effects  of treading,  poaching  and fouling  
on grassland  production  and utilisation.  In: Frame,  J. (ed). Grazing,  19-31.  British  
Grassland  Society  Occasional  Symposium,  No. 19. B. G. S. Hurley.
Al
Grazing  Management  of Autumn  
Calving  Cows
G. RYAN
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Introduction
Seasonal  milk production  is a feature  of the Irish dairy industry.  More  than 
85% of manufacturing  milk is produced  between  March  and October  and the 
remaining  15% from November  to February.  Since dairy product-mix  is 
determined  largely  by seasonality  of milk supply,  Ireland ’s current  product  mix 
is mainly  orientated  towards  commodity  products.  Both the Culliton  Report  
(Industrial  Policy  Review  Group,  1992) and the Report  of the Expert  Group 
on the Food  Industry  (1993)  agreed  that continued  dependence  on intervention  
products  is not in the long term interests  of Irish producers,  processors  and 
consumers.  They proposed  the view that seasonal  production  of milk needs  to 
be reduced  in parallel  with the development  of genuinely  market-led  dairy  
products.
The costs associated  with winter  milk production  are higher  than those for 
summer  milk production.  Winter  milk production  systems  are generally  
perceived  as ‘high silage  input ’ systems.  Previous  research  with autumn-calving  
cows has focused  mainly  on indoor  feeding  of silage  and concentrates.  There  
has been very little research  into grassland  based  systems  of milk production  
with autumn-calving  cows. It is important  to exploit  the potential  of grazed  
grass because  it is a low cost, high quality  feed. Full exploitation  of grazed  
grass will have a large influence  on the profitability  of winter  milk.  This paper  
is focused  on the grazing  management  practices  for autumn-calving  cows at 
different  periods  during  the year.
Moorepark  study  on systems  of milk production
A research  programme  was initiated  in the autumn  of 1995 to investigate  
the effect  of three  contrasting  calving  patterns  on animal  production and  grazing  
management.  The herds were assembled  at the Solohead  Research  Site in Co. 
Tipperary.  The study was carried  out over two lactations.  The experimental  
animals  had an average  RBI ’95 of 115. The three contrasting  systems  were:
System  A: 100%  Autumn  Calving  - Sept./Oct.  calving,  stocking  rate of 
2.52 cows/ha,  high nitrogen  input and a planned  concentrate  input of >1,000  
kg-
System  AS: 50% Autumn  and 50% Spring  Calving  - Sept./Oct.  calving  
and Feb./Mar.  calving,  stocking  rate of 2.52 cows/ha,  high nitrogen  input and 
a planned  concentrate  input of >1,0(X)  kg.
System  S: 100% Spring  Calving  - Feb./Mar.  calving,  stocking  rate 
of 2.52 cows/ha,  high nitrogen  input and a planned  concentrate  input  
of -500 kg.
48
Milk yield and composition
The effect of system  of production  on milk yield, milk composition  and 
lactation  length  is shown  in Table 1.
Table 1
The effect  of system  of production  on milk yield, milk composition  and the 
level of concentrates  fed
Year ASystem
AS S
Total milk yield (kg/cow) 1996 6,638 6,513 6,179
1997 6,435 6,200 6,101
305-day  milk yield (kg/cow) 1996 6,322 6,235 6,038
1997 6,219 6,103 6,011
Milk fat (kg/cow) 1996 269 270 250
1997 265 261 242
Milk protein  (kg/cow) 1996 232 229 215
1997 213 221 213
Milk lactose  (kg/cow) 1996 309 306 287
1997 295 290 281
Fat % 1996 4.08 4.15 4.06
1997 4.14 4.22 3.96
Protein  % 1996 3.51 3.52 3.50
1997 3.52 3.57 3.51
Lactose  % 1996 4.64 4.70 4.66
1997 4.59 4.68 4.61
Lactation  length (days) 1996 322 318 304
1997 309 292 298
Concentrate  fed (kg) 1996 1,524 1,095 666
1977 949 719 560
There was a tendency  towards  higher  milk production  with System  A in 
both years  of the trial but no statistical  difference  was recorded.  System  A had 
a longer  lactation  length  in 1996. This longer  lactation  length  would  account  
for some of the difference  in milk yield but when all treatments  had their  
lactations  adjusted  to a 305-day  lactation,  there was still a tendency  towards  
higher  milk yield with System  A.
There  was no significant  difference  in milk fat, protein  and lactose  yield in 
year 1 and year 2 of the experiment.  Milk fat concentration  was significantly  
lower  for System  S in year 2, with no significant  difference  in year 1 of the 
experiment.  The large reduction  in concentrate  feeding  level between  year 1 
and year  2 was due to early  turnout  to pasture  in 1997 and a higher  digestibility  
silage  conserved.
The data in Figure 1 show the highest  peak milk production  was achieved  
with System  S. System  A had higher  milk production  levels  in the latter half 
of lactation  and were more persistent  until the end of lactation.  The cows on
49
Figure  1 - The effect  of system  of production  on milk  production  by 
week  of lactation  in 1996
System  A had a ‘secondary  peak ’ whereby  milk yield rose in mid-lactation.  
This coincided  with the cows being  turned  out to pasture.  System  S had the 
lowest  milk production  levels  at end in both years  of the trial. The seasonality  
of milk  supply  of the three  systems  of production  is shown  in Figure  2. Systems  
A and S had highly  seasonal  milk supply  patterns  whereby  System  AS had a 
more uniform  milk supply  pattern.
Grazing  management  
Early  spring  period
Spring  grass  is higher  in terms  of feeding  value  than grass  at any other  stage  
in the season.  Autumn-calving  cows are in mid-lactation  at this time and are 
still producing  high milk yields.  The provision  of early spring  grass is an
Week  of Experiment
Figure  2 - The effect  of system  of production  on milk  production  by 
week  of experiment  in 1996
50
Table 2
The effect  of different  daily herbage  allowances  on milk yield and composition  
for autumn-calving  cows in the spring  herd
Daily herbage  allowance  (kg DM/cow)
17 kg DM/cow 20 kg DM/cow 23 kg DM/cow
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 17.4 18.5 18.8
Protein  content  (%) 3.73 3.76 3.78
Fat content  (%) 4.38 4.30 4.32
Protein  yield (kg/cow/day) 0.65 0.70 0.71
Fat yield (kg/cow/day) 0.76 0.80 0.80
Source:  Maher,  Stakelum  and Rath, 1998)
important  consideration  on farms with autumn-calving  cows. The primary  
objectives  are to give autumn-calving  cows access  to grazed  grass as early as 
possible  and to budget  that grass  until grass  supply  equals  demand.  The results  
of a study at Moorepark  in 1997 where autumn-calving  cows were offered  
different  daily herbage  allowances  in the late spring  period  are shown  in Table  
2. Three levels  of daily herbage  allowance  (17, 20 and 23 kg DM per cow),  
(> 3.5 cm) were  offered  to autumn-calving  cows  (mean  calving  date September  
23). The experiment  lasted  from late April to mid June. There  were 14 cows  
per treatment  with an average  RBI of approximately  112. The average  pre­
grazing  herbage  yield in the experiment  was 1,904  kg DM per ha (> 3.5 cm). 
The autumn-calving  cows grazed  to a residual  herbage  yield of 401, 498 and 
618 kg DM per ha and a residual  sward  height  of 5.0, 6.0 and 6.9 cm for the 
low, medium  and high allowances  respectively.
There  was a response in daily  milk  yield,  protein  and fat yield  in early  lactation  
up to the highest  level of daily herbage  allowance.  There was a very small  
response  in milk fat and protein  yield and milk fat and protein  concentration  
going  from the medium  to the highest  level of daily herbage  allowance.  The 
results  show that 20 kg DM/cow/day  was capable  of supporting  a high level 
of milk production  and also optimum  pasture  utilisation.  Higher  levels  of daily  
herbage  allowances  resulted  in only a small increase  in milk production  and 
under  utilisation  of pasture.
Mid-summer  period
Supply  of feed in the form of grazed  grass exceeds  demand  for feed for 
autumn-calving  herds  from mid-July  onwards  (Ryan,  Crosse  and Rath, 1998).  
There  is an increase  in farm grass cover  for autumn-calving  cows because  of 
low herd  demand  for feed (cows  non-lactating)  during  this period.  Grass  growth  
rates are still relatively  good at this time of year. The supply  of grass on the 
farm  should  be monitored  so as to avoid large  surpluses  (increase  in farm  cover)  
occurring.  There  was a large area conserved  as surplus  for the 100% autumn ­
calving  herd (16.4  ha) than for the 50%  autumn;  50% spring-calving  herd (13.1
51
Table 3
Dry cow grazing  measurements  for 1996 and 1997
Date 1996 1997
Pre-grazing  height 8.97 8.13
Post-grazing  height 5.77 6.46
ha) or 100% spring-calving  herd (12.6  ha) during  the two years of the systems  
study. Surplus  grass on the farm should  be conserved  and fed indoors  in the 
winter  period  as a high quality  forage.
Autumn-calving  cows will generally  have a higher  body condition  score  at 
the end of lactation.  It is important  that they should  not gain excess  body  condition 
during  the dry period  and that they calve down at a body condition  score of 
3.0 - 3.5. Over  fat animals  tend to eat less post-calving  than  animals  in optimum  
condition  and have large  body  weight  losses  in the first 3 to 4 weeks  of lactation.  
The strategy  followed  at Solohead  during  the systems  study was to graze the 
milking  cows ahead  of the dry cows.  The pre- and post-grazing  heights  for the 
dry cows for the two years of the systems  study are seen in Table 3. The dry 
cows entered  paddocks  with contrasting  pre-grazing  heights  and grazed  these  
paddocks  at a pre determined  height  of 6 cm. Grazing  dry cows behind  the 
milking  cows allows  for more  restriction  in the level of intake  during  the dry 
period. This  can be difficult  to achieve  when grass growth  is high.  A post grazing  
height  of 6 cm results  in dry cows  being  maintained  at an optimum  body  condition 
score and pasture  quality  is also improved  for the remainder  of the grazing  
season.
Late autumn  period
The costs associated  with winter  milk production  are higher  than those for 
summer  milk production.  Grazed  grass is the cheapest  feed available  to Irish 
dairy farmers.  The full exploitation  of grazed  grass and conserved  forage  will 
have a large influence  on the profitability  of winter  milk production  systems.  
The focus  as autumn  cows start calving  is to meet the nutritional  needs  of the 
cow and to achieve  high levels of animal  performance  from home produced  
forage.  Therefore,  grazing  management  should  aim to utilise the maximum  
amount  of grass in the late autumn  period  with autumn-calving  cows. The 
objective  is to achieve  high intakes  of grass up to mid-November  if ground  
conditions  permit.  However,  grazing  beyond  mid-November  will reduce  the 
supply  of grass available  for grazing  in early spring.  It should  be noted that 
autumn  grass has a lower  nutritive  value than spring  grass. Generally,  grass  
grown  in the autumn/early  winter  period  has a low dry matter  content  and has 
also a lower  energy  content.  The amount  of time cows can spend  grazing  is 
also reduced  due to shortening  daylight  hours. The utilisation  of autumn  pasture  
IS more  difficult  because  of the lower  DM concentration of the herbage,  increased  
fouling  due to poor ground  conditions  (Wilkin  and Garwood,  1986),  reduced  
grazing  time and a lower  metabolizable  energy  content  in the DM (Givens,
52
Table 4
The effect  of treatment  on milk yield and composition
Treatment  G Treatment  S
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 23.27 22.48
Fat yield (kg/cow/day) 0.99 0.96
Protein  yield (kg/cow/day) 0.83 0.68
Lactose  yield (kg/cow/day) 0.94 0.85
Fat % 4.30 4.29
Protein  % 3.55 3.04
Lactose  % 4.72 4.42
Average  bodyweight  change  (kg) -0.39 -0.75
1993).  The nutritional  status of the autumn-calving  cow is particularly  important  
at this time of the year. Poor  nutritional  status  and negative  energy  balance  may 
have consequences  for production  levels  in early  lactation  and the reproduction  
efficiency  of the cows. There  are two studies  reported  here with  autumn-calving  
cows on pasture.
A study was undertaken  in the autumn  of 1997 to compare  grazed  grass  
versus  grass  silage  as a forage  source  for autumn-calving  cows  in early lactation.  
Animals  on Treatment  S were fed a diet of grass silage  ad-libitum  and 6 kg 
concentrate.  The cows on treatment  G were offered  20 kg grass DM/cow/day  
and 6 kg concentrate.  Herbage  was allocated  on the basis  of pre-grazing  yields  
(> 4 cm). The grass and silage  comparison  lasted  eight weeks  between  29th 
September  1997 and ceased  on 17th November  1997.  The comparison  ceased  
due to high rainfall  levels  and poor  ground  conditions.  There  was fifty per cent 
first lactation  animals  in each treatment.  The cows had an average  RBI ’95 of 
118.
The effect  of treatment  on milk  yield  and composition  during  the experiment  
is shown  in Table  4.
There  was no statistical  difference  in milk  yield  recorded  in the experimental  
period.  There was no significant  difference  in fat and lactose  yields or 
concentration  in the experiment.  Milk protein  yield and protein  concentration  
was significantly  higher  for Treatment  G. The cows on Treatment  S had a 
significantly  higher  body  weight  loss during  the study  than the cows  on treatment
Table 5
The effect  of treatment  on dry matter  intake  (kg DM/cow)
Treatment  G Treatment  S
FDMI 12.03 6.03
TDMIl 17.27 11.27
FDMI - Forage  Dry Matter  Intake TDMI  - Total Dry Matter  Intake
53
G. There  was 0.36 kg/cow/day  difference  between  the grazed  grass group  and 
the grass  silage  group  for bodyweight  loss in the first seven  weeks  of lactation.
The intake levels  for the cows  offered  grazed  grass  and grass  silage are  shown 
in Table 5. The cows  outdoors  on grazed  grass had a significantly  higher  forage  
dry matter  intake  and a significantly  higher  total dry matter  intake.  The group  
intakes  for Treatment  S during  the experimental  period  were  approximately  8.5 
kg of forage  dry matter  intake  (FDMf)  but for no apparent  reason  the intake  
dropped  to 6 kg FDMf  during  the same period  as the intake  run.
The silage  fed in the study was of good quality  as measured  by the in-vitro  
digestibility  (763 g/kg DM), crude protein  (134 g/kg DM) and the ash (93 
g/kg DM) indicating  very little soil contamination.  However,  for a dry matter  
content  of 149 g/kg,  the pH of 4.26 was  higher  than desirable.  The grass analysis  
measured  over the experimental  period  shows  that the modified  acid detergent  
fibre levels on average  were 242 g/kg DM. The organic  matter  digestibility  
levels  over  the experimental  period  on average  were 805 g/kg OM. The quality  
of the sward was good as measured  by the OMD figures.
Immediately  post-calving,  the autumn-calving  cows diet should  consist  of 
a mixture  of grass  and concentrates.  The level  of concentrate  feeding will depend  
on the quality  and quantity  of the grass  available.  The results  of a study  carried  
out at Moorepark  in the late autumn/early  winter  period  of 1996 in which  grass  
was supplemented  with different  levels  of concentrate  are shown  in Table 6. 
Three groups  of autumn-calving  cows were allowed  graze by day and night  
and were offered  209 kg of grass DM/cow/day  (> 4 cm). This grass had a low 
dry matter  content  (14%)  and a moderate  DMD  (77-78%).  ft is important  to 
note that the grass quality  was low in this study because  the grass cover  was 
too high.
There  was a large  response  in milk  yield  to concentrate  feeding.  The response  
was approximately  0.75 kg milk per kg of concentrate  consumed.  In addition,  
the cows  on the highest  level  of concentrate  feeding  had the highest  milk  protein  
content.  The improved  performance  is associated  with an increased  total energy  
intake.
Grass  silage  should  be introduced  into the diet when  grass  supply becomes  
limiting  or when poor grazing  conditions  prevail.  The cow ’s diet is a blend  of
Table 6
The effect  of level of concentrate  feeding  on the performance  of Autumn  
calving  cows in early lactation
Grass only Grass -i- 3kg cone. Grass + 6kg cone.
Milk yield (kg/cow/day) 20.9 23.3 25.2
Fat % 4.62 4.56 4.50
Protein  % 3.16 3.34 3.43
Source:  Maher  and Ryan, 1997
54
grass, concentrates  and silage  until the  cows  are fully housed  indoors.  The cover  
of grass available  for grazing  ahead  of the cows should  not exceed  2,000  kg 
DM per ha (> 4 cm) for herds  with 100%  autumn-calving  herds.  If grass  supply  
is not controlled,  too much grass on the farm will lead to a deterioration  in 
pasture  quality  and it will also have a negative  effect  on animal  performance.  
Grazing  high yields  of grass at the final grazing  will retard  the supply  of grass  
available  for grazing  in spring.  In addition,  grass growth  rates are reduced,  
sward  vigour  will be depressed  and consequently  the swards  may become  very 
open.
Blueprint  for winter  milk production
The above  components  are part  of an overall system of winter  milk  production  
which  can result in very high levels of performance  from grazed  grass and 
conserved  forage.  The overall  blueprint  for autumn-calving  cows is outlined  
below.
Calving  date for winter  milk production  is concentrated  around  September/  
October  calving.  The optimum  calving  pattern  for the spring  and autumn  
components  of the herd will vary widely  depending  on the winter  milk scheme  
available.  A realistic  target for technically  efficient  dairy farmers  using this 
system  is 6,400  litres milk per cow with an average  fat content  of 3.9% and 
a protein  content  of 3.4%.  This level of performance  is achievable  at a stocking  
rate of 2.7 cows/ha  with a nitrogen  input of 300 kg per hectare  and a mean  
calving  date in mid-October.  The inputs  per cow include  1.2 tonnes  (DM)  of 
concentrates,  2.9 tonnes  (DM)  of grazed  grass and 1.4 tonnes  (DM)  of silage.  
Using  this blueprint,  a total of 450-1- kg of fat and protein  per cow (300 day 
lactation)  is possible.  The system  requires  a high digestibility  silage  with high 
intake  characteristics,  which  cannot  be restricted  if this level of performance  
is to be achieved.
Cows  in the 100%  autumn-calving  herd calved  in the September-November  
period.  Post turnout  to pasture,  the grazing  management  in the early grazing  
season  is similar  to the spring-calving  herds.  The autumn-calving  cows  are grazed 
to the same post-grazing  height,  offered  similar  daily herbage  allowances  and 
a similar  per cent of total area is closed  for first and second  cut silage.  However,  
the grazing  management  diverges  after late summer  when  the autumn-calving  
cows cease lactation.  The demand  for pasture  is reduced  after this period  due 
to dry cows. Grass growth  rates are still relatively  good at this time of year.  
This results  in an increase  in farm cover.  It is important  to make full use of 
this feed supply.  The autumn-calving  cows should  remain  outdoors  full-time  
until ground  conditions  or grass necessitate  them being housed.  Maximising  
grazed  grass in the diet of the autumn-calving  cow during  this period  will reduce  
the quantity of silage  fed. Poorer  fertility  performance  is associated  with  autumn ­
calving  cows. Heat detection  can be more difficult  in autumn-calving  herds.  
A combination  of more  intensive  heat detection  and some  heat synchronisation  
may be necessary.
An overview  of the current  recommended  system  for winter  milk  production  
is shown  in Figure  3.
55
Calving  Date
2 t n ^ ^
Month  of year
Figure  3 - Milk  supply  profile  (Y axis on right  of graph)  together  with  
the feed budget  (Y axis on left of graph)  for a system  of milk  production  
based  on 100%  autumn-calving
The seasonality  of milk supply  together  with the fat and protein  content  of 
the milk for 100% autumn  calving  is shown  in Figure  4.
-% MIk Supply - Fat % -Prol.  %
Figure  4 - Seasonality  of milk  supply  (% supply/month)  and the fat and 
protein  content  of milk  for a herd  with 100%  autumn-calving
Some  management  considerations  in relation  to winter  milk production
• Herd management  was more  difficult  with system  AS than with system  A 
or S. There are cows in different  stages of lactation  and this makes  
management  more difficult.  In system  A or system  S the workload  is 
concentrated  around  a few main  periods.  The management  decisions  within  
systems  A and  S are done  on a herd  basis  which  simplifies the milk  production 
system.  Split calving  patterns  leads to four groups  of replacement  heifers  
which  makes  management  more difficult.
• Autumn-calving  cows should  be allowed  access  to grazed  grass as early as 
possible  in the spring  time.  Turnout  to pasture  results  in a ‘secondary  peak ’
56
in milk yield, rise in protein  yield and lower  milk production  costs. The 
optimum  allowance  in the spring  is 20 kg DM/cow/day  resulting  in high 
levels of milk production  and optimum  utilisation  of pasture.  Higher  
allowances  may be necessary  with cows of higher  genetic  merit.
There  is low herd demand  for feed  (cows  non-lactating)  in the mid-summer  
period for autumn-calving  cows.  It is important  to monitor  farm cover  during  
this period  to avoid surpluses.  Surplus  grass should  be conserved  as high 
dry matter,  high digestibility  silage and can be fed indoors  in the winter  
period.
Graze dry cows  behind  the milking  cows  during  the dry period.  The milking  
cows are offered  herbage  of higher  energy  content.  The dry cows graze to 
a pre-determined  height  which improves pasture  quality and insures  dry cows  
are in optimum  body condition  at calving.
The optimum  calving  pattern  for winter  milk production  will vary widely  
depending  on the winter  milk scheme.  Cows calving  in September  and 
October  lead to the possibility  for outdoor  calving  in favourable  weather  
conditions  thereby  reducing  the workload  and minimising  the risk of disease.  
Herd calving  based  on September  and October  allows  for the inclusion  of 
some grazed  grass post-calving.  Improved  milk protein  yield and 
concentration  were obtained  from autumn-calving  cows on grazed  grass in 
early lactation.  The cows on grass silage lost more bodyweight  than the 
cows on grazed  grass. Systems  of milk production  incorporating  autumn ­
calving  cows should  aim to incorporate  the maximum  amount  of grazed  
grass in the cows ’ diet to improve  animal  performance,  animal  intakes  and 
to reduce  the requirement  for silage. This reduces  the cost of milk  production  
during  the late autumn/early  winter  period.
The cow ’s diet is a blend  of grass,  concentrates  and silage  until fully housed  
indoors.  The optimum  level of supplementation  in the autumn  period  will 
depend  on the quantity  and quality  of grass available.
The utilisation  of grass in the autumn  period  is one of the most important  
factors  influencing  animal  performance.  The pre-grazing  yield for autumn ­
calving  cows in early lactation  should  not exceed  2,000  kg DM per ha. The 
autumn-calving  cows should  remain  outdoors  full-time  until ground  
conditions  or grass supply  necessitates  them being housed.
References
Givens,  D. 1. (1993).  Influence  of growth  stage and season  on the energy  value  of fresh  
herbage.  1. Changes  in the metabolisable  energy  content.  Journal  of the British  
Grassland  Society,  48, 1660174.
Industrial Policy  Review  Group (1992).  A time  for change:  Industry  policy  for the 1990’s. 
Chairman:  J. Culliton,  Government  Publications,  Dublin  1992.
Maher,  J., Stakelum,  G. and Rath, M. (1998). Effect  of lactation  stage,  season  and herbage  
allowance  on the performance  of dairy cows. Proceedings  of the Irish Grassland 
and Animal  Production  Association,  Research  Forum  24th Meeting,  UCD,  Belfield.  
p. 171-172.
57
Maher,  J. and Ryan,  G. (1997).  Feeding  the autumn-calving  cow. Todays  Farm,  Vol. 
8, No. 3, September/October,  1997.
Report  of the Expert  Group  on the Food Industry  (1993).  Department  of Agriculture,  
Food and Forestry.  April 1993.
Ryan,  G., Crosse,  S. and Rath,  M. (1998).  The effect  of three  contrasting  calving  patterns  
on the grazing  management  of dairy  cows.  Proceedings  of Irish  Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Research  Forum,  24th Meeting,  UCD, Belfield.  pp. 169- 
170.
Wilkin,  R. J. and Garwood,  E. D. (1986).  Effect  of treading,  poaching  and fouling  on 
grass  production  and utilisation.  In: ‘Grazing ’ (ed. J. Frame),  Occasional  Symposium,  
No. 19, British  Grassland  Society,  pp. 19-31.
58
Improving  Cow Performance  with 
Increased  Use of Grazed  Grass
S. and A. LEONARD  
Teergay,  Kilbarry,  Macroom,  Co. Cork.
Farm  details
Total home  farm area is 44.1 ha, 39 ha of this area is allocated  to the dairy  
herd. Sugar  beet is grown  on 2.5 ha, and barley/whole  crop is grown  on 2.5 
ha. Fifty  dairy  cows  are milked  on the farm,  which  fill a quota  of 77,000  gallons  
(1540  gallons/7209  kgs/cow).  It is a total spring  calving  herd - mean calving  
date 11th of February.  The soil type is brown  podzolic;  the home  farm is located  
on a tributary  to the Lee Valley;  some of the lower  farm is exposed  to winter  
flooding.
Two other  farms exist,  the first farm  is allocated  to the calf  and heifer  rearing  
enterprise  (18 ha), the second  farm (8 ha) is run as a dry hogget  unit. In our 
system  - all farms are integrated  in the REP Scheme.
Labour  units
Two labour  units manage  the farm, my wife Angela  and myself.
Production  figures  (1996-1998)
Table 1
Farm  production  performance  (1996-1998)
1996 1997 1998
Milk yield (kg/milk/cow) 6039 6507 7181
Milk protein  (%) 3.20 3.24 3.34
Milk fat (%) 3.69 3.70 3.79
Milk fat yield (kg MS) 223 237 272
Milk protein  yield (kg MS) 193 211 240
Total solids (kg) 416 448 512
Table 2
Total feed budget  (1996-1998)
Feed budget  (t/DM/cow) 1996 1997 1998
Grass (Allowance) 3.9 4.7 5.7
Cone (Allowance) 0.38 0.40 0.58
Silage (Allowance) 1.0 1.05 1.0
Maize (Allowance) 0.40 0.34 _
Total 5.7 6.5 7.3
59
In the past two years we have leased  more quota. Rather  than increasing  
cow numbers  we have chosen  to increase  the output  of milk per cow. We are 
now filling 15,000  gallons  of extra quota  with the same number  of cows as 
we previously  had. In the past two years  our milk yield  per cow has increased  
by 1142 kg milk per cow (244 gal per cow). This yield has not come at the 
expense  of extra concentrate  feeding.  The majority  of the improved  animal 
performance  has come  from feeding  the animals  better  at grass. Consistently  
over the past 3 years our total feed budget  has increased  and this has resulted  
in an increased  animal  production  performance.  The grass allowance  has 
increased  by over  45% from 1996  to 1998.  Our current  feed budget  incorporates  
290-300  days at grass. Turnout  is in early February  as cows calve, and 
housing during  the early days of December.  The feed budget  has increased  
in three different  areas.
a) Increased  grass availability  in spring
Generally  paddocks  are closed  in rotation  starting  October  10th. The closing  
farm cover  therefore  has a wedge  shape  to it i.e. the paddock  with the highest  
cover  is the first closed  paddock,  the paddock  with the lowest  cover  is the last 
closed  paddock.  Early  nitrogen is applied  in January  whenever  ground  conditions 
and soil temperatures  allow. With a cover of grass on the farm at nitrogen  
application  grass growth  is stimulated.  Then,  as cows  calve  they graze  by day; 
when grass supply  allows  grazing  by night starts.
b) Increased  grass availability  in autumn
With the low stocking  rate we can generally  graze until late November  
depending  on ground  conditions.  With the total farm available  to graze post 
second  silage,  our farm cover  increases  to high levels  during  September  and 
early October.
b) Improved  daily herd grass  allowance  (mid-grazing  season)
With the potential  of the herd we aim to feed the cows fully at grass.  This 
requires  a larger  grass allowance  i.e. 23 kgs DM/cow/day.  We closely  monitor  
milk yield and milk protein.  Combining  grass allowance,  milk yield and milk 
protein  together,  enables  us to see whether  we are feeding  the animals  correctly  
or not.
Grassland  management/measurement
We have  been  involved  in the Moorepark  grass  measurement  project  for the 
past three years,  since its inception  we have learned  quite a deal about  - grass  
cover,  grass allocation,  post grazing  height  and monitoring  the animal  factors
i.e. milk/milk  protein and cow condition score.  We base our grazing  management  
on five cornerstones:
(a) Farm cover
(b) Pre-grazing  yield in paddock
(c) Daily grass allocation
(d) Post grazing  sward  height
(e) Grass quality
60
a) Farm  cover
We generally  aim at keeping  our farm cover  at 900 - 1000 kg DM per ha. 
This means  keeping  a high amount  of kg DM per cow. Therefore  the possibility  
of running  out of grass is usually  low, although  it has happened  on a number  
of occasions  most vividly  during  the mid April period  of 1998.
b) Pre-grazing  yield in paddock
The key to keeping  the cover  in check  during  periods  of high grass growth  
rates, is maintaining  a manageable  yield ahead of the herd. We find that pre 
grazing  yields  in the range  of 1,700  kg/DM/ha  are adequate  to graze out properly, 
with a high proportion  of live leaf. If the pre grazing  yields  run too high ahead  
of the herds,  then the paddock  is cut and it is either  baled or pitted.  Storing  
baled  silage  in the yard is never  a problem  - it is a saleable  product  if not needed  
by our own herd. In the case of grazing  a higher  cover  i.e. 2800-3000  kg/DM/  
ha where post grazing  height  may be lenient  - the pasture  is topped  post grazing.
c) Daily grass allowance
In general  the daily allowance  of grass to the herd at turnout  and for the 
rest of the grazing  season  is high. Post turnout  we strive  to place  as much  grass  
in front of the herd as our budget  allows.  Our low stocking  rate is of great  
benefit  to us - with the area available  we can graze  a lot of ground  in the early  
spring.  Turnout  by night in the past two years has been the 7th March  (1997)  
and 21st February  (1998).  With  the production  capacity  of animals  in the herd 
we aim to allow the herd up to 23 kg grass DM/cow/day  during  the main  grazing  
season.  We aim to produce  as much milk as possible  from grazed  grass, so 
therefore we present  the animals  with  enough  of the feed  to fulfil  their  potential.  
However, we  do not hesitate  to feed concentrates  when  required.  By monitoring  
the grazing  situation  closely,  we always  know how well the animals  are fed 
- the key pointers  to this are post grazing  sward  height,  daily bulk tank yield,  
milk protein  percentage  and the amount  and quality  of grass in the paddock  
immediately  ahead  of the cows.  The awareness  of these principles  in grazing  
management  is the key to the success  in our system.
d) Post grazing  sward  height
With the high allowance  of grass which  we offer the herd one always  must  
be willing  to top the pasture  to maintain  a quality  sward  in front of the herd.  
At times  our post grazing  height  is lenient  but as a general  rule we aim to graze  
pasture  down  to about  5.5 - 6.5 cm depending  on yield and quality  of the sward.  
In general we  top paddocks  twice  a year,  but we also have the facility  to alternate  
our silage  ground  around  the farm,  we do not have one specific  area for cutting  
silage.
b) Grass  quality
Grass quality  is not a big problem  in our system.  With the amount  of topping  
and the high  proportion  of ryegrass  in the swards,  maintaining  a good  digestible  
sward  is not a major  problem.  We have a reseeding  policy  in place where  5- 
8% of the entire  home  unit is reseeded  each year  - this system  runs concurrently  
with our tillage  system.
61
Herd predicted  index
Table 3
Herd predicted  index  profile  (1996-1998)
Milk (kg) Fat (kg) Protein  (kg) Fat (kg) Protein  (%)
1996 186.3 6.9 5.9 -0.01 0.004
1997 234.1 7.9 7.0 -0.01 0.001
1998 254.8 9.1 8.1 -0.01 0.00
Currently  our herd is bred for milk with little emphasis  on milk solids,  due 
to the use of high milk  bulls  in the past. Over  the past two years  we have moved  
our breeding  policy  to use bulls with 400-500  kg of milk and positive  protein  
(%). We have specifically  used Irish bulls to do this, namely,  JOS, MFX,  GMI 
and MAU.  Our future  breeding  policy  will focus  on maintaining  milk volume  
and increasing  milk solids as much as possible.
Type of cow
Strong,  well muscled  cows with good feet and udders  are our objectives,  
the type of animal  that can maintain  1600-1700  gallons  (8000  kg) milk yield  
at 3.5% protein  and 4.0% fat, and more importantly  can maintain  herself  in 
a spring  calving  herd for 5 to 6 years.
Fertility  performance
Table  4
Herd fertility  performance  (1996-1998)
Year 1996 1997 1998
Cows served  in first three weeks  (%) 77 86 80
Calving  to 1st service  interval  (days) 110 75 80
Services  per conception 2.1 1.7 1.95
Pregnancy  rate: 1st service  (%) 44 60 66
2nd service  (%) 56 47 27
3rd service  (%) 42 86 20
Infertile  rate (%) 10.4 4.8 14
In the past three years our fertility  performance  has been variable.  In 1998 
our infertile  rate increased  to 14% from 4.8% in 1997. We use D.I.Y.  AI; it 
seems to work  satisfactorily  on the farm.  We are concerned  that given  the results  
of the three year Moorepark  study,  where  the high merit  animals  had a much  
higher  infertile  rate than the medium  merit  animals,  that this may mirror  itself  
on our farm. We do not have a problem  submitting  cows for AI, the problem  
we have is animals  not conceiving  to the services.  Using  tail paint,  pre service  
scanning  and pregnancy  scanning  are part of our breeding  programme,  without
62
these  aids our  infertile  rate would  most  definitely  be higher.  We are now involved  
in the Moorepark  fertility  study - and hopefully  we will receive  the relevant  
guidance  as to where  to focus our future  breeding  policy  and what to breed  
for.
Cost structure  and future  direction  of the farm
In the medium  term we would  like to increase  our quota  size; this will mainly  
be done through  leasing  more quota.  Our current  cost base is quite low, our 
fixed costs are running  at 38.3 per gal which  includes  the cost of quota  lease  
of 23.2p. per gal, variable  costs are running  at 23.9p. per gal. There  is possibly  
some more room for improvement  in reducing  these costs;  however  the most  
crippling  cost is the leased  quota. One of the bigger  problems  about leasing  
extra quota is taking  on more land. We do not intend  putting  non paying  
enterprises  to use this extra  land. We would  hope to fill about 100,000  gallons  
of milk in the next 2-3 years.  We should  carry this extra quota  with no extra  
labour  cost. With our cost base, expansion  in our current  capacity  is our main  
aim.
Acknowledgements
We would  like to express  our gratitude  to Michael  O’ Donovan  of Moorepark  
Research  Centre  for his help in preparing  this paper.
63
Role of Partnerships  in the Future  of 
Irish Dairy  Farms
T. M. BUTLER
Farm Business  Advisers  Ltd, Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
It is generally  accepted  that dairy farming  profitability  will not continue  at 
the relatively  high level of recent  years.  Apart from the predicted  decline  in 
milk prices,  dairy farm output  is also being reduced  by depressed  values  of 
calves  and cull cows.  As a consequence,  there will be increased  emphasis  on 
cost reductions.  There is a limit below which  cost cutting  cannot  go, and 
ultimately  survival  will not be achieved  without  increase  in size. Additional  
resources  must  be procured  by means  of purchase,  lease,  or amalgamation  such 
as share farming  or partnership.
Expansion  of farm size
The prevailing  market  prices of land with milk quota often give quite  
unattractive  returns  on investment.  In many instances,  the farmer  has no 
requirement  for the additional  land. With margins  declining  in all sectors,  
acquiring  land surplus  to dairying  requirements  at exorbitant  prices  makes  bad 
business  sense.
The leasing  of land with quota  can be commercially  justified  if the land will 
be profitably  used and the quota  price is not excessive.  The value of quota  to 
a particular  farmer  varies with  size being  leased  relative  to owned  quota, seasonal 
distribution  and fat percentage.  It is sometimes  not realised  that a quota  with 
a low base fat content  is vulnerable  to reduction  in size. For example,  lease 
a quota  of 30,000  gallons  with  a fat base of 3.55%; increasing  the fat percentage  
to 3.95%  will reduce  the quota by 2160 gallons.
The possibility  of increasing  unit size by amalgamation  of resources  in a 
formal partnership  has not been a  traditionally  popular  option  but is being widely  
discussed  in recent  times. Partnerships  have many positive  features  but also 
carry  pitfalls.  Prior  to establishment,  it is important  that the serious  implications  
are thoroughly  examined  by the partners.
Requirements  for partnership  success
Before  any physical  farm factors  are considered,  there are certain  human 
attributes  required  for a successful  partnership  i.e. compatibility  in terms of 
personality,  attitude,  commitment  and trust. Major  differences  in any of these 
parameters  will inevitably  lead to divorce  proceedings.
The second  essential  area to be satisfied  is the viability  of the new entity.  
Farmers  that have been performing  unprofitably,  and carrying  significant  
borrowings,  may not be appropriate  participants  in a partnership.  Ideally,  an 
independent  competent  professional  should  be used to determine  the projected  
profitability.  The feasibility  study should  examine  both short-term  and long­
term performance.
64
An important  third aspect  is clear understanding  by each proposed  partner  
to the implications  of partnership  operation.  It must be absolutely  recognised  
that partnership  is not leasing  in disguise.  A partnership  is a well defined  legal  
entity  that will keep accounts,  apportion  profits  in an agreed  manner  and make  
tax returns  (each partner).
Intending  partners  should  be aware that at the present  time, partnerships  
enjoy  no special  privileges  with regard  to milk quota  regulations.  The offieial  
interpretation  is that since each partner  will transfer  land and quota  to a new 
entity,  each quota will be subject  to 20% clawback.  It is hoped  that if there  
is sufficient  positive  demand,  this position  would  be altered.  It is on this basis  
that the concept  is being openly  discussed.
Benefits  of partnerships
Whilst  partnerships  cannot  be expected  to resolve  all of the problems  facing  
dairy  farmers,  they can certainly  help to alleviate  some  of the major  obstacles;-
1. Unit size:
The most  common  problem  is small  quota  size i.e. 20,000  to 40,000  gallons  
on 60 or 100 acres of land. With reducing  values  of dairy farm produce  and 
declining  margins  in other enterprises,  size of unit will be the limiting  factor  
to future viability.
2. Labour  requirements:
Farming,  particularly  when  inefficient,  gives  poor  returns  on labour  relative  
to industrial  employment.  There  are two aspects  to the farm labour  problem:
(i) Returns  to the farmer  himself  are often quite low for the effort  involved.  
Smaller  units  cannot  afford  hired  labour.  These  have traditionally  survived  
on the contribution  of family  labour.  This situation  is rapidly  changing  
with better  education  and employment  opportunities.  Even  relatively  large  
dairy farms  are finding  that no family  member  is interested  in continuing  
the business  due to the moderate  rewards  for the work involved.
(ii) Hired  labour  is becoming unaffordable  and very often  unavoidable.  A typical 
farm labour  unit costs  about  £12,000  per year.  An operator  with managerial  
expertise  or specialist  skills  will cost significantly  more. Without  adequate  
size, a hired labour  unit cannot  be afforded.  A herd size in excess  of 100 
cows is required  before  a permanent  hired labour  unit can be considered.
Partnerships  have very obvious  benefits  to offer.  There  is potential  to rotate  
weekend  work  and organise  holiday  time. If necessary,  and desirable,  a partner  
could supplement  income  with some off-farm  employment,
3. Quality  and safety  standards:
Compliance  with constantly  increasing  hygiene  standards  and safety  
regulations  requires  investment  that individual  farmers  often cannot  afford  or 
justify.  Increased  size will help to carry these costs.
4. Profitability  of secondary  enterprises:
The relevant  secondary  enterprises  that occupy  land are beef cattle,  sheep  
and cereals.  The latter is not applicable  without  area aid eligibility.  In many  
instances,  significant  capital  investment  is required  to improve  efficiencies  in
65
animal  performance  and labour  usage. The combining  of resources  in a 
partnership  may afford  the opportunity  for proper  development.  In some  
situations  the rearing  of replacement  heifers  and fattening  cull cows could  
become  part of this operation.
5. Environmental  standards:
Complying  with  requirements  pertinent  to the environment  is proving  difficult  
on many  farms because  of the inability to make  the necessary capital investments. 
Increasing  the size of the unit, and the opportunity  for specialist  enterprise  
operation,  should  be of great  assistance.  The target  should  be to have  all drystock  
units participating  in REPS.  This would  benefit  the farm and environment.
Partnership  operation
There  is a wide  variety of circumstances  in which  partnerships  have  a positive  
contribution  to make.  Potential  farmers  vary in age, health  status,  land area and 
quality,  milk  quota,  secondary  enterprises,  farm structures,  and financial  position. 
Common  requirements  are the need to improve  efficiency,  profitability,  and 
quality  of life.
Details  of two farms  for which  a feasibility  study  was undertaken  are shown 
in Table 1. Farmer  A has ill-health  and has three children  at various  stages  of 
education.  Farmer  B has recently  taken over the family  farm and recognises  
that he must expand  his existing  operation.
Table 1
Summary  data on proposed  farm partners
Farm  A Farm B
Acres (map) 132 77
Acres (adjusted 123 72
Milk quota (gallons) 67,492 26,014
Beef system 45 calf to beef 20 calf to store
Age (years) 49 28
Permanent  labour  units 1 0
The two farms could quite easily be structured  into a partnership  on the 
following  basis:
(i) A will become  the Dairy  Farm  with 90 cows  and 22 replacement  heifers.
(ii) B will operate  as a Beef Farm with 64 steers reared  calf to beef.
(iii) The permanent  labour  unit will not be required  and will be replaced  by 
Farmer  B, and Farm Relief  Services.
Details  of actual income  and expenditure  on the individual  farms and 
projections  for the proposed  partnership  are presented  in Table 2. These  data 
show the profit  increasing  to £70,721  compared  with the existing  combined  
total of £46,997.  The extra profit  is generated  by income  increase  of £7,254  
and expenses  reduction  of £16,470.  The major  cost savings  are achieved  by 
elimination  of hired permanent  labour  and quota  leases.
66
Table 2
Actual  income  and expenditure  on individual  farms  and partnership  projections
Income: Farm  A (£) Farm B (£) Partnership  (£)
Gross output  livestock 25,651 8,964 41,140
Gross milk receipts 70,918 25,598 96,311
Current  receipts 8,268 1,678 10,880
Expenses:104,837 36,240 148,331
Seeds & sprays 1,362 _851
Fertilisers  & lime 8,694 3,078 12,755
Livestock  maintenance 4,163 1,466 6,122
Feed & fodder 12,914 3041 17,331Casual  labour 897 360 2,000
Transport  hire 644 116 504
Machinery  hire 4,626 1.266 7,177
Daily variable  costs 804 254 2,202
Milk & livestock  levies 1,191 135 2,273
Silage  additive  & polythene 616 208 1,866
Machinery  operating  costs 4,828 688 5,014
Vehicle  costs 3,031 1,237 2,103Telephone  & ESB 3,205 595 2,697
Permanent  labour 13,903 _
Rent, rates & insurance 2,791 712 2,444
Loan interest  & charges 1,069 52 1,215Quota  lease 2,307 670
Repairs,  renewals  & hardware 3,234 445 2,221
Accountancy  fees 920 855 1,169
Miscellaneous  expenses 871 78 1,402
Depreciation 5,696 1,058 6,264
77,766 16,214 77,610
Profit: 27,071 19,926 70,721
This  type of improved  performance  is typical of the potential  that is achievable  
on many  units throughout  the country.  The concept  could  make  rapid  progress  
if the obstacles  of milk quota  clawback  were removed.
Summary
There  are very obvious  benefits  to be derived  from  partnership  establishment  
in Irish dairy farming.  These  include  improved  efficiencies,  higher  profits  and 
better  quality  of life.
To proceed  with the introduction  of partnerships  a first requirement  is the 
removal  of the imposition  of clawbacks  on milk quotas.  Assuming  this is 
achievable,  none of the other potential  difficulties  are insurmountable  if the 
partners  have a committed  attitude.
Partnerships  have advantages  over leasing  in terms  of retention  and use of 
resources  and taxation  implications.
67
Trends  Within  Danish  Dairy  Farming
P. B. S0RENSEN
The Danish  Agricultural  Advisory  Centre  
The National  Department  of Cattle  Husbandry,  Denmark
Danish  agriculture  - past and present
Denmark  is a Scandinavian  country  with a total area of 43,000  km- and a 
population  of 5 million  people.  1000 years ago our famous  and disreputable  
ancestors,  the Vikings,  plundered  and raped  away  from home  while  their  wives  
were  farming  at home.  Since  then we have turned  more  peaceable  and farming  
has become  one of our most  important  businesses.  Even  today  where  Denmark  
is a high-tech  industrial  society,  farming is of immense  importance  to 
employment  and the economy.  More  than two-thirds  of the agricultural  produce  
are exported.
Owner-occupancy  is more  widespread  in Danish  agriculture  than anywhere  
else in Europe  with a very small proportion  of farms tenant-run.
No. of farms:  60,910  in 1997 compared  with 140,200  in 1970.  The average  
size rose from  21 to 44 hectares.  The percentage  of farms  over 50 hectares  rose 
from 7 per cent in 1975 to 25 per cent in 1995 (Fig. 1).
Employment:  Full-time  employees  in 1996 numbered  just under 13,000 
against  20,000  in 1985.  Only one in four  farms  had full-time  assistance. However, 
including  industries  directly  linked  to agriculture,  the farming  sector  provides  
jobs for 233,000  people.
Approximately  1,200  young  people  embark  on agricultrual  education  every  
year. The average  age of people  setting  up in farming  is 27 years.  The average  
age of farmers  is 51 years.
Table 1
Agricultural  area in Denmark  by type of crop
1,000 ha 1982 1998
Cereals 1,706 1,519
of which  winter  wheat 241 673
barley 1,333 677
Pulses 29 107
Oil flax 0 6
Rape seed 168 118
of which  non food rape seed 10
Set-aside 144
Roughage  inch green cereals,  total 760 578
Cereals  for green fodder 53 111
Maize  for silage 16 45
Fodder  sugar beets 131 33
Grass in rotation 324 247
Grass outside  rotation 235 142
Potatoes 32 38
Beets for sugar production 74 64
Seeds for sowing 45 83
Horticultural  products 28 21
Other 11 1
Total cultivated  area 2,854 2,679
cultivated  on farms 2,828 2,658
Area cultivated  on farms in per cent 66.2 62.4
of Denmark ’s total area
Source:  Ministry  of Agriculture
Production:  The annual  output  of animal  products  could satisfy  the 
requirements  of 15 million  people  or 245 per farm.
Exports:  More  than two-thirds  of the total farm production  is exported.  In 
1997, 60 per cent of exports  went to other  EU countries  while  Japan  and the 
US were the main markets  outside  the EU.
Agricultural  exports  in 1997 were  worth  54 billion  Danish  kroner  in foreign  
currency.  The industry ’s requirements  for imported  operational  materials
69
accounted  for 15 billion  kroner  only. The difference  - 39 billion  kroner  - 
contributed  significantly  to pay for imported  raw materials  and equipment  for 
other industries  as well as cars and other consumer  goods.
Farm  product  prices  and costs:  Between  1980/84  and 1997,  the farmgate  
prices  of products  for the home market  rose by 2 per cent while the general  
price level rose by 68 per cent.
Income:  The total net income  in agriculture  amounted  to approx.  7 billion  
Danish  kroner  in 1995, 1996, 1997 and is estimated  to decrease  considerably  
in 1998 because  of the dramatic  drop in pork prices.  For full-time  farmers,  the 
net income  in 1997 was 231,000  Danish  kroner  in crop production.  195,000 
Danish  kroner  in cattle/milk  production  and 501,000  Danish  kroner  in pig 
production.
Organic  production:  In 1997  there  were 1,617  authorised  organic  holdings  
with a total  area of 64,329  ha in Denmark.  This corresponds  to an average  area 
of 39.8 ha.
Structural  changes:  When  talking  about  structural  development  in Danish  
agriculture,  pig production  is often  mentioned.  Denmark  is the world ’s leading  
pork exporter  with an annual  production  of 25 million  pigs. As you can see 
in Table  2, Denmark  produced  9.4 per cent of the total EU pig meat  production.  
In recent  years pig production  has been concentrated  in still fewer  and larger  
farms.
Table 2
Livestock  production  in the EU
1,000  tonnesBeef & 
vealPig Poultry  
meat meat Eggs Milk ButterSkm ’d mil 
Cheese powde
1995 total 7,964 15,976 7,944 5.341 112,996 1,735 5,798 1,186
1996 total 7,950 16,316 8,317 5,223 113,410 1,794 5,942 1,191
1997 total 7,887 16,249 8,575 5,154 113,315 1,756 5,983 1,126
Of which:
Belgium/Luxembourg  340 1,015 311 205 3,199 100 74 56
Denmark 175 1,523 185 85 4,433 50 290 23
Germany 1,449 3,562 745 840 27,171 442 1,591 334
Greece 69 142 161 120 549 1 9 0
Spain 592 2,401 987 557 5,397 24 185 14
France 1,718 2,220 2,290 975 22,922 466 1,521 366
Ireland 569 220 126 31 5,254 139 96 102
Italy 1,160 1,396 1,136 720 9,877 92 799 0
Netherlands 564 1,376 670 592 10,519 131 705 41
Austria 206 489 100 100 2,421 41 80 18
Portugal 104 303 246 103 1,673 21 47 13
Finland 99 179 55 71 2,369 57 88 25
Sweden 148 326 85 109 3,276 54 119 31
UK 694 1,096 1,479 645 14,255 140 380 105
Denmark  as % of total 2.2 9.4 2.2 1.6 3.9 2.8 4.8 2.0
Source:  Ministry  of Agriculture
70
The changes  in Danish  dairy  farming  have  involved  a high  number  of farmers.  
In the following  paragraphs some  of the main  characteristics  of this development  
will be described,  including  the impact  of the new milk  quota  transfer  market.  
Finally,  the challenges  of the future  will be pointed  out.
When  Denmark  joined  the EEC in 1973, the total number  of dairy farmers  
was nearly  70,000  who produced  a total of 4.5 billion  kg milk. Today 10,400 
dairy farmers  produce  the same  volume  of milk.  This decline  in farm numbers  
of about 85 per cent is indeed  very remarkable  (Figure  2).
The total  number  of dairy  cows  has also dropped  considerably.  In 1973 there
5<73 75 77 79 SI 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 98 Y*ar
Number  of hard* Average  herd size
Figure  2
were  a total of 1.2 million  whereas  the present  number  is a little below  700,000.  
In other  words:  The milk yield  per cow has gone up by more than 50 per cent 
and for milk recorded  cows the average  yield per cow is now 7,327  kg (Table
3).
Table 3
Average  production  of milk recorded  in Denmark,  1997/98
Breed No. ofCows % of all Kg % fat Kg % Kg Kg fat +
cows* per herd COWS milk fat protein  protein protein
Danish
Holsteins401,735 64 69.0 7,769 4.16 323 3.39 264 587
Danish  Jerseys 72,615 60 12.5 5.389 6.07 327 4.12 222 549
Red Danish 56,731 49 9.7 7,089 4.25 302 3.58 254 556
Red and White 5,468 53 0.9 6,897 4.16 287 3.45 238 525
Crossbreds 45,658 61 7.8 6,860 4.48 308 3.57 245 553
Total 582,207 62 100.0 7,327 4.36 320 3.49 256 576
‘Nearly  90 per cent of all Danish  dairy cows are under official  milk recording.
71
Today  90 per cent of all Danish  dairy cows  are under  official  milk  recording.  
Together  with a unique  registration  system  and a national  database  this forms 
the basis  of farm management  tools, calculation  of breeding  values  and a quality 
young-sire  testing  programme  where  300 Holstein  bulls, 100 Jersey  bulls, 80 
red Danish  bulls and 15 Red and White  bulls are tested  annually.
Large  improvement  of productivity
Measured  by labour  input,  the average  dairy  farm is much  larger  today  than 
25 years ago as the present  input is 3,700  hours  against  about  3,100  hours  25 
years ago. This means  that by means  of a modest  increase  in labour  input it 
is today  possible  to run a farm with more  than three times  as many  dairy cows 
as in 1973 which is indeed  a dramatic  improvement.
At the time the farms  were less specialized  than today as cattle production  
accounted  for only 60 per cent of the gross margin  in the middle  of the 1970s  
against  75 per cent in the middle  of the 1990s.
The area of the farms  has of course  increased  in this period  from 25 to more  
than 60 hectares.  55 per cent of this area is today used to produce  roughage  
against  45 per cent in 1973.  The roughage  area per cow has been stable  at 0.6 
ha.
An interesting  change  that has taken place  over  the past  25 years  is that dairy 
farms produce  much  less beef  today.  25 years  ago the net sales  of animals made 
up more than 30 per cent of the total receipts  from animals  and milk whereas  
the figure  today is only 15 per cent. This is due to the fact that fewer  cows  
are needed  to produce  the same amount  of milk but also that beef prices  have 
not increased  at the same  rate as milk prices.  Beef  prices  have been especially  
low in the last few years.
Danish  average  farm ranked  second  in the EU
Table 4 shows  the structural  development  in a number  of selected  EU 
countries.  At the beginning  of the new milk quota  year 1999/2000  there will 
be about 10,400 Danish  milk  producers  with an average  milk  quota  of 428,000  
kg. This means  that a Danish  average  farm is close to being  the largest  in the 
EU - thus outranking  the UK farm.  If the about  6,000  “passive ” UK  quota  owners 
are left out, the average  quota  is not 380,000  kg as stated  in the table  but about  
450,000  kg - in this case the UK still has the largest  farms.
The recent  rapid  structural  changes  are caused  by the successful  introduction  
of the new milk  quota  transfer  market  in April 1998.  This  issue  will be described  
later on in this paper.
As appears  from the table,  the development  in Holland  has been relatively  
stagnant  in the recent  years.  The French  milk production  is characterized  by 
large  structural  differences  - from  highly  intensive  milk  production in the northern  
part to extensive  and environmentally  sound  production  in the mountains  in 
the area near the Mediterranean.  The farms  in the northern  regions  have nearly 
50 per cent higher  quotas  than the average  quota of 165,000  kg. A similar  
geographical  structural  difference  also exists in Germany  where  the farms in 
the northern  regions  are comparable  to medium-sized  Danish  farms.
72
Table  4
Structural  changes  in selected  EU countries,  1983-1997/98
Denmark UK (3) Germany  (2)Holland France Sweden Ireland  (3
No. of farms
1983 35,400 58,000 395,000 61,000 427,000 37,400 86,000
1990/91 21,400 45.000 278,000 47,000 212,000 24.800 51.000
1997/98 12.255 37,809 165,178 38.557 144,833 15,188 35,000
Average  milk quota per farm, kg
1983 153,000 290,000 72,000 218,000 65,000 96,000 66,000
1990/91 217,000 320,000 112,000 243,000 124,000 138,000 102,000
1997/98 363,000 380,000 168,000 285,000 165,000 217.000 150,000
Average  number  of cows per herd (1)
1983 28 57 14 41 16 17 18
1990/91 34 63 23 40 25 22 25
1997/98 54 64 30 43 26 31 33
All figures  are computed  as per 1 April 1998
Source:  ZMP, Dairy Facts & Figures,  Eurostat  and EU Commission
!) Estimates
2) 1983-figures  include  West Germany  only
3) Inclusive  of “passive ’ quota owners
Traditionally,  the farms  in the former  German  Democratic  Republic  are large  
- and they still are - whereas  the farms  in the southern  regions  are smaller  than 
the national  average.  The structure  within  Danish  cattle farming  is probably  
the most homogenous  in the EU.
Figure  3
73
Income
Measured  by income  per hour, the result  of the Danish  dairy  farms  has been 
considerably  lower  than the average  of full-time  farms  concentrating  on arable 
production  or pig production  (Figure  3).
The average  difference  is about  30 Danish  kroner  (DKK)  per hour (present  
value).  Only by the end of the 1980s  was the income  of the dairy farms  almost  
equal to that of the other  enterprises.  The economic  incentive  to switch from 
dairy  cows to another  enterprise,  mainly  pigs and/or  plant  production,  has thus 
been present.
Attention  should  also be paid to the level itself  with a relatively  low income  
per hour until the early 1980s,  a higher  but still low level until the late 1980s  
and a figure  nearly  100 Danish  kroner  in the last 8-10 years.  Even though  this 
cannot  be compared  with  labour  market  wages,  the income  is modest  by Danish 
standards.
Measured  by current  income,  the Danish  dairy  farms  have also had a lower  
income  than other  enterprises  even though  the difference  has been somewhat  
lower  than the income  per hour. One of the reasons  is that the dairy farmers  
have generally  contributed  about 10 per cent more labour  than the average  of 
arable  and pig farms.
Investment  and financing
When  Denmark  joined  the EEC, the general  opinion  was that there was a 
basis for increasing  farm production.  This had the effect  that in the 1970s  the 
investments  of the dairy farms  were 50 per cent higher  than the depreciations  
whereas  in the 1980s they invested  15 per cent more than they wrote  off. In 
the 1990s investments  were nearly  35 per cent higher  than depreciations.
74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98
_____ _ Faim  inv«stm«nts
_______ % of form  profit. Owners  own  financing  
It of form  Invastmanf
Figure  4
74
The general  investment  level and the development  in income  per hour  have  
to be considered  when  evaluating  the development  shown  in Figure  4. It shows  
the relation  between  investment  in farm  assets  and farm profit.  The figure  shows  
that the investments  in the 1970s  were not covered  by an operational  surplus  
but later on investments  turned  more prudent.
Of course,  the introduction  of milk  quotas  in 1983 played  an important  role 
in this development  as for some  time they curbed  the decline  in farm numbers  
(see Figure  2).
Generally,  more caution  was displayed  following  a violent  crisis in Danish  
agriculture  in the early 1980s  when  the optimism  of the 1970s  received  a blow. 
The rise in the investment  share  over the past few years is probably  due to the 
fact that the farmers  took up a reserved  attitude  until they knew whether  the 
milk  quotas  became freely transferable  or not and  also that  the share is measured  
at a lower operational  surplus.
Generally,  investments  have been more  prudent  since  the early 1980s  which  
appears  from the self-financing  curve in which  depreciations  are included  as 
well.
In the 1970s  the money  invested  was mainly  borrowed  money  whereas  since  
then the farmers  have mainly  invested  their own money  although  borrowings  
again have increased  dramatically  in recent  years,  but now at a much lower  
interest  rate than in the 1970s.  The actual  interest  in farm property  is about  7 
per cent at 30 years  mortgage  loans.  Up to 70 per cent of the value  of the farm  
property  can be financed  via these loans.
Savings
An important  element  in an economic  assessment  is the volume  of savings  
for consolidation.  This has changed  drastically  for the dairy  farmers  since 1973  
which  is shown  in Figure  5 displaying  the annual  savings  of 5-year  periods.
Savings
Converted  by means  of net price  index
Year
The figures  clearly  show  that the development  has turned  from a deficit  to 
a pretty  good surplus  over the past 10 years.  It can be concluded  that in general 
the existing  dairy farms  have a healthier  economy  than for many years.
It has in no way been a problem-free  development  as thousands  of dairy 
farmers  have dropped  out of dairy farming.  To this must be added  that out- 
goers  schemes  have made  the decision  of stopping  to produce  milk easier  than 
perhaps  even attractive  to elderly  farmers.  The present  possibility  of selling  
quotas  has in principle  the same effect.
Impact  of new milk quota  exchange
The milk quota  exchange  is the most recent  vehicle  for restructuring  the 
Danish  dairy industry.  It was set up last year  and is aimed  at increasing  flexibility,  
to break the ties between  land and quota  and to allow the market  rather  than 
the political  system  to fix the price of quota.  It gives farmers  who are willing  
to expand,  the opportunity  to move  quickly  up to 80 cows.  Other  farmers  have 
to make  the decision  whether  they want to stay in milk  production  in the future. 
How is the exchange  working?
• Producers,  wanting  to sell, make  an offer to the Danish  Dairy  Board  stating  
the volume  they want to sell and the minimum  price.
• Producers,  wanting  to buy, make  an offer  to the Danish  Dairy  Board  stating 
the volume  they want to buy and the minimum  price.
The offers to sell are recorded  in a supply  curve according  to increasing  
prices,  and the offers  to buy  are recorded  in a demand  curve  according  to falling  
prices  (Figure  6). The cut-off  between  the two curves constitutes  an equilibrium  
price or market  clearing  price, which  is the point where  the quantity  offered 
for sale equals  the quantity  which  buyers  want to purchase  as the same price.
Danish  milk quota  exchange
Accumulated  sales  volume  (miion  tonnes)
Figure  6Sourc9:  Danish  MUk  floord
emrcirW
76
• Producers,  who have stated  that they want to sell at a price, which  is lower  
or equal to the equilibrium  price, will sell at the equilibrium  price.
• Producers,  who have stated  that they want  to buy at a price,  which  is higher  
or equal to the equilibrium  price, will buy at the equilibrium  price.
Other  offers to buy or sell (located  to the right  of the intersection)  are rejected
and may “try” again in the next exchange  round.
The equilibrium  price of the exchange  applies  to milk  quota  with an average  
fat content  of 4.36%  and each producer ’s price/price  offer is differentiated  
according  to fat content.
The price formation  of the quota  exchange  is based on the condition  that 
there are many producers  wanting  to buy and sell. This means  that individual  
offers cannot  affect  the equilibrium  price - neither  unrealistically  high offers  
to buy nor unrealistically  low offers to sell.
Possibilities  and limitations  of buying  milk  quota  - for farms  already  having  
a milk quota  the following  rules apply:
• rented  quota  is included  when calculating  the volume  of the quota  and the 
following  upper  maximum  limits apply:
1977-1988:  800,000  kg
1998-  1999:  850,000  kg
1999- 2000: 900,000  kg
2000-  2001:  950,000  kg
2001-  2002  1,000,000  kg
• if a farm has a quota  below  the upper  maximum  limit, the farmer  can buy 
up to 150,000  kg per year or 300,000  kg over 5 years.
• the milk  quota  purchased  includes  the allocation,  if any, received  as a newly  
established  farmer.  After  the purchase  the quota  must not exceed  the upper  
maximum  limit.
Special  rules for newly  established  farmers
To encourage  the producers  to redistribute  quotas  through  the exchange,  a 
clawback  of 33 per cent  on direct  transfers  was introduced  in 1997.  The deducted  
quota goes straight  into the national  reserve  and is redistributed  to newly  
established  farmers.  These  changes  have huge effect  on how quota is being  
transferred.
Newly  established  dairy farms:
• can apply  to the Danish  Dairy  Board  for a quota  up to 560,000  kg (80 cows)
• max. one-third  of the allocation  is free quotas  from the national  reserve
• max. two-thirds  of the allocation  are bought  at the equilibrium  price
Newly  established  “empty ” farms:
• can apply to the Danish  Dairy Board  for a quota  up to 300,000  t
• max. one-third  of the allocation  is free quotas  from the national  reserve
• max. two-thirds  of the allocation  are bought  at the equilibrium  price
Table  5 shows  the result  of the first 3 quota  exchange  rounds.  The first round  
was opened  on 25 December  1997 and closed  for sales and purchase  offers  on 
16 January  1998.  The result  of this first round  was as follows:  A total of 6,840
77
Table 5
Key figures  for the 3 first Danish  milk quota  exchange  rounds,  1983-1997/98
December August December
Market  clearing  price*,  DKK per kg 2.28 2.68 2.92
Market  clearing  quantity,  million  kg 177.80 56.50 158.00
Accepted  offers to sell or buy, total 4,8,5 1,564 4,017
Farms  wanting  to sell or buy quota (total offers)6,840 4,103 5,500
Quota  sales
Accepted  offers to sell quota 1,017 359 978
Offers  to sell 1,394 439 1,100
Quota  offered  for sale, million  kg 278.40 80.40 190.00
Average  quota purchased,  kg 174,800 157,400 161,600
Quota  purchases
Accepted  offers to buy quota 3,818 1,236 3.039
Offers  to buy 5,446 3,664 4,400
Quantity  in demand,  million  kg 222.90 126.30 192.00
Average  quota sold, kg 46,600 45,700 52,000
* 4.35%  fat
Source:  Danish  Dairy Board
producers  traded  at the exchange,  out of which  1,394  wanted  to sell 278.4  million 
kg and 5,446  wanted  to buy. 177.8  million  was traded  kg at the market  clearing  
price of Danish  kroner  2.28 per kg.
1,017 producers  made  sales offers  below  the marketing  clearing  price and 
sold their  quota.  3,818  producers  made  offers  to buy above  the market  clearing  
price  and consequently  they bought  the required  quantity. This  means  that 1,987  
offers were not traded.  366 producers  wanted  too high a price for their quota  
and 1,627 producers  did not offer enough  to acquire  the quota  quantity  they 
intended  to. They  were informed  that their  offers  were  not traded  and they may 
try again at the next round of the quota  exchange.
Since  the milk quota  exchange  system  started  in the autumn  of 1997, it has 
been decided  to have two annual  exchange  rounds.  The price  has gone  up from 
Danish  kroner  2.28 per kg in the first round  to nearly  Danish  kroner  3.00 at 
the latest  in December  1998.  Before  the exchange  the price was Danish  kroner  
1.60 per kg.
This high rise in prices  is a clear indication  that the relatively  high income  
of the dairy  farmers  in the 1990s  has created  optimism  so that they now believe  
in a satisfactory  income  from dairy farming  in the coming  years.  After  years  
of little or no investment  on dairy farms  there  is now a resurgence.  New barns 
for 140-150  cows are being built. Existing  buildings  are being  expanded  by 
farmers  who are confident  they are staying  in the industry.
About  400 Dutch  farmers  have  immigrated  into Denmark  and are now running 
mainly  dairy farms  here. They have contributed  to creating  further  dynamics
78
in cattle  production  because  they demand  large  productive  units and make  heavy  
investments.  Their  farms  are considerably  larger  than the Danish  average  dairy  
farm.
More  stringent  control
In recent  years  Danish  farmers  have experienced  increasing  public  focus  on 
farm production.  This has resulted  in a wide range of rules and regulations  
which  the farmers  have to observe.
I. Animal  manure  and area requirements
In order  to reduce  nitrate  leaching to streams, lakes  and seas strict  rule stipulate  
how to use nitrogen  and animal  manure.  Last year the so-called  aquatic  
Environment  Plan II was adopted,  among  other stipulating  reduction  of the 
maximum  N application  rates to individual  crops.  By way of example:  spring  
barley  75-120  kg N per ha depending  on soil type, pre-crop,  irrigated  or not 
irrigated,  winter  wheat 110-187  kg ha N per ha, grass 290-325  kg N kg per 
ha and grass for extensive  grazing  140 kg N per ha.
The goals of the aquatic  Environment  Plan II are:
1 Wet meadows,  increasing  forest area
2. Increased  feed utilization
3. Increased  harmony  between  area and LU
4. Increased  utilization  of cattle manure
5. Decreased  N-recommendation  (10%)
Strict  rules  govern  the utilization  of N in animal  manure.  By way of example:  
Minimum  50 per cent of the nitrogen  in cattle slurry  must be utilized  in the 
first year and 10 per cent in the second  year. 9 months ’ storage  capacity  is 
required  for slurry  which  must not be spread  in the period  from 1 October  to 
1 February  and only on fields covered  with green crops.  Furthermore  67 per 
cent of all fields must be covered  with green crops during  the wintertime.
Nitrate  directive
Reduction  in N-leaching  100,000  tonnes  
Now:  1 LU = 1 milking  cow
From 1999:  1 LU = 100 kg N ex.storage
Application  of cattle manure
Now:
From 1999:  
From 2003: 
Mixed  farms  
Now:
From 2003:N from 2.3 LU/ha  (app. 270 kg N) 
210 kg N/ha  
170 kg N/ha
2.0 LU/ha
1.4 LU/ha  (140 kg N)
The area of land also has to be balanced  against  the livestock  numbers  on 
each individual  farm.  A cattle  farm is allowed  to have maximum  2.1 livestock  
units per ha. All types of livestock  are converted  to livestock  units. One dairy  
cow of a heavy  breed  (i.e. Holstein)  corresponds  to 1.18 livestock  units,  1 heifer:  
0.35 livestock  units, 1 bull from birth to 450 kg: 0.35 livestock  units, 1 bull
79
from birth to 450 kg: 0.35 livestock  units, 1 sow with  piglets  and young  females: 
0.33 livestock  units, 1 slaughter  pig to 30-98  kg: 0.033  livestock  units.  Poultry, 
sheep,  horses,  mink etc are converted  to livestock  units as well.
As from 1 August  2002 the harmony  requirement  for cattle farms is 1.7 
livestock  units per ha and 1.4 livestock  units per ha for other  livestock  types.  
However,  for cattle  farms  2.3 livestock  units are required  if sugar  beets,  grass 
or grass crops are grown  on more than 70 per cent of the area of the farm.
Every year the farmer  has to prepare  a fertilizer  balance  to The Danish  
Ministry  ot Food,  Agriculture  and Fisheries,  showing  how much commercial  
fertilizer  and animal  manure  have been applied  to each individual  crop and 
utilization  of animal  manure.  Farmers  who break the rules are fined.
The area  requirements  are tightened  as well and this has brought about  rapidly 
rising  land  prices  in areas  with many pig and cattle  farms  (up to 100,000  Danish  
kroner  per ha). So far Denmark  is the only country  meeting  the EU nitrate 
directive.
In the future,  it is likely  that pesticide  balances  are to be prepared  and sent 
to the Ministry  of Food,  Agriculture  and Fisheries  and the farmers  will no doubt  
be forced  to reduce  consumption.  Denmark  is already  among  the countries  in 
the EU applying  least pesticides  (g per ha) - today it is compulsory  to prepare  
a field record  showing  all pesticide  treatments.
2. Veterinary  rules
Currently  there  is much  public  focus on veterinary  and animal  welfare  issues 
and strict rules govern  the use of drugs on cattle farms.
General  rules
• The vet must only hand out or prescribe  prescription  drugs, provide  he 
personally  sets the diagnosis.
• It is not allowed  to hand out antibiotics  and chemotherapeutic  drugs  meant  
for injection  through  the skin of injection  into udder  or uterus.
• Strict  rules  govern  the withdrawal  of milk and slaughter  after  treatment  with 
a prescription  drug.
• Dehorning  of calves  must  take place  only  following  local  anaesthesia  carried  
out by a vet.
Health  advisory  agreement
A herd owner  who enters  into a written  health  advisory  agreement  with a vet 
is entitled  to:
• 12 annual  advisory  visits by the vet
• drugs for post-treatment  of cows, provided  the herd ’s vet has made the 
diagnosis  and started  the treatment
• drying-off  antibiotics,  provided  a positive  bacteriological  test of individual  
quarters
• drugs  for the treatment  and repeated  treatments  of calves  and young  stock,  
provided  the herd ’s vet has made the diagnosis  and started  the treatment
National  disease  eradication  programme
The Danish  cattle  stock  has a high veterinary  status and a great  many  diseases  
have been eradicated  by means  of sanitation  programmes  (“test and slaughter
80
policy ”). In the mid-1980s  IBR was eradicated  in a nationwide  programme  in 
which  more than 15 per cent of all cattle was slaughtered.  Denmark  is now 
100 per cent IBR-negative.
Right  now we are eradicating  BVD (bovine  Virus  Diarrhoea).  Herds  which  
have had an unbroken  BVD-free  status for more than 24 months  and whose  
BVD-free  status  has been  confirmed  through  a status  test are free to sell or buy 
animals  without  preceding  examination.
There  are two types  of status  test (needed  in case of transfer  to another  herd, 
exhibition  at cattle show, pasturing,  etc):
• Tank milk test, showing  a value below  50 units
• If the value  exceeds  50 or if no tank milk  test is available  (e.g. in beef  cattle
herds),  3 young  animals  (age; 8-10  months)  are to be blood-tested  for BVD-
virus and antibodies  with a negative  result.
Animals  from  a BVD-free  herd which  has had BVD-free  status  for less than 
24 months  can only be sold/purchased  if they have been blood-tested  for BVD  
antibodies with  negative  result. Calves  below  the age of 3 months  must  be blood- 
tested  for both BVD-virus  and BVD-antibody  with negative  result  (both  on the 
same day).
All animals  that are traded  must be accompanied  by a health  certificate,  
showing  the BVD-status  of the animal  and issued  by the Minisry  of Food,  
Agriculture  and Fisheries.
3. Housing
Livestock  housing  has also been much  debated  in political  circles.  According  
to the existing  regulations  new livestock  buildings  must meet certain  
requirements  as to ventilation,  resting  area, etc. Young  stock  below  the age of 
1 year must not be tied up and if young  stock  are housed  on slatted  floor,  they 
must  have access  to cubilcles  or deep  liter. The existing  animal  welfare  housing  
requirements  will no doubt  be tightened  in the years to come.
Total  organic  milk production  in mio.  kg.
soo^ MUUenkg arganle  milk
100  J
^ Tew  of ootliorieeHoa
ISM IMS 1M7 ISM
1995 IBSe 1997  1998  1999  2000
Figure  8. Teer  of dellTery
81
Organic  farming  is gaining  ground
The increasing  demand  for organic  dairy products  in recent  years has of 
course  resulted  in a dramatic  increase  in the number  of farms converting  to 
organic  farming.  In 1V2 to 2 years 10 per cent of Denmark ’s dairy production  
will be organic.  The price  of organic  milk is now about  25 per cent higher  than  
that of conventional  milk.
The higher  milk  prices  paid during  the period  of conversion  has accelerated  
the rapid development.  As shown  in Table 6, the average  organic  farm has a 
higher  milk quota  than the average  conventional  farm.
Table 6
Number  of organic  farms  with milk quotas
No. of farms Total quota  
million  kgAverage  quota  
per farm, kgAve. quota per 
conventional  farm, kg
1993/94 132 39 295,000 271,000
1994/95 146 47 323,000 290,000
1995/96 147 56 381,000 310,000
1996/97 344 140 407,000 330,000
1997/98 430 183 427,000 363,000
1998/99 672 333 496,000 392,000
Over the past 10 years there has been an unsatisfied  demand  for organic  
products  among  the Danish  consumers.  Organic  products  are trendy  and the 
consumers  are willing  to pay extra. With the large expansion  of production,  
demand  and supply  seems  to balance.
Branded  goods which  have been successful  as conventional  goods,  e.g. 
“Lurpak ”, are now introduced  in an organic  version.  This product  development  
is expected  to lead to increasing  demand.
In the future  organic  dairy products  are to be exported,  the UK, Germany  
and Sweden  being the most  interesting  markets.  Whether  the high  price  of organic 
milk and the sound  economy  of this production  can be maintained  remains  to 
be seen in the years to come.
High milk price needed
Denmark  cannot  rapidly  expand  production  when quotas  go. The whole  
country  is a nitrogen  sensitive  area. Environmental  restrictions  already  in place  
will limit the increase  in milk production  to between  5-10 per cent. Then why 
are we one of the four EU countries  (Sweden,  the UK, Italy and Denmark)  
calling  for quota  abolition  in 2006 in agenda  2000?  In the long term we are 
aiming  to set up a dairy industry  which  will be viable  - quotas  or no quota.
The system  of farming  is high cost compared  to Ireland.  Grass  has a role 
in reducing  costs but the cold winters  limit its potential.  Cows  are housed  for 
6-7 months  and calving  takes place all year round.
To survive  in the future,  we need  large  herd sizes  but even more  importantly,
82
a high milk price is needed.  Last year the milk price was Danish  kroner  2.50 
per kg. Organic milk, a  sector  in which  the production  as mentioned  is increasing  
rapidly,  made up to Danish  kroner  3.25 per kg. Organic  production  together  
with intensive  product  development,  aggressive  marketing  and increased  
efficiency  are the most important  tools to secure  a high milk price.
To maintain  high prices  in the future  we have set about  targeting  the high 
value added  European  markets.  A strategic  decision  was made over 10 years  
ago to switch  milk  from  commodities  sold to  third  country  markets  and develop  
more profitable  markets  in European  countries,  particularly  Germany. The milk  
pricing  system  was changing  to encourage  a more uniform  year round  milk  
supply.  It seems  that the policy  is now paying  off.
Postponement  of milk reform  gives concern
If we want to have a milk industry  in 25 years time, we have to be able to 
compete  in a free world  market.  We cannot  do it with 30-40  cow herds.  In a 
30-cow  dairy herd in the EU it costs about  Danish  kroner  300 to produce  100 
kg milk. In the US the costs of producing  100 kg is Danish  kroner  150 and 
in Australia  Danish  kroner  100 according  to the International  Farm  Comparison  
Network.  On EU-farms  with 60-75  dairy  cows  it costs about  Danish  kroner  225 
to produce  100 kg.
The Danish  Dairy  Board  is pleased  that an agreement  was made  in March  
concerning  an agricultural  reform  in the EU. At the same  time it is regrettable  
that the milk reform  and thus the lowering  of the guaranteed  minimum  prices  
of 25 per cent was postponed  until 2003/04.  This reservation  leads to uncertainty  
about EU’s long-term  policy  which  neither  the milk producers  nor the dairy  
industry  really need.
From a Danish  point of view it is positive  that the compensation  is now 
divided equally  without  leaving  out special  producer  groups.  The Danish  Dairy 
Board  is clearly  opposed  to the extra quota  allocated  to Italy, Spain,  Greece  
and Ireland.
The milk reform  was postponed  for budgetary  reasons  to make  the political  
patience  come out. This means  that the EU will have much shorter  time to 
adjust  the system  and the competitive  power  to the coming  WTO agreement  
which is expected  to be signed  no later  than in 2003.  Furthermore,  this situation  
also creates uncertain  conditions  for the enlargement  of the EU with the East 
European  countries.
What about the future of the quota system?  In 2003 at the earliest  this 
important  question  - which  is of decisive  importance  to the milk  producers  and 
the dairy industry  - will be dealt with. According  to the Danish  Dairy Board  
this is unacceptable  in connection  with  the very dramatic  structural development  
and the internationalisation  now taking  place.
The future
By 2006 the total number  of producers  in Denmark  will be 5,500  with an 
average  herd size of 80-90 cows to produce  the national  quota.  This clear  
direction  for the future is being backed  by the advisory  service  and the
83
government.  Structures  are being put in place. These include,  as already  
mentioned,  the milk quota  exchange  but also partnerships  and co-ops  to allow  
it to happen.  By way of example,  the two leading  cooperative  milk processors  
MD Foods  and Kloever  Milk merged  one month  ago. The new cooperative,  
named  MD Foods,  will process  91 per cent of the milk produced  in Denmark  
and its total annual  turnover  is estimated  at 26 billion  Danish  kroner.  In the 
beginning  of 1999 the two largest  cooperative  slaughterhouses  Danish  Crown  
and Vestjyske  merged.  The market  shares  of the resulting  company,  named  
Danish  Crown,  will be 85 per cent of all pig slaughterings  and 65 per cent of 
all cattle  slaughterings.  It is the world ’s largest  slaughterhouse  and its total  annual 
turnover  is estimated  at 38 billion  Danish  kroner.  The Danish  agricultural  industry 
is preparing  itself  to compete  with  the biggest  players  on the future  world  market. 
Effectiveness,  constant  product  development,  professional  marketing  and 
introduction  of high-priced  branded  goods  are to secure  the Danish  farmers  the 
highest  possible  prices  for their products.
84
Key Factors  in Growing  a Business
P. BAKER
Cloughjordan  House,  Cloughjordan,  Co. Tipperary
I was honoured  with a Nuffield  scholarship  in 1997.  A Nuffield  scholarship  
gives one the opportunity  to travel  the world  and study one ’s chosen  topic.  Its 
main  aim is to encourage  active  involvement  and leadership  within  agriculture.  
The Nuffield  network  of past and present  scholars  in various  parts  of the world 
is a wonderful  opportunity  to meet  with  positive  and interesting  people.  I would  
like to acknowledge  the generosity  of my sponsors:  The Farmers  Journal,  FBD  
and IFA
Reason  for looking  at “the key factors  in growing  a business ”:
My main  reason  for choosing  this topic  was that I felt there was widespread  
stagnation within  European  agriculture.  This was largely  because  of EU policies  
and restrictions which  were  perceived  as obstacles  to growth.  Industry stagnation  
was, and  is, taking  a financial  and human toll and  my study  was aimed  at finding  
a way around  these “obstacles ”.
Conclusion  of this report:
I interviewed  leading  managers  both from the corporate  sector  and within  
farming.  From  them, I formed  the conclusion for  my report  which  can be summed  
up in one quotation:
“Obstacles  are what  you see when  you take your eyes off the goals ”.
If there  is only one sentence  to be remembered  from my paper  then that is 
it! The reasons  are:
1. Business  growth  comes  from a combination  of management  and capital.
2. Our management  combines  a mix of strategy  (planning)  and capability.
3. My  simple  deduction  is that we all have a certain  amount  of capital  or can 
get it if the idea is right.  We would  also like to think  we have a reasonable  
degree  of capability.  Mostly  we do not have our eyes on a goal or strategy  
for the future.
4. Because  we generally  do not plan or set clear goals in this “impossible ” 
environment  in which  we operate  then we see nothing  but obstacles!
5. The general  trend in the past has been for farmers  to be reactive,  to let the 
co-ops,  the EU and God control  our destiny.  We must become  proactive  
where  we take responsibility  for our own destiny.  We must learn from the 
history  of even the past 5 years.  Individual  businesses  have stagnated  over 
that period.  The question  to ask ourselves  today is where  do we see our 
businesses  and their profits  in 5 years time?  To the vast majority,  it will 
be where the bureaucrats  are now telling  you it will be. All very easy!
6. The vast majority  will not plan.  The average  performer  will be reactive  and 
wait for direction  from the “brainy  boys”.
The difference  between  real success  and failure,  as individual  businesses,
85
is the amount  of time and effort  we are prepared  to put into setting  goals and 
planning  for the future.
The key factors  in growth:
There  are really  three  key factors  to growing  a business  which  I will briefly  
refer  to: The Kerry  Group  is an example  of an organisation  that fully embraces  
these three factors.  I was fortunate  to visit Denis  Brosnan  and his team. The 
Kerry  success  formula  states  that “Sustained  profitable  growth ” will come from 
a mix of:
STRATEGY  X CAPABILITY  X CAPITAL  
(SCC)
a) Strategy:
Real success  depends  on thinking  and planning,  as cited by Denis  Brosnan.  
Without  strategic  planning  Kerry ’s growth  would  be 5% instead  of the annual  
15% actually  achieved.  Kerry work on the principal  of the 80/20  rule:
80% of the growth  of successful  business  is due to time spent  thinking  and 
planning.  Only 20% is due to doing  the physical  work.  Arguably,  many  of our 
farm businesses  suffer  from the reverse,  that is the “ostrich ” syndrome.  Far too 
much  time is spent  on the operational  side and precious  little time given over 
to planning  where  we want our business  to go.
Strategy  can be defined  as asking  three questions:
1. Where  are we now?
2. Where  do we want to be in a given period?
3. How do we go about getting  there?
We must  try to match  realistic  market  opportunities  with our own skills  and 
balance  it with personal  ambitions,  values,  family  issues,  etc. Irrespective  of 
the circumstances  we must be proactive  about our situation  and we must all 
ask these questions:
1. Where  are we now?
Some of the main questions  to be answered  might  be:
• What is our core business?
• What are our limitations,  our weaknesses?
• What is the value of our assets and actual returns  being made?
• How much do we need to live and to pay tax?
• Do we consider  our business  a “lifestyle ” business  or a “growth ” business?  
Kerry  started  this process  back  in 1979.  Then  they were  faced  with  a situation
where  they lost 20% of their  milk  pool through  a brucellosis  disease  eradication  
scheme.  Denis  Brosnan ’s statement  at the time was that they could  never  again 
be solely  dependent  on milk to grow  their business.  They decided  at that stage 
to: “stop, think & plan”.
2. Where  we want to be in a given  period  of time:
We should  examine
• What we see as our mission:  where  do we see ourselves  in 5 years?
• Are there realistic  future market  opportunities?  If not, what are the 
alternatives?
86
• Have we clear financial  targets  (based  firstly  around  what we need to live 
and then creating  real surpluses)?
• There should  be a clear direction  but with flexibility  to respond  to bigger  
picture  factors.  The most pertinent  example  of this would  be whether  your  
plan for the next 10 years is operable  with or without  milk quotas.
• What  are our “soft goals ”? i.e. family,  where  we want  to live, what  we want  
for our children?
For some,  it may involve  accepting  that growth  within  farming,  for the present, 
is limiting.  Milking  50 cows now and blindly  targeting  200 cows in 5 years  
time might  not be a realistic  plan under  the current  scenario.  The exodus  of 
many  producers  will present  opportunities  for those  who  plan to become  serious  
players  in the business.
The Kerry  Group  has a clear  mission  statement  that revolves around  becoming  
a major  food ingredient  corporation,  they also have a clear  goal to grow  profits  
by 15% annually.  They  have detailed  records  of plans  made  over  the years. The  
actual results  consistently  beat their plan. This is largely  because  all of 
management  have agreed  on the plan and are focussed  on delivering  the results.
3. How to get there:
We must answer  the following  four questions  which  increase  profit  in any 
business:  Can we:
i. Increase  production?
ii. Increase  selling  price?
iii. Add value with higher  margin  products?
iv. Cut costs?
The real question  is whether  we have fully explored  all of these options.  
If the honest  answer  to all four is in the negative  than we are all in trouble!  
This is why it becomes  so vital for those  of us who want  to grow  to plan. Some  
of this planning  might  revolve  around:
• Isolating  what you, as a team, are really good at and increasing  the effort  
in that area. If your real skill is cows and grass, have you fully answered  
all four of the above  questions?  Are partnerships,  for example,  the route  to 
efficiency  and lowering  costs  that also free up more  time  to explore  alternative  
strategies?
• Being  prepared  to be flexible  and open to change.  We have to aggressively  
research  and pursue  any alternative  realistic strategies.  A clear  line will emerge 
between  the serious  commercial farm  businesses  and the “hobby ” farms where 
an alternative  source  of income  will be the mainstay.  We have to be crystal  
clear  which  camp  we plan to be in and then work  toward  the goal of getting  
there.
Capability
This is the second  key factor  in growing  a profitable  business.  It has been 
described  as: “the ability  to formulate  and implement  strategy ”. The higher  up 
the ladder  of management  in any business,  the more important  it becomes  to 
be able to think  strategically, to  plan  the growth  of the business.  The old argument  
is that the highest  reward  always  goes  to those  who  use their  minds.  Theoretically,
87
it will always  be possible  to hire in physical  labour.  So we need to constantly  
question  what we are doing  and is it really  contributing  to the growth  of our 
business?
We must all define  the direction  in which  we want our businesses  to grow 
and isolate  the deficiencies  in our own capabilities  that might  prevent  that growth, 
A dairy farmer  for example  might  be good in cow and grass skills but lack 
planning  and financial  skills.  If, after careful  consideration,  your survival  into 
the future  can come  from cows  and grass alone  then you must  chase  new ideas 
and the research  available  to do it better.  The profits  that you plan to generate  
will need to be invested  to further  grow the business.  Have you the skills  
necessary  to sensibly  invest  these profits  to get as high a return  as possible?
We all need to continually  up skill and educate  ourselves  particularly  in areas 
that allow  us to maximise  our resources.  We all need to consider  ourselves  as 
“mature  students ”. This may require  formal  tuition  in areas of relevance:  
attending  courses,  reading  or simply networking with positive, intelligent  friends 
and business  acquaintances.  Recently,  I was fortunate  to be part of a group  of 
20 who took part in a “business ” course.  What did we achieve?
1. We up-skilled  on how to evaluate  our present  businesses
2. We became  very focused  on the need to plan our business  growth,  to set 
goals
3. Received  a comprehensive  outline  of various  key types  of investment  from 
experts
4. Gained  massively  from mixing  with a group of positive  people  who all 
wanted  to succeed
5. Committed,  on an on-going  basis, to  meeting  regularly to learn  and exchange  
ideas.
I present  a case example  of a New Zealand  farmer  who had a plan to grow  
his business  around  dairy farming  provided  that he could achieve  a targeted  
percent  return  on his capital.  He bought  a steep 1000 acre hill sheep farm at 
one-twelfth  the market  price  for normal  land. He now milks  500 cows,  putting  
them on once a day milking  from mid-summer  onward.  Production  is below  
average.  The total focus is on keeping  the operation  as simple  as possible.  A 
manager  (who has a 20% financial  share in the venture)  plus one staff are 
employed.  No silage  is made and no AI used. In this case example:
• The bottom  line is that there is a clear plan for the business.
• There  is the capability  to think  outside  the square,  to implement  a plan and 
to involve  other people  to help the business  to grow.
• He has the clear financial  focus of always  aiming  to get a targeted  return  
on his capital.
Capital
Planning  and management  capability  are very much  linked.  Given  a clear, 
realistic  business  plan and the capability  to carry it out, then capital  should  
always  be available.  Sometimes  our expectations,  as farmers,  is that we have  
large  assets and therefore  the banks  should  give us loads  of money!  Unfortunately
88
the cash generated  on many farms is low in relation  to the value of capital  
employed.
One accountant  suggested  that we should  first examine:  “Profits  first then 
choices ”. Maybe  too many of us moan about  the obstacles  to growth  that we 
see without  ever seriously  looking  at fine tuning  our own business  first. The 
common  factor  in successful  businesses  is their strong  cash generating  ability.
A simple  formula  for maximising  financial  growth  is:
Surplus  cash + Leverage  X High rate of return X Compounding  
= Financial  growth
The key to using  capital  is to invest  in businesses  that can give a high rate 
of return over a long period  of time i.e. they are given the opportunity  to 
compound.  The power  of compounding  is probably  one of the simplest,  and 
yet least understood,  concepts  of growing  a business.  The following  example  
shows  the value of a single  £1000  invested  for either  a 30-year  or a 50-year  
time frame.
Sum invested
£1000
£1000Annual  compound  
interest
15%
15%Age at Age at Total
investing encashment  accumulated
20 70 £1.083m
40 70 £66,194
This illustrates  the power  of time where  compounding  is allowed  to work  
- too late for most of us to think of the 50 year investment.  To those  of us who 
wish to cater for the next generation  or even for our retirement,  we must ask 
if it is responsible  to dump  money  into a low return  business  We must focus  
on getting  a higher  return  for every  £ made or borrowed.  The average  return  
from farm businesses  is estimated  to be well under  5%. Isolating  areas either  
on farm, or off farm, that can be shown  to give a consistently  high return is 
the challenge.
The two golden  rules of investing  were quoted  to me:
1. Never  destroy  capital  and 2. never break  rule 1.
As farmers,  many of us have often broken  that rule. We have often made  
the choices  first and then hoped  tor the profits.
Summary
Long-term  success  can be measured  by sustained  profitability  growth  over 
a minimum  5-year  period.  In managing  our individual  farm  businesses  we must  
ask: Have we achieved  sustained  profitable  growth  over the past five years?  
Can we envisage,  under  the present  scenario,  a £30,000  farm profit  growing  
to £60,000  in five year ’s time?  This is 15% compounded  growth  per annum.  
This is the rate of sustained  profitable  growth  Kerry  and others  have achieved  
over the past 10 years.  It can only be achieved  if we take time to: “Stop,  Think  
and Plan”. If we do that then we are well  on the way to believing  that: Obstacles  
are what you see when you take your eyes off the goals ”.
89
Finally,  I think it is important  to remember  in all of this that a balance  in 
life is vital.  Too many  people  in my year ’s study  had driven  the growth  of their 
business  at the expense  of family.  We in Ireland  are perceived  as having  quality  
and balance  in our lives. The challenge  into the next century  is to ensure  that 
we can survive,  grow and maintain  that quality  of life.
90
Innovative  Practices  for Increasing  
Farm  Net Worth
J. ROSKAM
Ballymalone,  Tuamgraney,  Co. Clare
We milk  cows  to make  money.  This has been  our overall  goal since  we started  
leasing  my parents  23 hectare  farm in 1995.  We set three achievable  goals: 1. 
To reduce the variable  costs  of production,  2. To increase  the value  of our product  
and 3. To grow  our business.  The strength  of these  objectives  is the combination  
of them happening at the same  time.  This  combination  has created a large  surplus  
on our farm which  is the life blood  of what we do. The surplus  has rewarded  
us with two things:
• motivation  to continue  the effort  that raising  performance  demands  and also 
with
• development  options.
The main practices  that have taken place on our farm over the past four 
years are outlined  in the paper.  These  practices  are explained  across  the three  
areas on which  we focused  our farming  efforts.
Production  costs
Focusing  on the costs of production  was the natural  starting  point.  In 1995  
the cost of producing  a litre of milk was 14.3p. In 1998 we had reduced  it to 
8.6p per litre.  The first objective  was the easiest,  partly  because  our old system  
was a very high cost system.  The summary  points  of the old production  system  
on the farm are as follows:
• Cows fed one tonne of meal/head/year
• Huge emphasis  on silage:  two cut system.  Often cows were left tight on 
grazing  in order  to fulfil the silage  requirements  that this system  demanded
• Cows housed  for five months
• Large labour  requirement
Changing  the cost structure  brought  about  by these  high costs practices  was 
and remains  a very straight  forward  job. I joined  a discussion  group  to learn  
from sharing  experiences  with like minded  farmers  in the Tuamgraney/Scariff  
area. The group  was active  and a concentrated  effort  in the area of extending  
the number  of grazing  days allowed  me to learn and implement  new practices  
quickly  and to great  effect.  I found  this easy. Understanding  the principles  and 
science  of extended  grazing  is necessary  and at the end it came down to four 
practices  on which  I took action
• Improving  the grass varieties  in my pasture
• Spreading  nitrogen  throughout  the September-April  period  at cost effective  
rates
• Increasing  the number  of hectares  serviced  with roadways
• backfencing
As a result,  costs of production  were reduced  from 14.3p to 8.6p per litre
91
in 1998.  These  practices  allowed  us to reduce  the level of concentrate  and silage 
being fed to cows. In addition,  savings  automatically  followed  on contractor  
costs. I have found  a direct  relationship  between  the level of grazed  grass in 
the diet and profitability.  I believe  that I can bring  costs  of production  to around  
6p per litre (below  30p per gallon)  on my farm with better  budgeting  of grass  
on the total farm area. With  costs  and labour  time reduced  I have valuable  time 
to concentrate  on other subtle  but rewarding  parts of our daily business.
Milk  is the largest  part of our turnover.  In addition  to producing  milk  cheaply  
we also want to offer Golden  Vale a quality  product  for money.  To do this 
effectively  we concentrated  on lifting  protein  percentage  from 3.3% in ’94 to 
3.7% in ’98 and an increased  price from 22p to 27p per litre. I do not think  
that there is one magic  formula  but a combination  of different  factors  each one 
of which  is important  in its own right.
Identification
The cows  used for breeding  the replacement  heifers  must  be carefully  selected.  
Usually  there are large variations  in the protein  percentage  of cows within  the 
one herd. Milk recording  enables  me to identify  cows which  will be used for 
breeding.  This has  proved  to be an essential part of raising  our protein percentage. 
Half the cows are producing  over 3.8% protein.  To raise the lower  half of the 
herd to that level would  require  two to three generations  which would  be a 
waste  of time and money.  So, it is essential  to know  which  cows  to breed  from.
Breeding
After  selecting  the breeding  cows we then select  the bulls, usually  three or 
four. The following  factors  are taken into account:
• an increase  in protein  of at least 0.10%
• a fairly high reliability  of about 80%
• 300 to 500 kg increase  in milk yield; for instance,  to maintain  a yield of 
54,000  litres (1200  gallons)  you need a bull which  lifts milk yield  by about  
500 kg.
We match  a bull with a cow according  to her yield;  we do not look too much  
at linear  assessment  as we are not breeding  cows for shows.  I believe  that if 
a chosen  bull is not very low in one of the important  functional  traits then it 
is a good match.  There are some suggestions  that cows with a sloping  rump 
angle have less fertility  problems;  this is one aspect  we will consider  in the 
future.
Nutrition
To start with, a cow must be in good condition  at calving.  I like to feed a 
cow a sufficient  quantity  of high  quality  grass.  As well  as autumn  saved pasture,  
wilted  silage  and concentrates  are fed as necessary.  Concentrates  are only offered 
when necessary  and are relatively  inexpensive  at £132 per tonne.
Vigilance
After making  every effort to improve  the protein  percentage,  one very
92
important  matter  remains,  that is, to make  sure we are paid  for what  we produce.  
We take milk samples  regularly  and have  them  tested  independently.  By taking  
this approach,  we have  been  compensated  several  times  by our creamery. Golden  
Vale.
As shown  by the figures  stated  earlier,  a clear and uncomplicated  breeding  
policy  that we understand,  matched  with good  animal  husbandry,  has achieved  
satisfactory  results  over  the past few years.  Our milk value  has been increasing  
by over Ip per litre every year for the last four  years.  Although  lifting  the protein  
percentage  in milk is a slow process,  the money  spent on milk recording,  
breeding,  improving  pastures  and independent  milk testing  has been one of the 
best investments  on our farm.  In our case,  with a 236,000  litres  (52,000  gallons)  
quota,  the high price we get for our milk is worth  about  £12,000  a year over 
the average  milk price.
Growth
Using  good farm  management  practices  on a growing  herd size is necessary  
in order to make a decent  surplus.  Money  is targeted  at areas that will make  
impact  on our business  net worth.  Historically  these have been the most  
significant  areas on which  this surplus  will be spent.  Since  we started  leasing  
my parents ’ 23 hectare  farm in 1995 with 127,000  litres (28,000  gallons)  milk  
quota our progress  to date is as follows:
1995:  We bought  the 27 cows and replacement  heifers  and in the same  year 
we bought  a neighbouring  12 ha farm.
1997:  We bought  another  27 ha and sold the house  on the farm;  we planted  
14 ha with trees. As a result,  we are now farming  63 ha of which  40 ha are 
owned.  Because  we had a commercial  lease  on my parents ’ farm,  we could  buy 
milk quota  through  the restructuring  system.  In total, we bought  111,300  litres  
(24,500  gallons)  in the last four years.  We are now producing  238,700  litres  
of top quality  milk.  Our stock  numbers  have  increased  from  27 cows  to 55 cows  
this year. We also keep the bull calves  until they are one year of age.
Other  information
We are in our third  year  of the Rural  and Environmental  Protection  Scheme.  
Between  forestry  premia,  REPS  money,  higher  farm produce  sales and lower  
production  costs, we are now generating  quite an amount  of surplus  money  
which  with good investment  is very valuable.
Conclusion
Our experience  of farming  to date has been very rewarding.  Through  the 
practices outlined  in this paper  we have  produced  a substantial  amount  of surplus  
money  in a short period  of time. This has given us cash flow to develop  and 
grow.  As a result,  we are enthusiastic  about  continuing  to grow  and to increase  
our net worth.  I see ourselves  trying  to do this in new ways.  I cannot  say now 
what the exact nature  of these ways will be but we will always  be interested  
in buying  assets  that represent  value.  While  looking  for such opportunities  we 
will continue  to remain  with our present  belief  which  is that management  is 
making  surplus  money.  Investment  that increases  net worth  secures  the future.
93
Achieving  Growth  in an Unregulated  
Environment  - Principles  and Lessons  
for Any Environment
J, VAN DER POEL
Dain- Farmer,  Te Awamutii,  New Zealand
Introduction
Are there more opportunities  in an unregulated  environment?  Does 
every farmer in an unregulated  environment  enjoy growth?  If not. why 
not?
Sue and I started  our farming  career  in 1980 with $5,000.00  (£2,700),  16 
cows and a Ford Cortina.  Our first sharemilking  job was milking  120 cows  on 
40 ha. We also mamed  that same year and so had the added  expenses.  Our 
growth  from that beginning  to the present  time finds us involved  in ten dairy 
ventures:  these being the owners  of two famis,  part owners  of four  further  farms, 
involvement  in three  sharemilking  positions  and partnership  in a grazing  block!  
These ventures  encompass  1604 hectares  and 4500 cows in tolal producing  
1,600,000 kg MS  per year. Our personal  share  is 2260  cows  producing  850,000  
kg MS per year.
New Zealand  dairy farmers  receive  the lowest  price for their milk of any 
of the developed  countries  in the world.  We have a small population  and so 
95% of our products  is exported.  After  shipping  our product  12,000  miles we 
lind we are competing  with multi-national  companies  and trading  blocs such 
as the EU that use their economic  power  and subsidised  products  to compete  
with us on the world stage. We are shut out of exporting,  apart from small  
quotas,  into the richest  economies  in the world  such as the EU, USA  and Japan  
and therefore  forced  to trade in third world countries.
We have a government  which  is adamant  that it is going  to open up the New  
Zealand  Dairy board to direct  competition  from other exporters  from New 
Zealand.  We have become  the world ’s lowest  cost producers  from necessity. 
This is hardly  an ideal environment  to grow a business,  but for all that, it still 
has opportunities  to grow.  Out of adversity  comes  opportunity  - the key is that 
you need to be efficient  in the way you produce  milk. Being  average  is not 
good  enough. In fact  in the medium to long  term, world  trends and  ever  improving 
management  practices  will most  likely mean that your  business  will come  under  
immense  pressure  from  more  efficient  farmers  whether  they be in Ireland,  Europe 
or New Zealand.  The farming  practices  needed  to survive  and prosper  in the 
future  need to be identified  and implemented  today.
The way that you conduct  your business  is more important  than the 
environment  you farm in. The factors  which  you yourself  control  will have far 
greater  implications  for your  success  than waiting  for the government  to create  
a so called  ‘level playing  field ’. I will focus  on six factors  that are fundamental  
to being successful:
94
(1) Identify  your areas of influence
(2) Effort,  Focus & Analysis
(3) Goal  setting
(4) Create  margins/profit
(5) Integrity
(6) Think  laterally
Identify  your areas  of influence
Individually  we can’t influence  weather,  government  regulations,  what our 
neighbour  is up to, etc. Our areas of influence  are matters  that we can control,  
such as, how well we use our resources,  what  day to day management  decisions  
we make,  how much  we spend  to achieve  our production,  where  we focus our 
business.  For us, this approach  has helped  us to get where  we are today. If we 
had to spend  too much  time concerning  ourselves  about  low prices,  droughts,  
competition  for sharemilking  jobs etc, we wouldn ’t have been able to achieve  
the kind of growth  that we have. The interesting  thing that we have found  is 
that by focusing  on our area of influence,  we have been able to increase  our 
area of influence.  For Irish  farmers  your opportunities  will be different  because  
you live and farm  in a different  environment  but the same  principles  apply.  Perhaps  
in Ireland  your  main areas  of influence  include  your  farming  system,  the allocation  
of resources  between  the dairy and beef  enterprises,  your approach  to business  
management  and perhaps  traditions.
Effort  focus and analysis
If you look closely  at any successful  business,  farming  or otherwise,  
somewhere  in that operation  there  is someone  who is driving  it forward,  keeping  
it on track,  monitoring  progress.  Never  underestimate  the power  of management.  
As owner  or manager  of your  farm  you have a far greater  influence  on the outcome  
or profit  from your farm than most people  realise.  The decisions  that are made  
and the  effort  that is applied  to implement  those  decisions  will greatly  influence  
whether  or not they will succeed.
We can no longer  be directly  involved  in all the decisions  regarding  our 
operations.  However,  we talk to the managers  about  what  goals  are. Our managers/  
partners  are invited  to help set  these  goals  to help  identify  management  practices  
that will achieve  them.  We talk to them regularly  to monitor,  provide  support  
and make sure progress  is being made.
Also, when considering  your management  options,  don’t be afraid to try 
something  different,  something  that is not normal  practice  for yourself,  take 
some  risks.  If you are too afraid  to try something  new, and take some  risks,  how 
will you grow?  You might  make mistakes,  ‘but it is not the mistake  that will 
hurt you, it is what you do next’.
Good  farmers  make  just as many  mistakes  as anyone  else - sometimes  more  
because  they take more  risks.  But the difference  with the best guys is that often  
it is not obvious  to others  that a mistake  has been made  because  they are in tune 
with their  farm and recognise  and correct  the mistake  quickly.  Change  can make  
you feel uncomfortable  because  it often means  stepping  outside  from where  
you feel comfortable.
95
Goal setting
Goal setting  needs no explaining  but is very important.  What  is the use of 
running  hard if you are headed  in the wrong  direction?  Setting  goals  will also 
help you to keep on track. When  setting  goals think of where  you want to be 
in, say, five years,  both financially  and from a family  perspective.  Keep your 
goals balanced.  Once you have set your goals break them down into yearly 
measurements  to monitor  progress  and then review  them yearly.  Don ’t ever 
consider  them to be set in concrete  because  as your circumstances  change,  so 
will your measures  of success.
Create  margins/profit
Each of us will have a different  reason  for choosing  to be dairy farmers.  
It could  be because  we enjoy the lifestyle,  enjoy working  with stock,  running  
our own business.  Whatever  the reason  we chose farming,  it is a lot more  
enjoyable  if you make  a good net income  from your efforts  and it is your NET  
income  that matters.  Net income  is the amount  left over from your farming  
operation  for:
— personal  drawings
— debt servicing
— debt reductions
— savings
— extra investment
To make a high net income  requires  a will to maximise  the gap between  
gross income  and cost of production.  This is a financial  measure  and cannot  
be confused  with  physical  measures  such as number  of cows  milked,  production  
per cow, or indeed  the size of your quota.  Without  any checks  on the physical  
indicators  and what they are costing  to achieve,  they don’t necessarily  tell the 
full story or help you achieve  your goals. If we can achieve  high per cow 
production  over larger  numbers  of cows  and do so profitably  by keeping  a tight  
control  of our cost structure,  then we really create some opportunities  for 
ourselves.
If we are profit  focused  and achieve  good margins  and high net profits,  we 
open up opportunities  for our families  and ourselves.  With those profits  we 
could choose  to:
— improve  our lifestyle
— Support  our children  with better  levels of education
— Service  larger  debts for extra growth
— Pay off our mortgages  faster
— Invest  in other business  opportunities
Whatever  you do with those  profits  is up to the individual  and will depend  
on your circumstances  and goals.  The important  thing is that you have given  
yourself  some choices.  You have created  the ability  for you and your family  
to achieve  your goals.  On the other  hand, however,  if your farming  operation  
is not generating  profits,  your options  tend to be limited  and it is hard to feel 
good  about  farming  if you are working  hard and not getting  a reasonable  reward  
for your efforts.
96
The controlling  and management  of profits  requires  a high level  of awareness  
of the business  performance.  Financial  monitoring  systems  need not be elaborate  
or time-consuming.  The important  thing is that you are always  aware  of how 
the business  is performing.
Integrity
Some people  believe  that to get ahead you need to cheat or practice  one- 
upmanship  in business.  I truly  believe  that the opposite  is the case.  Good  business  
is where  both parties  benefit  from the transaction,  where  the people  who work  
for you provide  service,  value  your business  and look to continually  do repeat  
business  with you. We have found  that by identifying  people  we want to do 
business  with,  explaining  to them  what  standards  we expect,  giving  them  repeat  
business  if these standards  are met and paying  our accounts  on time, we have  
been able to negotiate  favourable  trading  terms  and get excellent  service.  Also  
we have  found  that by treating  people  fairly,  we get more  opportunities  to grow.  
In New Zealand  there are only 14,000  dairy farmers  in the country  so a bad 
reputation  as well as a good one follows  you.
Thinking  laterally
As a dairy farmer  the main product  that is produced  is milk. But your milk  
is not identifiable  from your neighbour ’s. As far as the consumer  is concerned,  
your  milk  is no different  than mine  or someone  farming  in the US  A or Australia.  
So it’s not as if we can all go out and produce  different  types  of milk  to differentiate  
from our neighbours.  If we wish to do better  in our farming  operations  than the 
average  farmer,  we can approach  that from two different  ways;
(1) We can do what the average  farmer  does, but better,  and more efficiently  
and in a larger  scale to give us some advantage.
(2) We can look at ways of farming  differently,  of finding  better  and more  
efficient  ways of growing  our business.
For us, this has meant  questioning  all aspects  of how things  have  traditionally  
been done. In practical  farming  sense we first became  efficient  in harvesting  
pasture  into milk and then started  adding  in other feeds to add value to our 
business,  not something  that is considered  normal  practice  in New Zealand.
From a growth  perspective,  traditionally  in New Zealand  one progresses  
through  the industry  by getting  a 50/50 sharemilking  position  where  the 
sharemilker  supplies  labour,  stock  and machinery  for 50% of the milk cheque.  
The young  sharemilker  normally  moves  from one sharemilking  position  to the 
next until they have enough  cows to sell a portion  and use the money  to put 
down  a deposit  on a farm. At this stage  they stop being  sharemilkers  and become  
farm owners.  We followed  this same pathway  for the first eight years of our 
career  but instead  of giving  up our sharemilking  position  and selling  our cows  
to purchase  our first farm, we kept our sharemilking  position.  We borrowed  the 
extra revenue  from both operations  to service  and repay the extra debt. From  
then on, we kept expanding  this concept  to where  we are today. It was just a 
matter  of farming  really  well  in the first place,  taking  the strengths  of the present  
system  and adapting  them to help to achieve  our goals.
97
The same  principles  apply  in ownership.  Historically  in New Zealand,  dairy 
farms  are operated  by family  units with a strong  sharemilking  system  helping  
farmers  reach  their goals and dreams  of farm ownership.  This system  was and 
still is coming  under  increasing  pressure  as farms need to increase  in size to 
stay economic.  High  land prices  mean  that it is becoming  increasingly  difficult 
to achieve  farm ownership  from sharemilking.
To counter  these obstacles  and to help us achieve  our own goals,  we have 
recently  become  more  involved  in equity  partnerships  where  a sharemilker  that 
is ready for land ownership  can afford  to purchase  a share in a large viable 
farming  business.  They  earn their share  of the net income  from that investment  
and also earn a salary as the employed  manager  of that farm.
For us and our partners  as shareholders  in these farms, we have people  
operating  these  farms  that are totally  committed  to their  success  and  who consider  
these farms  to be their own and treat them as such. We see this as a win/win  
arrangement  where  managers  have farm ownership  and we have committed  
managers.  If you are aiming  to grow  your farming  operation  don ’t ignore  what 
is tried and proven,  but at the same time don ’t be afraid  to think outside  the 
norm.
Conclusion
The principles  of success  can be translated  anywhere.  Where  you farm is 
not as important  as how you farm. A  banker  once  told me “A successful  farmer  
would  be successful  in any business  - it’s just that he chose  to be a farmer ”. 
I believe  that it is the principles  that make the business  successful.
Success  is a state of mind.  The way you  see a problem  IS the problem.  Some  
farmers  see a problem;  other farmers  see solutions.  The way you look at a 
problem  is far more  important  than the problem  itself.  So, being  successful  in 
an unregulated  environment  requires  the same mindset  and commitment  as in 
any environment.
98
Artificial  Insemination  of Sheep  - Current  
Status  and Possible  Developments
A. DONOVAN  and J. P. HANRAHAN  
Teagasc  Research  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway
Introduction
Artificial  insemination  (AI) is probably  the most  important  single  technique  
devised  to facilitate  the genetic  improvement  of animals.  The widespread  use 
of AI in cattle has allowed  for the rapid dissemination  of genetic  merit on a 
national  and international  basis to the benefit  of both breeder  and consumer.  
It also enables  the use of sophisticated  data analysis  procedures  to accurately  
identify  animals  of superior  performance.  Theoretically,  similar  benefits  with 
regard  to the rate of genetic  progress,  which  may be achieved  through  the use 
of AI, should  be available  to sheep  breeders.  Availability  of an efficient  sheep  
AI service  would  be of great  benefit  to pedigree  and commercial  breeders wishing  
to respond  positively  and effectively  to consumer  demands.  The widespread  
use of AI and the realisation  of its full potential  depend  essentially  on the use 
of frozen  semen,  and thus on the availability  of techniques  that result in 
acceptable  fertility.  However,  the very low level  of fertility  obtained  when  frozen- 
thawed  semen  is used for cervical  insemination  has stemmed  widespread  interest/  
uptake  of AI in sheep.  The alternative, laparoscopic  AI, while  an effective  method  
of insemination  with frozen-thawed  semen,  is costly,  thereby  limiting  its use 
to pedigree  breeders. It is therefore  desirable and necessary  to develop  procedures  
that may form the basis of making  AI a practical  reality  for sheep farmers.
Advantages  of AI
1. Breeding  efficiency
The use of AI, based  on frozen-thawed  semen,  can greatly  increase  the number  
of offspring  produced  per sire per year  because  a ram has the potential  to produce  
enough  spermatozoa  to inseminate  thousands  of ewes.  Thus, genetically superior  
rams  could be made  accessible to all sectors  of the sheep  industry,  thereby  rapidly  
improving  the quality  of output  from the sector.
2. Increased  rate of genetic  improvement
In Ireland,  genetic  improvement  is hampered  by the small size of pedigree  
flocks,  which  reduces  the intensity  of selection  and leads  to lack of consistency  
in breeding  goals.  Furthermore,  available  breeding  value estimates  are generally  
only valid  for within-flock  selection.  These  constraints  severely  impair  the rate 
of genetic  improvement  being achieved  nationally  (Hanrahan,  1997). Sire 
Reference  Schemes  are currently  being  adopted  by some breeds  to overcome  
these disadvantages  (Simm  and Lewis,  1997).  This also increases  the precision  
of breeding  value  estimates  through  the application  of BLUP  procedures.  Sire 
Reference  Schemes  are based on the use of a small set of rams to produce  
progeny  in all flocks  as a basis for providing  genetic  links among  the flocks.
99
While  these linkages  can be produced  by transfer  of ewes to a single  location  
for mating  and/or  rotating  rams among  flocks  during  the mating  period,  these 
options  are stressful  for the animals  and this may affect  fertility.  There  are also 
disease  risks attendant  upon such intermixing  of animals  from different  flocks. 
AI based on frozen  semen  would  eliminate  these problems  and allow the 
widespread  dissemination  of valuable  genetic  material  even to small flocks, 
thereby  leading  to effective  genetic  improvement  of the national  sheep  flock.
3. Eas\ transport  of genetic  material
AI can facilitate  the introduction  of new genetic  material  through international  
exchange  of semen.  It also allows  large numbers  of ewes to be inseminated  
by specific  individual  rams  over  a wide geographical  area in a short  time period.  
This enables  across-flock  genetic  evaluation  and high selection  intensity.
4. Lone term storage  of semen
Successful  storage  of semen  allows  for the more widespread  use of individual 
sires and the preservation  of genetic  material  for future use. It also allows  
preservation  of genetic  material  from rare breeds.  Semen  from rams can be 
frozen-stored,  without  loss of fertility,  for at least 16 years  (Salamon  etal,  1985)  
but probably  longer.
Disadvantages  of AI
/. Reduced  fertility
Fertility,  encompassing  both pregnancy  and litter size, is adversely  affected  
by AI especially  AI using  frozen-thawed  semen.  Despite  intensive  laboratory  
studies,  the procedure  of freezing  and thawing  ram semen  inevitably  reduces  
the viability  of spermatozoa.  The major  obstacle  to fertility  in ewes cervically  
inseminated  with frozen-thawed  semen  is the establishment  of a large enough  
population  of viable  spermatozoa  in the cervix  and impaired  transport  from the 
cervix  to the site of fertilisation.
2. Potential  for inaccurate  breedine
Accidental  errors  in insemination  can occur  if semen  from individual  sires 
is not carefully  or properly  labelled,  particularly  if semen  from several  sires 
is being used concurrently.  Secondly,  if breeding  values  of sires have been  
overestimated  or determined  incorrectly  then genetic  loss rather  than gain could  
ensue.  Additionally,  use of sires with undetected  genetic  defects  could result  
in the rapid spread  of that defect.
3. Cost
As with any technololgy,  production  costs are incurred  when AI is used. 
Costs include  collection  and assessment  of semen,  processing,  freezing  and 
storage  of semen,  delivery  of AI, labour,  management  and drugs for 
synchronisation.
Semen  collection  and prepararion
Ultimately,  the genetic  impact  of a superior  ram is limited  by the number  
of sperm  produced,  which  is a direct  function  of testicular  size. Therefore  selected
100
rams need to be placed  on a high plane of nutrition  and maintained  in good  
conditions  - otherwise  semen  production  may be seriously  impaired  especially  
under the intensive  collection  regime  required  for AI programmes.
Semen  may be  collected  by artificial  vagina  (AV)  or by electrical  stimulation.  
The AV method  is preferable  because  it does not stress  the animal,  it is quick  
and simple  and results  in the collection  of better  quality  semen.  After  collection  
the quality  of semen  is assessed  for volume,  motility,  concentration  and 
morphology  on an individual  ejaculate  basis.  Accepted  ejaculates  can then be 
inseminated  raw (undiluted)  as soon as possible  after collection  or stored  in 
protective  media  on a short term basis. This is known  as ‘chilled ’ or ‘liquid  
stored ’ semen  where  spermatozoa  are held at 5°C and inseminated  within  24 
hours.  Semen  can also be frozen  for long term storage.  Frozen  semen  may be 
stored  in PVC straws (0.5 ml and 0.25 ml),  minitub  straws (0.25  ml) or as pellets.  
Pellet  freezing  of ram semen  has produced  better  conception  rates compared  
with PVC  straws,  but not significantly  better  than minitub  straws.  These  provide  
a useful  alternative  to pellets allowing for  individual  dose  identification (required  
for export),  easier  storage  and are less time consuming  at insemination.
In the case of semen  frozen  at Athenry,  a random  sample  of straws  from  each  
ejaculate  is thawed  and assessed.  Semen  containing  less than 50%  spermatozoa  
with progressive  motility  is discarded.  This is considered  a crucial  step in the 
quality  control  process.  Based  on results  of our studies  to date we would  expect  
to obtain  about 500 useable  straws  per ram over a 4-week  collection  period.
Insemination  techniques
Insemination  of sheep  may be vaginal,  cervical,  transcervical  or intrauterine.  
The various  methods  differ in their complexity,  cost and effectiveness.
Vaginal:  This is the simplest  form of insemination  and involves  depositing  
fresh semen  in the anterior  vagina  without  any attempt  to locate  the cervix.  
Reported  success  rates are highly  variable  and this method  is unsuitable  for use 
with frozen  semen  at present.
Cervical:  The  cervix  is located, via a speculum  with  a light  source, and semen  
is deposited  into the first fold of the cervix.  This is a cheap  and relatively  easy 
method  of insemination . Conception  rates  with  fresh  or ‘chilled ’ semen are good  
(65 to 75%)  but unacceptably  low (10 to 30%)  if frozen-thawed  semen  is used.  
An exception  is in Norway  where  mean  conception  rates of 60% are reported.
Transcervical:  This method  involves  grasping  the cervix  and retracting  it 
into the vagina  with a pair of forceps  to allow an inseminating  instrument  to 
be introduced  into the cervical  canal.  Acceptable  conception  rates (57%)  have  
been reported  by Halbert  et al (1990)  but not by others  who have tried this 
method.  This  procedure  involved  a high  degree  of manipulation  and any resultant  
injury  could  compromise  the ewe ’s ability  to conceive  naturally.  As yet,  no data 
are available  on the efficacy  of repeatedly  using this technique.
Intrauterine:  This utilises  a rapid laparoscopic  location  of the uterus  and 
direct  injection  of semen  into  the uterine  horns  using  a fine  pipette.  This method  
circumvents  the cervical  barrier  and radically  improves  fertilisation  rates when  
using frozen-thawed  semen;  conception  rates ranging  from 50 to 80% have
101
been reported.  This method  also has the advantage  of only requiring  a small 
number  of spermatozoa,  thereby  allowing  a more  widespread  dissemination  of 
valuable  genotypes.  However  laparoscopy  has several  disadvantages.  It is an 
invasive  procedure,  requires  veterinary  expertise  and is expensive  in terms  of 
equipment  and labour.  It is also possible  that laparoscopic  and transcervical  Al 
may become  unacceptable  in the future  based on welfare  grounds.
AI Research  in Teagasc
As an industry,  sheep producers  need an AI technique  which is widely  
available,  cheap  and effective  in terms  of pregnancy  rate. It also needs  to take 
account  of welfare  issues.  The aim of AI work  carried  out in Teagasc, Athenry  
is to develop  an effective,  nonsurgical  cervical  procedure  for frozen  semen from 
individual  rams.
In Norway,  good  conception  rates (approximately  60%)  have been reported  
with cervical  inseminations  using  frozen-thawed  semen.  The obvious  objective  
was to determine  if similar  success  could  be achieved  in Ireland  by the adoption  
of Norwegian  AI freezing  and insemination  procedures.  However,  breeds  used 
in Norway  are quite  different  from  those  found in this country  and insemination  
is to a natural  oestrus.  In Ireland  this would  be impractical  and any serious  
thought  of applying  AI here would  require  set time  Al to a synchronised  oestrus. 
It was necessary  to determine  if the good  conception  rates achieved  in Norway  
are due to inherent  Norwegian  factors/practices.  Therefore,  issues such as 
freezability  of semen  from Irish and Norwegian  rams and the effect of 
synchronisation  and inseminator  on pregnancy  rate were addressed  during  the 
breeding  season  in 1997. Ewes (various  breed types;  n=297)  were cervically  
inseminated  (according  to Norwegian  methods)  with either  fresh or frozen-  
thawed  semen  to a natural  or synchronised  oestrus.  Two people  (Norwegian  
and Irish) carried  out all inseminations.
The results,  presented  in Tables  1 and 2, showed  that ewes  inseminated  with 
fresh semen  had significantly  higher  pregnancy  rates compared  with frozen-  
thawed  semen.  This is consistent  with the findings  of others.
No significant  differences  were  found  in pregnancy rates  or litter  size between 
Irish frozen-thawed  and Norwegian  frozen-thawed  semen  or between  ewes  
inseminated  to a natural  or synchronised  oestrus.  Therefore,  the good  conception  
rates achieved  in Norway  were not due to specific  qualities  of semen  from 
Norwegian  breeds  (semen  from both Norwegian  and Irish rams were frozen  
according  to the same  protocol),  nor were they due to ewes being  inseminated
Table 1
Pregnancy  rates for ewes inseminated  with fresh and frozen-thawed  semen
Semen  type
nNatural  oestrus 
Preg. rate (%)Synchronised  oestrus  
n Preg. rate (%)Overall  
Preg. rate (%)
Fresh 28 82 30 70 76
Frozen  - Irish 62 40 50 52 46
- Norwegian 68 34 59 37 36
102
Table 2
Effect  of synchronisation  on litter  size adjusted  for ovulation  rate
Semen  type
nNatural  oestrus  
Preg. rate (%)Synchronised  oestrus  
n Litter size
Fresh 23 2.7±0.23 21 3.2+0.23
Frozen - Irish 25 1.9+0.23 26 L4±0.23
- Norwegian 23 2.0±0.24 22 1.9+0.24
at a natural  oestrus.
A notable  finding  (Table  3) was the significant  effect of ewe breed on 
conception  rate and such  breed  effects  may be  the reason for  the good  conception  
rates achieved  in Norway.  We had hoped  to inseminate  Norwegian  ewe breeds  
with Irish frozen-thawed  semen  but Norwegian  legislation  on disease  control  
did not permit  this.
Litter  size was lower  in ewes inseminated  with frozen-thawed  semen  and 
this adverse  effect  was greater  in synchronised  ewes  (Table  2). This may reflect
Table 3
Effect  of ewe breed  on pregnancy  rate
Breed n Pregnancy  rate (%)
Finnish  Landrace 60 57
S, Blackface  cross 104 54
Lowland  crosses 133 38
reduced  fertilisation  and/or  embryo  surgical  rates due to damage  caused  by the 
frozen-thaw  process  on the structure  and function  of spermatozoa.  In addition,  
the inseminator  was influential  in pregnancy  outcome.
A second  trial (in 1998)  set out to specifically  determine  if the ewe breed  
differences  seen in 1997 were also evident  among  purebred  ewes of terminal  
sire breeds,  these being a target group for Sire Referencing  Schemes.
A selection  of purebred  and crossbred  ewes  were  inseminated  cervically  with  
fresh or frozen-thawed  Norwegian  or Irish semen.  Results  presented  in Table  
4 confirm  the existence  of highly  significant  differences  among  ewe breeds.  
Pregnancy  rate ranged  from 18% to 77% (the latter  being  equivalent  to overall  
pregnancy  rates with fresh semen).
The pregnancy  rates achieved  with Belclare,  Scottish  Blackface  cross and 
especially  Finnish  Landrace  breeds  across  two years  show  that cervical  AI using  
frozen-thawed  semen  can provide  a pregnancy  rate acceptable  for use in breed  
improvement  programmes  (around  50%).  However  fertility  rates  with terminal  
sire breeds  were poor. The reasons  for the very large breed differences  in 
pregnancy  rate remain  unknown  - it may simply  be a function  of the timing  
of AI relative  to ovulation  or to such factors  as ovulation  rate, anatomy  of the
103
Table 4
Pregnancy  rate for ewes inseminated  with frozen-thawed  semen
Breed
nFrozen  semen
Pregnancy  rate (%)
Finnish  Landrace 35 77
Suffolk 77 18
Texel 101 30
Belclare 25 44
S. Blackface  cross 40 43
Suffolk  cross 56 19
cervix  or more subtle  differences  in uterine  environment.
Future  developments
Commercial  implementation  of an AI programme  requires  a procedure  that 
yields  consistent  and acceptable  pregnancy  rates.  It also must  be cost effective  
and welfare  friendly  (i.e. via the cervix).  Attainment  of this objective  requires  
overcoming  problems  involving  both the ewe and the ram. The precise  basis 
for ewe breed  differences  need to be determined  but in addition  further  effort  
on devising  freezing  protocols  that are less injurious  to spermatozoa  is required  
to minimise  the impact  of any specific  ewe breed effects.
At ewe level,  are the causes  of differences  in pregnancy  rates  between  breeds  
of ewes physical  or physiological?  The cervix  of the ewe is approximately  7 
cm in length  and contains  about  5 funnel  shaped  rings.  These  rings have small 
openings,  are not concentrically  aligned  and do not dilate  during  oestrus.  The 
anatomy  of the ovine  cervix  therefore  precludes  the deposition  of spermatozoa  
into the uterus  via the cervix.  It is possible  that the anatomy  of the cervix  differs 
between  breeds.  If the cervix could be dilated  this would  overcome  any 
differences  that may exist between  breeds.  Attempts  have been made in this 
area by the use of pharmacological  hormones,  such as oxytocin.  This however  
had detrimental  effects on fertility.  Pharmacological  products, which  successfully 
dilate  the cervix  without  interfering  with sperm  transport,  may become  available. 
Similarly,  the development  of an instrument  that would  allow deposition  of 
semen  deep within  the cervix  or uterus  could  prove  very beneficial  for cervical  
insemination  with frozen-thawed  semen.  Physiological  issues  may simply  be 
a reflection  of differences  in the timing  of ovulation  between  breeds.  Studies  
designed  to assess  the timing  of ovulation  in relation  to sponge  removal  for 
different  breeds  need  to be done to identify  the optimum  time for insemination  
on a breed  basis. Other  more subtle  parameters  such as uterine  environment  
may require  investigation.
The freezing  and thawing  of semen  causes  ultrastructural,  biochemical  and 
functional  damage  to a significant  proportion  of spermatozoa.  These  changes  
are accompanied  by decreased  viability  and fertilising  capacity.  There  is therefore 
potential  for improvement  in the techniques  of cryopreservation  of ram semen,
104
particularly  at finding  new cryoprotective  dilutents  that would  give sufficient  
protection  to ensure  successful  passage  through  the entire  female  reproductive  
tract. Development  of better  diluents  for chilling  without  resorting  to freezing  
may be another  route worth  investigating.  If semen  could be maintained  for 
a couple  of days,  without  losing  fertilising  capacity,  it could  solve  geographical  
problems  of distribution.  The downside  is a reduction  in the number  of ewes  
that can be inseminated  by an individual  ram in any one year.
One of the problems  in the cryopreservation  of ram semen  is being  able to 
evaluate  the success  of the freeze-thaw  methods  employed.  Unfortunately,  
spermatozoa,  which  are highly  motile  post thawing,  can give poor conception  
rates and vice versa.  To date, in vitro assessment  of the viability  and structural  
membrane  integrity  of ram spermatozoa  post thaw  does not correlate  well with 
actual  fertility.  The development  of a test that would  indicate  actual  fertilising  
capacity  of spermatozoa  post thaw  would  provide  an important  tool in choosing  
rams in an insemination  programme.  Work  for this AI project  included  studies  
on the development  of an IVF procedure  to assess the fertilisation  rate and 
development  competence  of ovine  oocytes  using  semen  from individual  rams.  
Results  showed  that this IVF procedure  was a useful test for predicting  the 
relative  in vivo fertility  of frozen-thawed  ram semen after laparoscopic  
insemination  (G. Byrne  et al, 1999).  This is an exciting  development  which  
may prove  useful  in the assessment  of semen  from  the commercially  important  
breeds.  Development  of such in vitro tests,  while  requiring  substantial  research  
funding  and commitment,  deserves  attention.  It is reasonable  to assume  that, 
given  the resources,  procedures  and instrumentation  could  be developed  for the 
successful  implementation  of cervical  AI using frozen  semen.
Benefits  to the producer
Genetic  improvement  is an effective  strategy  for altering  the performance  
of farm  animals.  While it may be considered  slow  in comparison to other  methods  
such as improved feeding, it is permanent,  cumulative  and generally sustainable.  
The benefits  of AI, if used in conjunction  with accurate  Sire Referencing  
Schemes,  can pay off in terms of improved  growth  rate and carcass  traits.
The benefits  expected  to accrue  to the commercial  producer  will depend  on 
many  factors  but a reasonable  estimate  of the initial  worth  of access  to genetic  
superior  rams through  AI is an increase  of 2 to 3 kg in average  weaning  weight  
for the flock and heavier  carcasses  at a given level of fatness.  It is estimated  
that the economic  benefit  of this would  be around  £200 to £250 per 100-ewe 
flock  per annum.  It is also to be noted  that the genetic merit  of rams  will increase  
over  time  as effective genetic improvement  systems are implemented  in pedigree  
flocks.
If cervical  AI using frozen-thawed  semen  becomes  a commercial  reality,  it 
should  be remembered  that in itself  it is not a magic wand.  It should  be considered  
as a tool to be used in conjunction  with clear breeding  goals and effective  
management  strategies  if the full benefits  are to be realised.
105
References
Byme,  G. P. et al. (1999).  Use of IVF procedures  for assessing  the fertility  of frozen-  
thawed  ram semen.  Proceedings  of 25th  Agric.  Res. Forum,  U.C.D., Belfield,  Dublin,  
pp. 3-4.
Halbert,  G. W. et al. (1990).  Field evaluation  of a technique  for transcervical  intra­
uterine  insemination  of ewes. Theriogenology  33: 1231-1234.
Hanrahan,  J. P. (1997).  Exploiting  genetic  resources  to enhance  the competitiveness  of 
lowland  sheep  systems. Proceedings  of Irish Grassland  Association  Sheep  Conference,  
Carlow,  pp. 22-23.
Salamon  eta/. (1985).  Fertility  of ram semen  frozen  for 16 years.  Proc. 19th Ann. Conf  
Aust. Soc. Reprod.  Biol. p. 62.
Simm,  G. and Lewis,  R. M. (1997).  Sire Referencing  Schemes;  A fast lane in Sheep  
Breeding?  Proceedings  of Irish Grassland  Association  Sheep  Conference,  Carlow.
pp. 8-20.
106
Genetic  Evaluation  of Sheep  Breeds  for 
Meat Traits'
D. L. KELLEHER
Department  of Animal  Science  and Production,
University ’ College  Dublin
Introduction
Various  studies  (e.g., Kempster  et al., 1986)  have shown  that lamb carcases  
can consist  of 20% to 26% fat in excess  of that desired  by consumers.  This is a 
highly  unsatisfactory  situation,  not only because  it takes  extra  feed energy  and 
therefore  costs money  to put on this fat but also because  the consumers  dislike  
fat. They are concerned  about putting  on excess  weight  and they are also 
concerned  about  the adverse  effects  that fat is likely  to have on their  cholesterol  
levels  and the consequential likelihood  of heart  problems.  In addition,  consumers  
regard  meat  with excessive  fat as poor value  for money.
For these and other  reasons,  sheep  meat  consumption  in Europe  has remained  
low relative  to other  meats,  decreasing  from 8% to 5% (in the EC-12) of all 
meat between  1961 and 1991 (Bansback,  1993).
Commercial  sheep  breeding
If the Irish  sheep  meat  industry  is to develop,  it must  focus  on producing  and 
supplying  leaner  meat  and presenting  it as attractively as possible at a competitive  
price. Fortunately,  in sheep meat production,  meat quality  and efficiency  of 
production  can be favourably  correlated.  Quality  and efficiency  are both 
increased  by increasing  lean tissue growth  rate and by avoiding  waste by 
producing  the minimum  of fat. One of the difficulties  that both breeders  and 
commercial  sheep  farmers  often face is the lack of clear  information  regarding  
the economic  benefit  of producing  leaner  meat.  Abattoirs  too often do not pay 
adequately  for higher  lean percentage  or penalise  excess  fat sufficiently.  Reliable  
market  information  must be available,  starting  from the consumer  and relayed  
faithfully  right  back to the pedigree  breeder,  otherwise  all sectors  of the sheep  
meat industry  will not operate  efficiently  in a co-ordinated  manner.
The first step in improving  the genetic  merit  of sheep  at commercial  level is 
to identify  the breeds and crosses  that are most  suitable  to a particular  production  
system.  Genetic  improvement  at commercial  level invariably  involves  
crossbreeding.  This takes  advantage  of hybrid  vigour  in lambing  rate and lamb  
survival  and combines  the good  features  of different  breeds.  After  that, further  
genetic  improvement  is usually  brought  about  by the improvement  of the pure 
breeds  that are components  in the cross by within-  breed  selection.  Sustained  
improvement  of pure breeds  over time,  combined  with crossbreeding,  is a very  
effective way of achieving  continued  genetic improvement  at commercial  level.
There  are about  4.5 million  commercial  ewes  in the country.  The structure  of 
sheep  breeding  can be described  as a pyramid  with  the flocks that are participating  
in the Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep Breed Improvement
1. The author  wishes  to acknowledge  funding  under  the Operational  Programme  for Agriculture,  
Rural  Development  and Forestry  1994-99,  Stimulus  Fund  T/G(55)  - Ram Genetic  Indexing
107
Programme  at the top, other pedigree  flocks  as a second  tier and finally  the 
commercial  flocks  as the main part of the pyramid.
Pedigree  sheep  breeding
The pedigree  sector  of the industry  is that sector  which,  over a long number  
of years,  has developed  breeds  of sheep  that are regarded  as being  genetically  
superior  in economically  important  traits  of value to commercial  sheep  farmers.  
In fact, the commercial  sheep farmer  and the pedigree  sheep breeder  are 
complementary  and mutually  dependent  on one  another.  It is important,  therefore, 
that they should  be properly  co-ordinated.
Like the commercial  sheep  farmer  who supplies  a quality  product  (high  lean, 
low fat carcasses)  to the factories,  the pedigree  breeder  also supplies  a quality  
product  (genes  of high genetic  merit for increased  lean meat production  and 
low fat production)  to the commercial  sheep  farmer,  delivered  in the form of 
semen  and rams.  That product  must be capable  of producing  sustained  genetic  
improvement  in the quality  of the commercial  lambs,  so that when given the 
appropriate  environment  (proper  feeding  and management),  they will be well 
capable  of meeting  the needs  of the consumers  in the higher  priced  markets  in 
the EU or elsewhere.
The pedigree  breeders  should  be highly sensitive  to the needs of the 
commercial  sheep producers  and the problems  that they face in satisfying  
consumer  demand.  If one is to take this idea seriously,  the breeding  goal at 
pedigree  level must be defined  with the needs and requirements  of the 
commercial  sheep  farmer  in mind.  This is greatly  encouraged  by the commercial  
farmers  being proactive  in demanding  high genetic  merit (for increased  lean 
meat production  and low fat production)  from the pedigree  breeder.
Genetic  improvement  in pedigree  flocks
Genetic  improvement  of a pure breed  can be achieved  by following  a fairly 
simple,  clearly  defined  strategy.
• Firstly,  one must define  the breeding  goal or breeding  objective  clearly  and 
ideally,  all members  of the breed society  should  agree with this breeding  
objective.  The breeding  objective  spells  out the animal  traits for which  the 
breed  is to be improved.  It should  also spell out the relative  importance  of 
each of these  traits.  For example,  a meat  type breed  might  wish to improve  
lean tissue growth  rate with a minimum  increase  in fat deposition.  It is 
advisable  that the traits in the breeding  goal should  be confined  to those  
traits that are of proven  economic  importance.  If a trait is included  that has 
not been proven  to be of economic  importance  (e.g., width of the head),  
selection  for other  genuinely  important  traits may be compromised.  Useful  
criteria  for deciding  what traits to include  in the breeding  objective  include  
the requirements  that
- they are of economic  importance  in increasing  the quality  of the product  
or in reducing  costs of production  and that
- they should  show  a reasonable  amount  of genetic  variation.
If a breed  does not have a  clearly  defined  breeding  goal, or if all the members
108
of the breed  society  do not agree with the breeding  goal, it will find it difficult  
to make  progress  in any direction.
• Secondly,  one must  measure  performance  traits  that are in the breeding  goal, 
or are closely  related  genetically  to the traits  in the breeding  goal.  For example,  
if the genetic  improvement  of lean tissue  growth  rate is a part of the breeding  
goal, since  this trait cannot  be measured  directly  in the live animal,  one can 
use rate of gain in live-weight  (LWT),  ultra-sonic  muscle  depth  (UMD)  and 
ultra-sonic  fat depth (UFD)  to predict  breeding  value in rate of lean tissue  
growth  rate.
• Thirdly,  by using  up-to-date  statistical  methods  to process  the performance  
records  (data  on traits that have been measured)  in order  to make  maximum  
use of the available  information.  The method  currently  most widely  used is 
called  Best Linear  Unbiased  Prediction  (BLUP).  This method  provides  us 
with  estimated  breeding  values  (EBVs)  for all animals  in the measured  traits.  
These  estimated  breeding  values  are usually  combined  into a single  figure  
for each animal called  a “selection  index ”. This makes  the ranking  of animals  
for selection  considerably  easier.
• Fourthly,  by supporting  developmental  research  into new methods  of 
improving  the efficiency of the genetic  evaluation  and selection. For example,  
there  may be better  methods  of measuring  traits  that are more  closely  related  
to those  in the breeding  goal than those  currently  being  used,  (e.g., computer  
assisted  tomography  (CT)) or there may be better  methods  of rearing  the 
pedigree  lambs  in order  to minimize the nongenetic  or environmental variation 
between  them.
Level of participation  of pedigree  breeders  in the Irish Department  of 
Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep  Breed  Improvement  Programme
In 1998,  eight  breeds of sheep (Suffolk,  Texel,  Charollais,  Vendeen,  Belclare,  
Beltex,  He de France  and Berrichon)  participated  in the Department  of 
Agriculture ’s Breed  Improvement  Programme.  The numbers  of ewes  and flocks  
in the three  main breeds  are given  in Table 1.
It is important  to note that only a quarter  of the total number  of pedigree  
flocks  in these  eight breeds  in Ireland  actually  participated  in the Programme.  
The participation  level was higher  in some  breeds  (Texel  49%)  than in others,  
(Suffolk  15% and Charollais  16%).
Only two (Texel  and Charollais)  of the eight breeds  participated  in a Sire 
Referencing  Scheme  and even in the Texel  breed,  the proportion  of flocks  that 
participated  was very low (21%).  Participation  of the Charollais  in the Scheme  
was 60%.  Considering  that the total population  of commercial  ewes  in the country  
is about  4.5 million  and considering  that the number  of ewes  in recorded  flocks  
is about  5,300, it is apparent  that the usage  of rams  coming  directly from  recorded  
flocks per year  to the commercial  flocks  is only  a fraction  of what  is reasonably  
possible.  Five thousand  ewes  could  be expected  to supply  3,000  rams per year 
to the commercial  flocks.  At 40 ewes  per ram per year and each ram remaining  
in the flock for 4 years,  one would  expect  that the flocks  participating  in the 
recording  programme  could  supply  enough  rams to serve  about  500,000  ewes
109
Table 1
No. ewes and flocks  from the breeds  participating  in the Department  
of Agriculture ’s Flock  Recording  Programme  in 1998
No. ewes No. flocks
Total
nationallyIn
recorded
flocksIn sire 
referencingTotal
nationallyIn
recorded
flocksIn sire 
referencing
Suffolk 13,000 2,100 none 430 65 none
Texel 3,700 2.025 665 153 75 16
Charollais 3,740 821 648 184 30 18
Vendeen 1,697 195 none 41 8 none
Others' 866 177 none 38 7 none
Total 23,003 5,318 1,313 846 185 34
'Other  breeds  participating  in the Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep  Breed  Improvement  
Programme,  viz., Belclare,  Beltex,  He de France,  Berrichon.
per year which  is only a fraction  of the potential  number  of ewes  mated  to meet 
breed  sires each year. It is possible  that many  commercial  lamb  producers  also 
use rams that are one or two generations  removed  from recorded  flocks.  This 
seriously  slows  down  the transfer  of genetic  merit  from the recorded  flocks  to 
the commercial  flocks  and limits the cost effectiveness  of the recording  and 
selection  programme  in the recorded  flocks.
What  is BLUP?
BLUP  stands  for Best  Linear  Unbiased  Prediction.  This  is a specially  designed  
statistical  procedure  for analysing  performance  data on animals  in order to 
estimate  breeding  values  (EBVs)  for recorded  traits.  Although  the basic  concept  
had been in use since the 1930s (Lush, 1945),  the procedure  was developed  
further  by C. R.Henderson  to facilitate  simultaneous  adjustment  of the 
performance  records  for non-genetic  effects (such  as flock  effects)  and to handle 
multiple  traits.  BLUP  is now regarded  as the best statistical  procedure  available  
for genetic  evaluation  and is used  in all species  of farm livestock  in the developed  
world.  All those involved  in the genetic  evaluation  and improvement  of sheep 
in Ireland  are assured  that the version  of BLUP  that has been  used since 1998 in 
the Irish Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep Breed Improvement  
Programme  is the most  up-to-date  version that is currently  available,  viz.. Multi ­
trait Individual  Animal  Model  BLUP.  It has the following  features.
• It can estimate  the effects  of non-genetic  factors  such as sex, type of birth 
and rearing,  age of the dam, age of the lamb  at scanning,  maternal  effect  of 
the ewe, and flock  effect  from  the data being  analysed  rather  than depending  
on pre-adjustment  using  estimates  from other  data-sets.
• It can include  performance  information  from  all known  relatives  of the animal 
being  evaluated  (on the maternal  side as well as on the paternal  side) in its 
calculations.
110
It can adjust  for the  genetic  quality  of the ewes  when  evaluating  a sire on the 
basis of its progeny ’s performances.
It can include  performance  information  from all measured  genetically  
correlated  traits.
It can take account  of the degree  to which  the trait is inherited  (heritability)  
in deriving  the estimated  breeding  values.
It can take account  of the maternal  environment  provided  by the ewe as a 
nongenetic  effect  on her progeny.
What  is estimated  breeding  value  (EBV)?
The estimated  breeding  value  (EBV)  of an animal  that is provided  by BLUP  
is the best estimate  of the additive  genetic  merit  of the animal,  i.e., the sum of 
all the animal ’s genes.  However,  to someone  who is buying  a ram for breeding  
purposes, what  it transmits  to its progeny is of greater  relevance  than its estimated  
breeding  value  (EBV).  Because  an animal  transmits  only half  of its genes  to its 
progeny,  its predicted  transmitting  ability  (PTA)  is only half  of its EBV.  It is not 
always  clear  whether  the quoted  breeding  value  is an EBV  or PTA  and this can 
give rise to confusion  regarding  the predicted  performance  of the progeny.
When  the estimated  breeding  values  (EBV)  are quoted  for a number  of rams,  
any two rams  can be compared  on the basis  on the predicted  differences between  
their progeny  means,  assuming  that those progeny  are obtained  from similar  
samples  of ewes.  The progeny  means  of these rams are expected  to differ  by 
half of the difference  between  the ram EBVs.  Therefore,  if two rams differ  in 
EBV by 4 kg., their  progeny  means  are expected  to differ  by 2 kg.
In any given breed,  the estimated  breeding  values  (EBVs)  for individual  
traits are always  expressed  as deviations  (+ or -) from a “base value ”. In the 
Irish Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep Breed Improvement  
Programme  in 1998 (and this will be the case also in 1999),  the base that was 
used for each breed was the average  EBV of all lambs bom in that breed in 
1998. All animals  in a particular  analysis  (breed)  are expressed  as deviations  
from the  same  base value.  Therefore,  all animals  in a given  breed,  whether  they 
are lambs,  older  rams or ewes,  can be compared  directly  with one another.
Figure 1 shows  a typical  distribution  of EBVs  for 120-day  liveweight  of 
lambs  in a given  breed.  The performances  vary from approximately  -20 kg to 
+20 kg  around  the average,  but the EBVs  vary only from  about  -5 kg. to +5 kg. 
This illustrates  the fact that not all of an animal ’s superiority  (or inferiority)  in 
performance  is regarded  as heritable.  This is consistent  with a low heratability  
(see next section).
BLUP  provides  EBVs,  not only for those animals  that have performance  
records,  but also for other  animals  that do not have  performance  records  but are 
related  to those  that have such records.  For example,  sires and dams that have  
no records  themselves  but have progeny  with records  would  be given  EBVs.
What  is “heritability ”?
Heritability  is
a. The proportion  of the variation  among  animals  in a given trait in a given
111
Figure  1 - Typical  distribution  of performance  and breeding  values  for
120-day  liveweight
population  that is due to genetic  differences  among  them  
h. The proportion  of the superiority  (or inferiority)  of an animal  in a given  trait 
in a given  population  that is regarded  as genetic  
c. The proportion  of the difference  between  any two animals  in a given  trait in 
a given  population  that is regarded  as genetic.
If the heritability  of liveweight  in a particular  breed  is, say, 15%, and if two 
animals  differ  by 20 kgs., we regard  the genetic  difference  between  them to be 
only 3 kgs (15%  of 20 kgs). In other  words,  in order  to be realistic  in predicting  
the type of progeny  that an animal  will produce  relative  to another  animal,  we 
must  reduce  its apparent  superiority  in performance  considerably  (by about  85%)  
and only half  of what  is left (7.5%)  is expected  to appear  in its progeny.  If more 
control  could be exercised  over the degree  of non-genetic  or environmental  
variation  among  performance  recorded  animals,  one would  expect  less variation 
in performance  but the heritability  of the trait would  be higher  and the animal ’s 
performance  would  be more  useful  as a predictor  of its breeding  value.
Reporting  the Results
Table  2 shows the  layout  of the report  produced  by the Department  of Agriculture 
in 1999.
What  is meant  by “accuracy ”?
Estimated  breeding  values  (EBYs)  that are published  in the Department  of 
Agriculture ’s annual  report  to the breeders  have  an “accuracy ” value  associated  
with them. This accuracy,  which  is on a numerical  scale between  0 and 1.0, 
indicates  the amount  of information  available  on the animal  in question  and, 
therefore,  the level of confidence  that the authors  have in the EBV values. 
Statistically,  “accuracy ” is the estimated  correlation  between  the EBV and the
112
Table  2 - Layout  of Report
ANY BREED IMPROVEMENT  PROGRAMME
Breeding  values and INDEX for 1996 lambs 
Date - June 19, L99B Flock Code » XVZ
JOHN ROE 
ANYWMERB
H/M/XYZ /9e/05B 
H/M/XYZ /96/009 
H/M/XY2 /96/ODEIN IRELAND
Breeding  values
LWT
(>cg)UMD
(mm)LMI-9R 
(M«an- 
UFD 100
(min) ACC SD«30>
H/H/ABC
H/M/ABC
H/M/ABC/92/036
/92/036
/92/036H/F/VFT
H/K/VFT
H/F/CFR/S5/099
/S4/006
/53/04S2.75
1.04
■2.14.39
33-0.18 0.5&164
(D
Lamb  Ko.This is the lamb identity'  number,  it has encoded  in it the breed,  sex, flock,  
year of performance  and the ear tag number  as the last 3 digits.
Sire Mo.This is the identity  of the sire of the lamb
Ewe No.This is the identity  of the dam
EBVs  for LWT,  
HMD  and UFD.These  are the estimated  breeding  values  (EBVs)  for live weight  (LWT),  
ultrasonic  muscle  depth  (UMD)  and ultrasonic  fat depth  (UFD),  respectively.
' AccuraevThis is a measure  of how close we believe  that the estimated  breeding  value  is 
likely  to be to the true breeding  value.  The accuracy  values  presented  refer 
only to Live-weight.  Time  constraints  at present  do not permit  the 
development  of a procedure  for calculating  the accuracy  of the Index.
' LMLTMI-SRThis IS the calculated  Lean  Meat ludex. It is designated  as LMI-SR  for Sire 
Reference  flocks  and LMI for the Non-  Reference  flocks.
true breeding  value  and is a function  of the heritability  of the trait.
Table  3 shows  how the accuracy  of EBV  can change  for different  amounts  and 
sources  of information.  The level of accuracy  depends  on
— the numbers  and types  of relatives  considered
— the heritability  of the trait.
High accuracy  means  that the EBV  is not expected  to change  very much  as 
new information  comes  available  whereas  low accuracy  means  that the EBV  is 
expected  to change  as new information  comes  available.  There  is, therefore,  a 
greater  gamble  involved  in selecting  animals  on EBVs  with a low accuracy  
than on EBVs  with a high accuracy.
Finally,  accuracy  is our measure  of assurance  of the quality  (high  or low) of 
the product  (genetic  merit  of the animal  for lean tissue  growth  rate).
Table 3
How accuracy  changes  with different  amounts  of information  available
Accuracy  (approx.)
Information  available Heritability  (h2)=0.1 h2=0.2 h2=0.3
Own performance  only 0.32 0.45 0.55
Own performance  and 10 offspring 0.52 0.65 0.79
Sire having  200 offspring  only 0.91 0.95 0.97
113
The Lean  Meat  Index
Each animal  in the Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Flock  Recording  
Programme  that has a performance  record,  or that is related  to an animal  that 
has a performance  record,  is given an EBV for liveweight  (LWT),  ultrasonic  
muscle  depth  (UMD),  ultrasonic  fat depth  (UFD),  carcass  lean weight  (CLW)  
and carcass  fat weight  (CFW). The EBVs  for CLW  and CFW  are combined  into 
a single  figure  called  a Lean Meat  Index  (LMI).
The LMI  is then  scaled  in such  a way that the lambs  in the “base ” population  
have a mean  value  of 100 and a standard  deviation  of 30. The “ base ” population  
is the same  as that referred  to earlier,  viz,, all lambs  born in that breed  in 1998.  
Scaling  the Lean  Meat  Index  does not change  the ranking  of the animals  within  
the breed but it makes  it easier  for breeders  to compare  animals  in the same  
breed  that had performances  or relatives  performing  in different  years.
Can animals  be compared  across  breeds?
It is important  to note that the LMI for one breed  is not comparable  with the 
LMI for another  breed  because  their estimated  breeding  values  are calculated  
independently  and they have different  “base ” populations.  Thus,  an animal  with 
a LMI of 100 from one breed  cannot  be regarded  as having  the same genetic  
merit  as an animal  with a LMI of 100 from another  breed.
At present  the information  that is required  to compare  animals  across  breeds  
is not available.  To do so one would  need to have sufficient  numbers of animals  
from the different  breeds  reared  and measured  under  the same  conditions.  The 
necessary  information  could be provided  by commercial  producers  if the 
performance  and pedigree  of the commercial  animals  were recorded.  It would  
be important  that the pedigree  could  be traced  back to the pure breeds,  at least 
on the male side.
Figure  2 shows  the type of distribution  of LMIs  that one can get in a particular  
breed.  As in most biological  populations,  the distribution  of the LMIs is
Figure  2 - Typical  distribution  of index  values
114
approximately normal;  most  of the values  are near  the mean  of 100 with  relatively  
few at each extreme  (as low as 0 or as high as 200).  Animals  with LMIs  greater  
than 100 are regarded  as better  animals  than those with indexes  below 100.
In case anyone regards  those  animals  with indexes  less than 100 as being  of 
poor breeding  quality,  it is important  to state that they  may well be much  better  
than animals that have  no performance  records  and for which one has no genetic  
evaluation.  This includes  rams and ewes in pedigree  flocks that are not 
participating  in the Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep Breed  
Improvement  Programme  as well as those  non-pedigree  rams  and ewes  that are 
used for breeding  in commercial  flocks.
The environment
The genes  that an animal  carries  on its chromosomes  gain expression  when  
the animal  is exposed  to an appropriate  environment.  By environment  here we 
mean every influence  that an animal  experiences  after it is conceived.  Those  
genes  that gain expression  and that have an influence  on performance  in one 
environment  may not gain expression  in another  environment  or may be 
expressed  to a lesser  degree.  This phenomenon  is well known  in biology  and is 
called  Genotype  by Environment  interaction.  “Horses  for courses ” would  be a 
familiar  way of expressing  the same  concept,  meaning  that one type of animal  
is suited  to one  environment  while  another  type is suited  to another  environment.  
In sheep  production,  the fact that certain  breeds  are more suited  to mountain  
conditions  while  other  breeds  are more suited  to lowland  conditions  is a good  
example  of the existence  of genotype  by environment  interaction.
Pedigree  sheep  breeders  feed and manage  their  sheep  very well.  They  claim  
that it allows  the lambs  to express  their genetic  merits  better.  If this was truly  
the case, then one would  expect  that the heritability  of LWT,  UMD  and UFD  
would  be greater  than the value of 15% to 20% that that is generally  found.  
Hanrahan  (1997a,  1997b)  reported  that the differences  between  the progeny  of 
rams at commercial  level were not as great  as one would  have expected,  based  
on the Lean Meat Index values  of their sires. He claimed  that the genetic  
parameters  (heritabilities)  used to predict  progeny  performance  at commercial  
level were overstated,  resulting  in overstatement  of their EBVs.  Whatever  the 
reasons  for the discrepancies  between  predicted  and actual performances  at 
commercial  level, the results  that he obtained  should  give us all serious  cause  
for concern.  If we wish to encourage  commercial  sheep  farmers  to buy rams  of 
high genetic  merit, it is essential  that the information  presented  in the sales  
catalogues  gives a reliable  indication  of the performance  of the progeny  at 
commercial  level.
Since  the economic  climate  in which  the commercial  sheep  farmers  operate  
does not allow them to feed expensive  diets, there may be large differences  
between  the levels of feeding  in pedigree  and commercial  herds.  These  
differences  may be so great as to cause  (a) serious  over-stating  of the genetic  
differences  between  rams  in terms  of progeny  performance  and, more  seriously,  
(b) changes  in the rankings  of those  rams.
The responsibility  of addressing  these  issues  rests, to a considerable  extent,
115
with the commercial  sheep  farmers.  In any production  system,  it is essential  to 
monitor  quality  at each stage of production,  thereby  enabling  one to identify  
the precise  stage at which factors  that cause poor quality  occur.  At present,  
there is no systematic  structure  in place by which  commercial  sheep  farmers  
can check  the genetic  quality  of the breeding  stock  that they are using  in their  
flocks.  This would  require  individual  sire matings  at commercial  level and the 
keeping  of records  of performance  and parentage  of lambs.  If such information  
were available,  one could relatively  easily analyse  the data and relate the 
performance  of lambs  to their  sires ’ breeding  values  and provide useful  answers  
to a number  of questions.  Record-keeping  is a task that nobody  finds  attractive  
but it is an essential  part of monitoring  product  quality.
Some  responsibility  also rests with the pedigree  breeder.  It is in the long­
term interest  of the pedigree  breeder  to focus on product  quality.  High quality  
of product  from the pedigree  breeder  ultimately  means  high genetic  merit of 
breeding  stock  for meat traits under  commercial  conditions.  Feeding  practices  
and rearing  conditions  in pedigree  herds  should  be such  as to enable  breeders  to 
identify  animals  that conform  to high product  quality  versus  those that do not. 
It is necessary,  therefore,  to ensure  that all animals  get a fair and equal  chance  
to express  their genetic  merit.  More  attention  could  be paid to
- compact  lambing,  to ensure  that all lambs  are as close  as possible  to being  
the same age through  their rearing  period.
- weaning  reasonably  early (8 weeks)  to give the lambs  a better  chance  to 
express  their genetic  merit  free from maternal  effects  prior to weighing/  
scanning  at 120 days.
- Treating  all lambs  in the flock (particularly  those of the same sex) as 
alike as possible.
- Ensuring  that the level of feeding  and management  is not so excessively  
high as to cause  serious  genotype  by environment  interaction.
What  are “reference  sires ”?
Reference  sires are specially  selected  rams  that are mated  to ewes  in several  
pedigree  flocks  in a given season  in order to facilitate  the separation  of the 
flock differences  in performance  into their genetic  and non-genetic  (or 
environmental)  parts. It is most effective  when at least two rams are used in 
each flock and each ram has several  progeny  in each flock. However,  this is 
difficult  in very small  flocks.  The procedure  enables  breeders  and sheep farmers  
to make  more  reliable  comparisons  between  animals  in different  flocks  on their  
genetic  merits  and thereby  widens  one’s scope  for selecting  replacement  breeding  
stock.  It also enables  the individual  breeder  to compare  the genetic merit  of his/ 
her flock  relative  to the genetic  merit  of other  breeders  flocks.
Prospects  for improving  selection  on LMI  in the pure  breed  flocks
The rate of genetic  progress  in any given  animal  trait depends  on the amount  
by which  the replacement  stock  each year exceed  those  that were used in the 
previous  year. Table 4 shows,  for a sample  of 91 pedigree  flocks,  the mean 
LMI of the parents  of lambs  born in 1999.
116
Table  4
Lean Meat Index  of parents  of pedigree  lambs  born in 1999
Type of parentYoung*  parents  
No. Average  LMIOlder**  parents  
No. Average  LMI
Sires
Dams66
308135.2
104.4113
1433109.1
94.4
*Bom in 1998 in the case of males,  in 1997 in the case of females
**Bora  prior to 1998 in the case of males,  prior to 1997 in the case of females
The young  replacement  parents  had considerably  higher  LMIs  than  the older  
parents.  There  is, however,  considerable  room for improvement.  Some  young  
replacement  rams had very low LMIs  (12%  of all young  replacement  rams had 
LMIs  less than 100) and others  (about  23%)  appear  to have come  from flocks  
that were not participating  in the Department  of Agriculture ’s Pedigree  Sheep  
Breed  Improvement  Programme  (though  they may  have had an evaluation  from  
elsewhere  and may have  been genetically  acceptable).  It is also very likely  that 
many high LMI rams were sold to commercial  flocks  or to flocks  not in the 
recording  programme  and were not available  for use within  the participating  
flocks.  Considering  a reasonable  lambing  rate of 160%  and approximately  12 
ewes mated  per ram in participating  flocks,  it should  be possible  to achieve  an 
average  LMI of 160 in the case of young  males  (and an LMI of 130 in the case 
of the females).
Economic  value  of genetic  improvement
• Banks  (1994)  in Australia  and Simm  et al. (1997)  in the UK estimated  a 
benefit  cost ratio of more  than 8:1 resulting  from expenditure  on testing  and 
selection  for meat traits in nucleus  flocks.  While this estimate  could be 
regarded  as being  high,  nevertheless  it is true that expenditure  in this area is 
sufficiently  cost effective  to justify  a reasonable  level of expenditure.
There  are a number  of conditions  necessary  for achieving  a high benefitxost  
ratio.
- High level of participation  of the nucleus  (pedigree)  sector  in the genetic  
evaluation  programme,
- Efficient  use of the results  of genetic  evaluation  in achieving  a high rate of 
genetic  progress  in the nucleus  (pedigree)  population,
- Increased  training  on performance-based  methods  of selection,  promotion  
of more comprehensive  recording,  improved  design of breeding  programmes  
including  the promotion  of sire-referencing  schemes,
- Rapid  transfer  of the genetic  gain from the nucleus  (pedigree)  sector  to the 
commercial  sector,  increasing  the usage of recorded  rams in commercial  
flocks,  or improving  the dissemination  of high merit  breeding  stock  through  
the wider  use of Al or other  reproductive  technologies.
117
Also,  there  should  be continuing  development  and use of improved  tools for 
selection  (e.g., use of computer-assisted  tomography  (CT) to take whole-body  
scanning  measurements  on some  animals).
It is difficult  to see a disadvantage  in putting  greater  effort  and expenditure  
into genetic  improvement,  especially  if the alternative  is the increasing inability 
of the sheep  meat  industry  to compete  favourably  in the high  quality,  high  priced 
sheep  meat  markets.  At pedigree  level,  genetic  improvement  can be cumulative,  
permanent  and cost-effective.  At commercial  level,  genetic  improvement  gives  
increased  product  value  and greater  competitiveness  in higher-priced  markets.  
It is a prize that we cannot  afford  to ignore.
Bibliography
Banks,  R.G.  (1994).  Structural  effects  on returns  from  genetic  improvement  programs:  a 
case study.  Proc. 5th World  Congr.  Genetics  Appl. to Livest.  Prod., 18:123-126.
Bansback,  B. (1993).  Meat  Demand  Economics.  In “Meat  Consumption  in the European  
Community ”. Proceedings  of a workshop  organised  by the Director-General  for 
Agriculture  (DG VI) of the Commission  of the European  communities.  Office  for 
Official  Publications  of the European  Communities,  Luxembourg.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1997a).  Evaluation  of Lean Meat Index  for Sheep.  Summary  of papers  
presented  at Irish  Grass.  Anim.  Prod.  Assn.  23rd  Annual  Meeting,  University  College  
Dublin,  Belfield.  pp33 1-332.
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1997b).  Exploiting  Genetic  Resources  to Enhance  the Competitiveness  
of Lowland  Sheep  Systems.  Irish Grassland  & Animal  Production  Journal.  31:106-  
115.
Kempster,  A.J., Cook,  G.L.,  Grantley-Smith,  M. (1986).  National  estimates  of the body  
composition  of British  cattle,  sheep  and  pigs with special  reference  to trends  in fatness.  
Meat Science  1 986, 17: 107- 138.
Lush,  J.L. (1945)  Animal  Breeding  Plans.  The Iowa State  College  Press,  Ames.
Simm,  G., Amer,  P.R. and Pryce,  J.E. (1997).  Returns  from Genetic  improvement  of 
Sheep  and Beef  Cattle  in Britain.  In SAC Animal  Sciences  Research  Report  1997.  
SAC,  Edinburgh.
Simm,  G. (1998).  Genetic  improvement  of cattle  and sheep.  Farming  Press.
Simm,G.  and R.M.Lewis  (1997).  Sire Referencing  Schemes:  A Fast Lane in Sheep  
Breeding?  Irish Grassland  & Animal  Production  Journal.  31 :97-105.
Simm,  G. and W.S. Dingwall  (1989).  Selection  Indices  for Lean Meat Production  in 
Sheep.  Livestock  Production  Science,  21: 223-233.
118
Some  Observations  on Animal  Disease,
Ill Thrift  and Infertility
J. F. Quinlan
Department  of  Agriculture  and Food,  Regional  Veterinary  Laboratory,  
Athlone,  Co. Westmeath
Cattle
Although  bovine  abortions  occur  throughout  the year the highest  incidence  
is generally  during  the first quarter.  From our perspective  the main agents  
continue  to be Leptospira,  Salmonella,  Neospora,  Listeria  and Brucella.  With  
our emphasis  on diagnosis  the quality  of the sample  is paramount.  Indeed  the 
quantity  is also very  important  in that the more  samples  submitted  the more  one 
increases  the chances  of establishing  the true cause of abortion  where  up to 
70% fail to yield a specific  cause.  In view  of this, it is advisable  to bring  the first 
aborted  foetus  to the laboratory  and not to wait until perhaps  the third  or fourth  
incident  before  taking  action.
With  regard to stillbirth/early  neonatal  death,  the single  most  important  cause  
of loss is dystocia/anoxia  or damage/stress  at calving.  However,  events/  
conditions such  as infections,  deficiencies  and mismothering  leading  to starvation  
are also involved.
Neonatal  mortality  (up to 28 days) is generally  assoeiated  with pneumonia  
and diarrhoea  or respiratory  and enteric  disease.  The viruses  rotavirus  and 
coronavirus,  E.coli.  K99 E coli, Cryptosporidia  and coccidia  are isolated  from  
intestinal  contents  of calves  with diarrhoea.  With regard  to pneumonia,  while  
viruses and  bacteria  such as E.coli  and Pasteurella  are regularly  isolated,  foreign  
body pneumonia  due to aspiration  of milk into the lungs is also significant.  
Navel  ill is a hardy  annual.  Starvation  continues  as a significant  cause  of death  
in neonatal  calves  and is probably  due to the incorrect  use of electrolyte  solutions.  
In general,  calves  should  not be left without  milk  for more  than 24 hours. Immuno  
deficiency,  that is where  the newborn  calf does not receive  either  sufficient  
quantity  or quality  of colostrum  early  enough  in life to protect  against  disease,  
is a major  contributory  factor  to neonatal  mortality. The management  system  of 
shared  space  where  pregnant  and calved  cows are housed  together  along  with 
their calves  will raise the incidence  of calf diarrhoea  and potentially  neonatal  
mortality  by a factor  of three.  In such situations  the incidence  of pneumonia  is 
also similarly  raised.  Mineral  deficiency,  in particular,  trace  minerals  may also 
be involved  resulting  in weakly  born calves  that are more  susceptible  to disease.
Ill-thrift  in 1999 in all species  was influenced  by parasites  and in particular  
fluke and worms  although  a number  of cases of heavy lice infestation  have  
been diagnosed,  Copper  deficiency  again  in both cattle  and sheep  continues  to 
effect  thrive and indeed  fertility.  In general,  in our particular  catchment  selenium
119
values  recorded  in blood samples  and in tissue samples,  such as kidney,  are 
adequate.  In some  areas  iodine  deficiency  continues  to influence  calf  mortality, 
thrive  and fertility.
With regard  to infertility  the obvious  causes  such as deficiency  and disease  
are of course  important.  However,  nutrition  is probably  more important  than 
either  of the aforementioned.  It is advisable  to have infertility  investigated  in 
order  to establish  a cause.  It has been established  that Ketosis  in the perinatal  
period  has a major  influence  on fertility  and that the depth  and duration  of the 
Ketosis  can result  in prolonged  infertility  into the next breeding  season  with 
consequent  effect  on the calving  interval.  Leptospirosis  is also regarded  as a 
major  cause of infertility.  Diseases  that cause  a high febrile  reaction  such as 
Tick-borne  Fever  also affected  fertility  although  this may be more  important  in 
sheep.
Sheep
In sheep  the single  most  important  cause  of infectious  abortions  continues  to 
be Toxoplasmosis,  although  increasingly  Listeria,  Salmonella  and Chlamydia  
are appearing.  Campylobacter  is also seen occasionally.  As with cattle it is 
important  to bring all abortions  to the laboratory  and where  available  to also 
bring the afterbirth.  Twin lamb disease  or pregnancy  toxaemia  also causes  
abortion  and generally  the death of the ewe as well. Presently  we see this 
condition  most  often in ewes that are too fat. While  Leptospirosis  has not been 
identified  as a major  abortifacient  in sheep  the flock  can serve  as a reservoir  of 
infection  for cows in the mixed  farming  situation.
Still birth and early neonatal  death are most importantly  due to dystocia/  
anoxia  and starvation/exposure.  Early neonatal death  is also  caused by infections 
causing  diarrhoeas  such as E.Coli,  rotavirus  and Salmonella  and by navel 
infections  causing  tissue  abscessation  and septicaemia.
The incidence  of Listeriosis  in neonatal  lambs  appears  to be increasing  with 
the classical  nervous  disease  manifestations  but also in some cases with 
microabcessation  of the liver and consequent  death.
Just as with calves  the incidence  of disease  in lambs  is associated  with high 
environmental  contamination  which increases as lambing  progresses  particularly 
when  the flock  is housed.  Clostridial  diseases  are ever present.
This past year has been notable  for parasitic  infestations  in sheep.  Fluke  and 
worms  are a major  cause of ill-thrift  in sheep  but also a major  cause  of death  
since sheep are most susceptible  to acute fluke. The incidence  of acute and 
chronic  fluke  has been seen at a level  not recorded  for many  years.  Copper  and 
cobalt  deficiencies  have also  been recorded;  in some  cases  the copper  deficiency  
has appeared  as Swayback  as well as ill thrift.
Infertility  in ewes  in our experience  has been  associated  with  Toxoplasmosis  
and Tick borne  Fever.  Ram infertility  of course  is also a major  factor.  However, 
disease  and/or  deficiency  are not the only factors  and poor management  can 
have a significant  negative  influence  if superimposed  on an already  at risk 
situation.
120
DETECTION  OF ENTERO-PATHOGENS  IN CALVES  UNDER
ONE MONTH
Period  Jan - Mar 1999
I.aboratorv:  Athlone
Entero-Pathogen  No. examined No. Positive Percentage  Positive
Rotavirus 173 62 35.8%
Cryptosporidia 142 47 33.1%
K99+£.  co/( 175 13 7.43
Coronavirus 173 29 16.8%
Salm. typhimurium 172 2 1.2%
Salm. dublin 172 2 1.2%
Coccidia  species 34 6 17.6%
DETECTION  OF BOVINE  ABORTIFACIENTS  
Period  Jan - Mar 1999
Laboratory:  Athlone  
TOTAL  NUMBER  EXAMINED  - 136
Abortifacient No. Positive , » Percentage  Positive
Brucella  abortus 5 3.7%
Salmonella  abortus 5 3.7%
Salmonella  species 1 0.75
Actinomyces  pyogenes 8 5.9%
Leptospira  hardjo 13 9.6%
Listeria  monocytogenes 1 0.7%
Fungal  Species 1 0.7%
Neospora  Species 3 2.2%
121
Ectoparasites  of Sheep
D, J. O’BRIEN
Veterinary  Research  Laboratory,  Abbotstown,  Dublin  15
Ectoparasitic  diseases  of sheep have animal  welfare,  environmental  and 
economic  effects.  The most common  sheep  ectoparasites  in Ireland  are mites,  
lice, ticks and flies.
Mites are the most serious.  Satcoptes  scabei,  a biting  mite, is frequently  
encountered  in continental  Europe  and North  Africa  but is not generally  a 
problem  here. Neither  Chorioptes  bovis  nor Demodex  ovis cause serious  
problems.  However,  Psoroptes  ovis is a sucking  mite and the cause of the 
notifiable  disease,  sheep  scab. It causes  a serious,  sometimes  fatal disease  of 
sheep with extreme  pruritis  exudative  dermatitis,  loss of wool. It lowers  
production  by one third (Kirkwood  1980)  and lambs  born to infested  ewes are 
ten percent  lighter  than those  from uninfested  ones.
Sucking  lice Linognathus  ovillus  and L. pedalis  which  are confined  to the 
hairy  areas  of the body,  can cause  problems  but Damalinia  ovis  a biting  louse  is 
a more serious  pest causing  production  losses  to the fleece  and hide damage.
The tick Ixodes  ricinis  (Castor  tick) is the most  common  tick found  on sheep  
in this country  and although  it causes  some damage  to the hides of sheep its 
main importance  is as a vector  of several  viral and bacterial  diseases.
Fly strike  (Blowfly  myiasis)  causes  great  pain and suffering  to sheep. Lucilia  
spp  (Green  bottles),  Phormia  sp (Block  bottles) and Calliphora  spp  (Blue  bottles)  
lay their  eggs in the fleece  of lambs  and unshorn  ewes  having  been attracted  by 
the smell and condition  of the fleece  soiled  by faeces  and urine (French  et al. 
1996).  The eggs hatch to larvae  which  burrow  into the flesh and cause  lesions  
which  can be further  exacerbated  by the attention  of other  flies and bacterial  
infection.  Melophagus  ovinus  (the sheepked)  which  is a wingless  insect  causes  
sporadic  outbreaks  of disease  with wool lose and irritation.  These  are usually  
not serious.  The nasal botfly Oestrus  ovis  is a minor  problem  in parts of the 
south  of England  but is not a pest here.
Control
It has become  most important  to use ecto-parasitic  treatment  systems  in a 
judicious  manner  to ensure  efficacy  and avoid  environmental  damage.  Likewise  
the timing  of treatments,  when they might give best results,  must be well 
considered.  Epidemiological  experience  and accurate  diagnosis  gives this 
information.
In the past when  dipping  systems  alone  were available  all of these  diseases  
were treated  similarly.  However,  a divergence  of treatment  measures  has now 
occurred  with different  therapies  sometimes  being  effective  against  particular  
parasites.
Factors  influencing  the treatment  for mites  and lice would  be similar  as both 
groups  are obligate,  species  specific  parasites  which  have only limited  survival
122
lime off the most  (O’Brien et al. 1994).  In the case of flies and ticks,  both spend  
considerable  periods  away from the host, are often not species  specific  and 
their  success  and period  of activity is governed by climate,  weather,  geographical  
and topographical  factors.
Treatment  systems
Historically,  efforts  to find treatments  of these  diseases  commenced  early  in 
the nineteenth  century  when  many chemicals were  used  externally  and internally  
in efforts  to control  them.  The first dips were produced  by William  Cooper  in 
1843. Substances  used for control  included,  hellebore,  mercury,  kerosene  and 
sulphur.  The most successful  were arsenic  and nicotine,  which  products  were  
used into the twentieth  century.  Organochlorines  (OC) were first used in 1947.  
Downing  (1947)  and Wright  (1957)  first used organophosphates  (OP) for the 
control  of lice. The introduction  of avermectins  (Egerton  et al. 1980) had a 
profound  effect  on parasite control.  Invermectin was found  to be effective against  
sheep  scab (Psoroptes  ovis)  with two subcutaneous  injections  at 200 mcg/kg,  7 
to 10 days apart (Soil et al. 1992, O’Brien et al. 1993). One injection  of 
moxidectin  at 200 mcg/kg  was found  to be fully effective  (O’Brien  et al. 1994).  
As with dipping,  it was recommended  that for field outbreaks  two treatments  
be used and just one for prophylasic,  as moxidectin  has a  prophylactic  action  of 
at least 28 days (O’Brien et al. 1996).  Doramectin  has been found  to have a 
therapeutic  effect  with one injection  at 300 mcg/kg  (Bates  et al. 1995).
These  injectable  products  have  become known  as endectocides,  as they control 
many internal  and external  parasites.  It is strongly  recommended  that two 
injections  of endectocides  be used for the treatment  of sheep  scab.
A bolus preparation  of ivermectin  has now become  available  and has been 
assessed  for efficacy  against  sheep  scab at the VRL, Abbotstown  and found  to 
have therapeutic  and prophylactic  activity  for over  three months  (O’Brien  et al. 
in press).
The synthetic pyrethroids (SP) have  been widely  used  as both  dips and topical 
pour-ons  since the early eighties.  Several  different  SPs have varying  efficacy  
against  flies, mites,  lice and ticks (Romano  and Greco 1983, Hamel  and Van 
Amelfoort  1987).
Until recently  the most widely  used dip products  were OPs. They have a 
wide range  of activity  and can be used against  all of these  parasites.  They  work  
well if manufacturer ’s instructions  are followed.  They will not perform  in the 
presence  of organic  matter  (faeces,  muck, etc.), in dirty water  nor in the presence  
of old or spent  dip. They must also be made  up to the correct  concentration  or 
they will give disappointing  results;  replenishment  must be carried  out as 
recommended.  It is essential  to retain  each sheep  in the solution  for one minute  
to allow  a dose of active  ingredient  to be absorbed  onto the fleece  which  must  
be at least 0.5 inches  long. Most  OPs give protection  for six weeks  or more if 
used correctly  (Kirkwood  and Quick  1981 & 1982).
The disposal of used  dip solutions,  OPs and even  more  so SPs must  be carried  
out as recommended  by local administrations  or they will pose a serious  threat  
to aquatic  life and the environment  generally.  OPs also require  careful  use from
123
a human  health  aspect  and those  using  them  require  to be trained  and licensed.
The choice  of product  must  now be carefully  made. Endectocides  have  much  
to recommend  them being  convenient,  non labour  intensive,  safe, requiring  no 
special  equipment  and can be used in any weather  and in most locations  even 
on mountain  sides. They have an added  advantage  of also killing  nematode  
worms.  However,  the injectable  forms  have no worthwhile  effect  against  flies 
or lice and if these  are present  a diagnosis  must  first be made  as disappointment  
and economic  loss will ensue if mites are not the problem  and of course  
endectocides  are much  more  expensive  to use.
In addition to the above  mentioned  products. Insect  Growth  Regulators (IGRs) 
are being  more frequently  used.  Already  they are popular  for controlling  fleas  
and Cyromazine  is widely  used to prophylactively  control  blowfly  strike in 
sheep. It gives prolonged  activity  (O’Brien and Fahey 1991) and works by 
interfering  with the development  of the larvae  of dipterous  flies. More  of these  
products  will become  available. Work  continues  on the development  of vaccines  
against  ectoparasites.  However,  it must  be stressed  that very few new products  
are being developed  due to costs and time consuming  trials required  for 
registration.  Hence,  it behoves  us to use these products  wisely  for already  
resistance  is developing  to some  of these  and there  is concern  over the safety  of 
others.
References:
Bates,  P.G.,  Groves,  B.A.,  Courtney,  S.A. and Coles, G.C. (1995).  The Veterinary  Record.  
137: 491 -492
Downing,  W. (1947).  The Veterinary  Record.  59: 581-582
Egerton,  J.R., Birnbawn,  J., Blair,  L.S.,  Chabula,  J.C., Conroy,  J., Fisher,  M.H., Morozik,  
J. Ostlind,  D.A.,  Wilkins,  C. A. and Cambell,  W.C.  (1980).  British  Veterinary  Journal.  
136: 88-97
French,  N.P.,  Parkin,  T.D.H.  and Morgan,  K.L. (1996).  The Veterinary  Record  139: 384- 
388
Hamel,  H.D. and Van Amelsfoort,  A. (1988).  Veterinary  Medical  Review.  59: 162-166  
Kirkwood,  A.C. (1980).  The Veterinary  Record.  138: 210-211  
Kirkwood,  A.C. and Quick,  M.P. (1981).  The Veterinary  Record.  108: 279-280  
Kirkwood,  A.C. and Quick,  M.P. (1982).  The Veterinary  Record.  Ill: 367 
O’Brien,  D.J. and Fahey,  G. (1991).  The Veterinary  Record.  192: 351-353  
O’Brien,  D.J., Gray,  J.S. and O’Reilly,  P.F. (1993).  Irish Veterinary  Journal.  46: 99-101  
O’Brien,  D.J., Gray,  J.S. and O’Reilly,  P.F. (1994).  Veterinary  Research  Comunications.  
18: (1)3 27-36
O’Brien,  D.J., Gray,  J.S. and O’Reilly,  P.F. (1994).  Veterinary  Parasitology.  52: 91-96  
O’Brien,  D.J., Parker,  L.D., Menton,  G., Kearney,  C., McCollum,  E. and O’Laoide,  S.
(1996).  The Veterinary  Record.  139:438-439  
O’Brien,  D.J., Forbes,  A.B., Pitt, S.R., Baggot,  D.G. (1999).  Veterinary  Parasitology.  
85: 79-85
Pearson,  P. (1996).  Proceedings  Int. Conference  on Sheep  Scab,  Tralee,  Ireland.  March  
1996. 22-25
Romano,  A. and Greco,  J. (1983).  Gacets  Veterinaria.  XLV: 57-69  
Sargison,  N.D.,  Scott.,  P.R., Penny  C.R.,  Pirie,  R.S. (1995).  The Veterinary  Record.  136: 
287-289
Wright  P.W. (19571.  Rural Research  in C.S.l.R.O.  20. 25-26
124
Producing  Quality  Beef for the Market
W. McLAUCHLAN
Greenmount  College,  22 Greenmount  Road,  Antrim.
It is well recognised  that given Northern  Ireland ’s relatively  small quality  
beef  production,  producers  and processors  must  focus on supplying  quality  beef 
cost effectively  into Europe.  These  markets  are prepared  to pay premiums  for 
a top class/branded  product  providing  sufficient  numbers  of cattle  grading  EUR  
with fat class 2 and 3 can be consistently  provided  52 weeks  of the year. Is 
the Northern  Irish beef industry  well positioned  to respond  to the challenge?
Decline  in quality  evident
The graph  below  shows  the decline  in the percentage  of steers  and heifers  
grading  EUR over the past 10 years.
91 92 99 94 95 96 97 96 99
Change  in conformation  classification  for cattle  slaughtered  in N. 
Ireland  from 1990 until 1999 - EU and R grades  combined
It is notable  that the data post BSE excludes  approximately  55,000  dairy  
bred bull calves  which  were removed  under  the Calf Processing  Aid Scheme.  
Had these  animals been  added  in, then only  36% of streets  would  meet  the EUR  
specification.
Reasons  for decline  in quality
• Influence  of Holstein  genes  in the dairy herd lowering  the conformation  of 
beef X dairy steers  and indirectly  through  the supply  of poorly  conformed  
replacements  to the suckler  herd.
• Retention  of poorly  conformed  heifers  from within  the suckler  herd.
• Decline  in the carcass  weight  of Continental  x cattle.
• Reduction  in the proportion  of finished  bulls slaughtered.
• Suspected  increased  usage of poor quality/scrub  bulls.
125
Quality  targets  - a farm quality  assurance  plus scheme
Currently  a quality  beef  scheme  is being  developed  within  the province  the 
main aims of which  are:
• supply  a minimum  of 2,500  cattle  per year to the main processors  with 75% 
grading  EUR of fat class 2 and 3 by 2006.
• encourage  information  flow, intergration  and competence  development  
through  training  across  the supply  chain.
• develop  minimum  stress,  high welfare,  systems  designed  to meet consumer  
requirements.  This will be based  on limiting  the number  of holdings  to 2 or 
3 per animal  combined  with disease  prevention  programmes.
• monitor  eating  quality  of all carcasses.
Achieving  the quality  targets
Bull improvement  - terminal  carcass  sire
Within  Northern  Ireland  the BLUP  system  is operated  on behalf  of Signet  
by AI Services  NI. By removing  the environmental  effects  the system  allows  
the true genetic  value of bulls to be compared  through  the use of Estimated  
Breeding  Values  (EBV ’s). EBV ’s are calculated  using the bull ’s own 
measurements  combined  with measurements  for its relatives.  The EBV ’s are 
then rolled  into an overall  index known  as the ‘Beef Value ’ and reflects  the 
financial  benefit  of using that bull. For example,  the Beef Value of 24 for 
Greenmount ’s Cheadlewood  Jupiter  bull in Table 1 means  that he will pass on 
approximately  £12 extra  margin to each of his progeny  compared  to the average  
for the breed on 1980.
Below  each EBV is an accuracy  percentage.  The higher  the percentage  
accuracy  then the greater  the chances  are that the figure  is unlikely  to change.
Table 1
EBVs  for two Limousin  bulls
Run date 
9/8/99.1
C3 ^t? ooU CO ^’> (L>
cj S'53
CQ SCut)c=sis-^ s".e
o ®CN &bs Iaoc
"o i>
= OU _c3 Q.
S-SJC
3 s-U- T3« —^ 5
Cheadlewood
Jupiter
EBV 2.0 -3.8 3.3 LM -7.0 39 49 0.7 0.5 0. LM
-2C 2 24
Accuracy  % 82 74 87 82 49 86 84 74 77 60 75
Index 84 80 64 80 67 138 126 119 140 81 119
Farland  Orver
(Jupiter  son)
LM LM
EBV 1.8 -4.1 3.1 -2C -6.0 57 77 0.8 0.6 0.2 37
Accuracy  % 64 47 65 61 35 65 60 48 55 34 52
Index 86 77 67 80 72 162 148 123 150 81 142
126
The higher  the heritability  of the trait, the amount  of infoimation  on relatives  
and the number  of contemporaries  recorded,  the better  the accuracy.  Generally  
the overall  Beef  Value  should  have an accuracy  of 40%. The lower  accuracy  
associated  with  Orvet  (Jupiter ’s son) is a reflection  of fewer  records.  As a result  
there is a greater  chance  that Orvet ’s EBVs  may change  in the future  either  
up of down.
Recently  Signet  has added an index for each EBV reflecting  how the 
performance  trait compares  to the present  average  for the breed.  An index of 
130 or above  indicates  that the animal  is in the top 1% for the breed in that 
particular  trait.
Both bulls have very high positive  EBV ’s for growth  rate and muscling.  
Both traits are normally  associated  with more difficult  calving  as indicated  by 
a negative  calving  value  and lack of milk as indicated  by a negative  2000-day  
milk  EBV.  However  it is possible  to find a bull that demonstrates  positive  EBV ’s 
for all these important  economic  traits.
For commercial  suckler  producers  contemplating  purchasing  a bull it is 
important  to select  a list of bulls which  will improve  the weakest  aspect  of your  
current  calf crop. The aim may be to correct  low growth  rates or poor  
conformation  or a combination  of both. Having  made the selection  based on 
EBV ’s view the bulls and the select  the best according  to:
• soundness  of legs and feet
• conformation  and breed character
• large  even sized  testicles  - associated  with better  fertility  in male and female
• purchase  the best value for money
In Table  2 results  from a progeny test  comparing  two Limousin  bulls  differing  
in Beef  Value  by 7 points  is compared.  This indicated  that through  higher  carcess  
weight,  improved  grading  and better  feed efficiency  the bull with the highest  
Beef  Value  produced  steers  which  were  worth  £73 more  than the progeny  from 
the lower  quality bull. Further  calculations  show  that combining  estimated  heifer  
and steer  results  would  lead to an improvement  in output  of approximately  £63 
per finished  animal.  If this superior  bull LM23  was used on an average  herd 
of 19 cows producing  18 calves  per year over 5 years then this bull would  
produce  an extra  £5670  over his lifetime  compared  to the moderate  beef bull 
LM16.  This is a clear  example  of how the quality  bull plays a significant  role 
in improving  profit  margins.
Table 2
Comparison  of steer progeny  from high and moderate  beef value bulls
Beef value LM 16 LM 23
Carcass  wt. (kg) 344 375
Conform,  grade (%) 0+ 72 41
R 28 41
U 0 18
Days to slaughter 700 690
Reduced  feed cost (£) -£8
Overall  output  (£) 521 594
127
The use of AI
UsingAI  successfully  in the suckler  herd  is fraught  with a number  of practical  
difficulties.  This is reflected  in the low rate of usage  of AI in the suckler  herd. 
It is estimated  from semen  usage figures  (1994  UK Dairy facts and figures)  
in 1993/94  that no more  than 13% of the national  suckler  herd in the province  
would  have received  a single  AI dose in that year.
The remoteness  of many  herds and difficult  terrain  make heat observation  
3 times per day a challenge.  Nevertheless  certain  committed  producers  who 
recognise  the superior  quality  of AI bulls  make  use of a quad  bike and binoculars  
to observe  cows  regularly.  One producer  currently  covers  120 cows  by AI and 
the other 40 cows while holding  down a full time job. The same individuals  
are innovative  in making  use of a portable  crush  with pens attached  which  can 
be moved  from field to field on the tractor  pick up hitch. Electric  fences  are 
used to form a funnel  to assist in moving  the cows on standing  heat into the 
service  pen. Both are skilled  in carrying  out their own AI,  regularly  achieving  
conception  rates of 60%.
Through  the use of AI at Enniskillen  College  a double  muscled  Charolais  
Culard  bull called  Haubois  was used last year on a herd of West of Ireland  
(WOI)  black  cows calving  in January/February.  The bull calves,  now at point  
of weaning  at 8 months  of age, weigh  383 kg having  achieved  an average  daily  
liveweight  gain of 1.35kg  since  birth  with  no meal  feeding. These  animals  have  
the potential  to grade  E and U. Some of these calves  weighed  up to 60kg at 
birth. However,  no major  increase  in calving  difficulty  with Charolais  Culards  
was observed  in this relatively  small batch of cattle.
Heavily  muscled  Charolais,  Belgian  Blues  or Blonde  D’Aquitaine  bulls used 
on WOI black  cows should  produce  lean well muscled  lean carcasses  suitable  
for the Continental  market.  However  a V4 Continental  cow crossed  to a 
Continental  bull is more likely to produce  the desired  carcass  with minimal  
calving  difficulty.
Synchronisation
Despite  these success  stories  many producers  will not have the labour  and 
handling  facilities  to cope with AI. It is feasible  to successfully  use 
synchronisation  and AI and achieve  a normal  conception  rate of 60%.
Given  the current  price  of synchronisation  drugs  combined  with  lower  prices  
for weanlings/stores  it is difficult  to justify  the cost of synchronisation and double  
AI. However  producers  involved  in calf  to beef  systems  are likely  to more  than 
justify  the costs of synchronisation  and AI when the effects  of extra carcass  
weight  and improved  grades  are taken into account.  This is currently  under  
investigation  at Greenmount.
Improving  suckler  cow quality  
Three  possible  options:
1) Replacements  from the dairy herd
Minimise/avoid  obtaining  suckler  replacements  from the dairy herd unless  
the herd is of British  Friesian  or other dual purpose  breed.  If some Holstein
128
is evident  in the beef x dairy replacement  then consider  producing  V4 breds  
from the V2 breds as replacements.
This approach  has been adopted  within the LIMO suckler  herd  at Greenmount  
where beef  production  from  progeny  out of 72,73  and pure-bred  Limousin  cows  
is being  assessed.  Cattle  will be marketed  through  Linden  Foods  into  Continental  
markets.
NOTE:  Herds  of dual-purpose  dairy  cows  are scarce  and will  fall  far short  
of suckler  herd replacement  demand.  This increases  the risk of introducing  
disease  into the suckler  herd.
2) Breed the suckler  cows to one breed of bull and keep the heifer  
replacements.  This will eventually  lead to a pure bred herd.
Note: Simple  to operate  leading  to a fairly uniform  cow. Suffers  from lack 
of hybrid  vigour  reducing  output  per cow by 22-23%.
3) Criss-cross  breeding  program
For the majority  of suckler  producers  this will be the most cost effective  
solution to improve  cow quality. This consists  of a criss-cross  programme  using  
two different  breeds  of pedigree  beef bulls both with positive  200-day  milk  
EBV.  The two breeds  selected  should  be similar  in size otherwise  a wide  range  
in ultimate  cow size will result.  This criss-cross  breeding  program  will, after  
6 generations,  have virtually  eliminated  the Holstein  genes  settling  down to a 
cow type alternating  between  66% and 33% of both breeds.  This approach  when 
crossed  to a terminal  sire of a different  breed will retain approximately  86% 
of the hybrid vigour obtained  in a hybrid (dairy x beef cross) bulled  
to a terminal  sire of a different  breed.  It is important  to match  the breed size 
and hardiness  to the environment.  Large  breed  types such as the Charolais  x. 
Blonde  x and particularly  Simmental  x cows should  preferably  be avoided  in 
the Hill environment.
Currently  a wide  range  of breeds  is being  assessed  on farm in a major  study  
being carried  out by ARINI  Hillsborough  (Steen  1999).  Calving  difficulty,  cow 
fertility,  carcass  output  and quality  will be monitored  from a whole  range of 
cow breed types currently  carried  on Northern  Ireland  farms.
Selecting  breeder  cows
Ideally,  to breed replacements  from within the herd select cows which  
calve  early and have a proven  history  of a good temperament,  milking  ability  
producing  a well conformed,  sizeable  calf each year. To obtain  sufficient  
replacements  approximately  40% of the herd will have to become  breeder  cows  
each year.
Breeding  replacements  from within  the herd to calve  down  at two years of 
age will be difficult  for the smaller  Hill producer  who traditionally  sells his 
calves  as weanlings or stores.  In this situation it  is likely  that a number  of lowland  
suckler  herds will become  specialised  suckler  replacements  to calve down at 
two years of age. It is this route that the April/May  calving  Abbey  herd at 
Greenmount  is presently  following  with a criss-cross  breeding  programme  
between  Saler  and Limousin.  The aim is to provide  replacements  for this lowland  
herd and a May/June  calving  herd at Greenmount  Hill farm.
129
Why Limousin  and Saler?
Limousin  helps to retain conformation  in the cow along with reasonably  
easy calving.  Compared  with the Limousin,  the Saler brings  up to 43% more  
milk (D’hour et al 1998), 23% larger  pelvic area (D’hour et al 1998) and 
improved  reproductive  performance  reaching  puberty  at the same weight  as 
Limousin  heifers  but 1 month  earlier  (D’hour et al 1996),  In a situation  where  
feed was restricted  in quantity  and quality  Salver  cows came into heat four 
weeks sooner  than Limousin.  After 4 parities  in a restricted  nutritional  
environment  appproximately  85% of the Salers  remained  in the herd compared  
with 60% of the Limousins.  (D’hour et al 1997).
Given the current  financial  difficulties  in beef production  it is likely that 
herds  will expand  or producers  will move  to part time  fanning.  In both scenarios  
less time will be available  to calve cows or to encourage  calves  to get up and 
suckle,  h is felt that the Limousin  x Saler  when  crossed  to a muscular  terminal  
sire will help over  come  these  difficulties  producing  a quality  calf  at least  cost.
Does payment  on grade  reflect  the quality?
The Livestock  and Meat Commission  (1999)  carried  out an assessment  of 
saleable  meat yield across  5 different  grade bands as shown  in Table 3.
Table 3
The effect of grade  on saleable  meat yield
Grade  band Carcass  grades % Saleable  meat % Price change  from base
1 E2 E3 U4 URL 76.5 +7
2 R3 R4L 0+3 0+4L 72 0
3 4H R4H 0+4H
03 04L 04H67 -7
4 0-3 0-4L 0-4H 66.5 -17
5 P3 66 -27
Within  band  2 and 3 there is currently  a price  range  of 18p per kg of carcass  
or £58 per average  steer carcass.  In moving  from the base band 2 up to band  
1 increases  the current  average  price by 5 per kg of carcass  and moving  down  
to band 3 would  decrease  the average  price per kg of carcass  in this band by 
5p. Such a scheme  if adopted  would  more fairly reflect  the yield of saleable  
meat rewarding  the farmer  better  for producing  a quality carcass.  One  processor  
in the province  moved  this year to reflect  a block  grading  system  paying  base 
+4p extra for E 3 & 4L and U 2 & 3, base -6p for R 2 & 3 and U 4L with 
0+3 fetching  base -lOp. Base price was taken as U3 Brussels  quoted  price.
Conclusion
Getting  the right quality  of Continental  terminal  sire selected  using  EBV ’s 
and crossed  onto a criss-cross  bred  Continental  cow is the best recipe  to achieve  
Continental  consumer  requirements  that is carcases  under  400kg  grading  EUR
130
with fat score 2 and 3. At current  prices  improving  carcass  grade from O to 
U will increase  the average  value  of the carcass  by £77 and improving  carcass  
weight  by 10 kgs will improve  output  by approximately  £17 per animal.  Plan 
and make changes  now to the breeding  programme,  it will take time for the 
benefits  to feed through  to put extra cash in your pocket.
References
D’hour  R, Menissier  F and Petit  M (1998)  in PJ Goddard  (ed),  Proceedings  of European  
workshop  on “ The implications  of extensification  for the health  and welfare  of beef 
cattle and sheep ” Aberdeen  5-6 March 1998.
D’hour  P. and Petit  M. (1997).  Proceedings  of’Suckler  cow workers  meeting ” UK, Sept.  
1997 pp 15-19.
D’hour R, Petit M and Garel J.P. (1996).  Rencontres  Recherches  Ruminants,  3: 233- 
266.
Livestock  and Meat Commission  (1999).  Lissue  House  31 Ballinderry  Road Lisburn  
Bt 28 2 SL.
Peck D. (1999)  Scottish  Agricultural  College  Beef/Sheep  notes July 1999 P 23. 
Steen R.W.J.  Patterson  D.C. Frost J.P. & Binnie  R.C. (1996).  Occasional  Fhiblication  
No. 22 March  1996 p92.
Steen R.W.J. (1999).  Personal  communication.
131
Breeding  Policy  for the Suckler  Herd
M. DRENNAN
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath
The aim in suckler  beef production  is to produce  progeny  of high growth  
potentialwithout  undue  calving  problems  and carcasses  eligible  for the  highest  
priced  markets.  The highest  priced  markets  available  are in mainland  EU and 
the animals  required  by these markets  are lean and of good conformation.  As 
breed  is the main  factor  influencing  these  traits  a continental  breed  of bull must  
be used for the production  of suitable  animals.  There  is a wide range  of options  
for the cow breed type but the following  factors  must be considered  in cow 
selection:
• Crossbred:  to avail of hybrid  vigour
• Satisfactory  milk production  potential
• At least 50 percent  continental
Hybrid  vigour
Hybrid  vigour  or heterosis  is defined  as the superiority  of the crossbred  over 
the average  of the two parent  breeds  for a particular  trait. A summary  of the 
available  data (Fallon  and Drennan,  1999) shows  that the overall  advantage  
expected  from  using  a crossbred  suckler  cow as opposed  to a purebred  in terms  
of kg of calf  weaned  per cow put to the bull is 13 percent  (Table  1). This advantage  
results  from  a combination  of improved  fertility, lower  calf  mortality  and higher  
calf liveweight  gain to weaning.  In addition,  the available  data indicate  that 
using  a sire of a third  breed  increased  the weaning  weight  by a further  8 percent.
Table 1
Improvements  from heterosis  in suckler  calf production
Cow Calving  rate Mortality Weaning  weight Overall  calf weaned  
(kg)/cow  to bull
Purebred 100 100 100 100
Crossbred 105 104 104 113
Fallon  and Drennan,  1999
Cow breed  comparisons
In one study at Grange,  Hereford  x Friesian  cows were compared  with 
Limousin  x Friesians  over 4 years. First calving  was at 2 years of age using  
an easy calving  Limousin  bull while  Charolais  or Simmental  sires were used 
for subsequent  calvings.  Male progeny  (bulls)  were taken to slaughter  at 16 
months  of age and heifers  at 21 months.  Limousin  x cows averaged  only 15 
kg greater  liveweight  (560 v 575 kg) than Hereford  x cows.  The progeny  of 
the Limousin  x cows had better  killing-out  rates, higher  carcass  weight  gains
132
(total 10 kg), lower  carcass  fat scores  and lower  kidney  plus channel  fat weights  
than Hereford  x progeny  (Table  2).
Table 2
Liveweights  and slaughter  data of progeny  of Hereford  x Friesian  and 
Limousin  x Friesian  cows
Hereford X Friesian  cows Limousin  x Friesian  cows
Weaning  weight  (kg) 319 323
Slaughter  weight  (kg) 578 584
Carcass  weight  (kg) 321 330
Kilhng-out  rate (g/kg) 554 562
Carcass  per day of age 599 616
'Carcass  conformation  score 3.5 3.5
-Carcass  fat score 3.9 3.5
Kidney  -i- channel  fat (kg) 11.4 10.2
'Scale 1 to 5 (Best conformation)  -Scale 1 to 5 (fattest)
In a second  study Charolais  cows  were  compared  with  Hereford  x Friesians.  
Both  were  bred  to Charolais  sires  as mature  cows while  an easy  calving  Limousin  
sire was used  for first calving  at two years  of age. The Charolais  cows  averaged  
over 100 kg heavier.  The overall  incidence  of calving  problems  was low and 
there  was no difference  in calf  birth  weights.  Daily  gains  from birth  to weaning  
were 1.10 and 1.19 for the calves  from Charolais  and Hereford  x Friesian  cows,  
respectively  (Table  3). This amounted  to a 240-day  weaning  weight  difference  
of approximately  22 kg in favour  of the Hereford  x Friesian  progeny.  This 
difference  in calf daily gain to weaning  was a reflection  of difference  in milk 
yield of the cows.  Averaged  over two studies,  milk yield at grass for spring  
calving  Charolais  and beef (Hereford  and Limousin)  x Friesian  cows were  7.3 
and 11.1 kg, respectively  (Table  4).
In three experiments,  the steer progeny  of the Charolais  and Hereford  x 
Friesian cows were taken to slaughter  and in two of these experiments  the pistola  
from one side of the carcass  was dissected  into meat,  fat and bone.  The average  
age of the Charolais  and Hereford  x Friesian  progeny  at weaning  was 217 and 
222 days, respectively.  Corresponding  weaning  weights  were 304 and 328 kg
Table  4
Cow milk yields  (kg per day)
Charolais Beef X Friesian
Experiment  1 7.6 12.1
Experiment  2 7.0 10.1
McGee  1997
133
(Table  5). When  fed similarly  from weaning  to slaughter  at about  2 years the 
final liveweights  were 678 and 697 kg, respectively.  Corresponding  carcass  
weights  were  384 and 393 kg. Thus,  the weight  difference  between  the progeny  
of the two breed  types  present  at weaning  was largely  present  at slaughter.  Carcass 
produced  per day of age was 531 and 540 g for the progeny  of the Charolais  
and Hereford  x Friesians,  respectively.  However, kidney plus channel  fat weight  
and carcass  fat scores  were lower  for the progeny  of the Charolais  cows,  while  
carcass  conformation  was better  than for the Hereford  x Friesian  progeny.
Table 5
Liveweight  and slaughter  data for steer progeny  for Charolais  and Hereford  x 
Friesian  cows (mean  of 3 experiments)
Charolais  dam Hereford  x Friesian  dam
Birth weight  (kg) 49.1 49.5
Weaning  weight  (kg) 304 328
Slaughter  weight  (kg) 678 697
Carcass  weight  (kg) 384 393
Age at slaughter  (days) 724 729
Carcass/day  of age (kg) 531 540
Kidney  + channel  fat (kg) 11.4 15.7
Carcass  fat score 3.8 4.1
Carcass  conformation  score 3.7 3.4
Table 6
Weight  and composition  of the pistola  from the steer progeny  of Charolais  and
Hereford  xFriesian  cows (mean  of 2 experiments)
Charolais  dam Hereford  x Friesian  dam
Carcass  weight  (kg) 371 383
Pistola  (g/kg carcass) 468 456
Muscle  g/kg) 675 643
Fat (g/kg) 153 181
Bone (g/kg) 172 176
When  expressed  as a proportion  of carcass  weight  the pistola  (higher  priced  
cuts) of the Charolais  progeny  was greater  than that of the Hereford  x Friesian  
progeny  (Table  6). The Charolais  progeny  had a greater  proportion  of meat  and 
a lower  proportion  of fat in the pistola  than the Hereford  x Friesian.  Although  
carcass  weight  of the Charolais  progeny  dissected  was 12.1 kg less than that 
of the Hereford  x progeny,  the meat yield in the pistola  was 5.0 kg greater  
(Table  7).
Due to the carcass  weight  difference  the carcasses  of the Hereford  x Friesian  
progeny  were worth  £22 more than the Charolais  progeny  when a flat price
134
Table 7
Value  of the steer progeny  dissected  when based on a flat price per kg or
muscle  yield
Charolais  dam Hereford  x Friesian  dam Difference
A. Carcass  weight  (kg) 371.2 383.3 -12.1
Pistola  weight  (kg) 173.6 174.6 -1.0
Fore weight  (kg) 197.6 208.7 -11.1
Muscle  in pistola  (kg) 116.4 111.4 +5.0
B. Muscle  in carcass  (kg) 293.0 232.1 +6.9
'Value  (£) based on A 668 690- -22
^Value  (£) based on B 719 -I-.693 +26
p/kg based on B 194 181 +13
'Carcass  = 180 p/kg
-Pistola  muscle  = 454 p/kg Forequarter  muscle  = 155 p/kg
(pistola  = 0.487 and 0.48 of carcass  muscle  for Charolais  and Hereford  x progeny,  respectively)
of 180p  per kg of carcass  was used (Table  7). However,  if the carcass  is valued  
on muscle  yield  with pistola  muscle  priced  at 454p  per kg and forequarters  (and  
flank)  muscle  at 155p per kg then the Charolais  progeny  are worth  £26 more  
than the Hereford  cross Friesian  progeny.  Based  on muscle  yield the carcass  
value of Charolais  and Hereford  x progeny  are 194,181p  per kg, respectively.  
Similar  calculations  (Keane)  showed  a difference  in value of 20p per kg of 
carcass  between  Hereford  x Friesian  and Charolais  x Friesian  steers.  Thus,  
assuming  a constant  carcass  weight  of 350 kg and the above  price  differentials,  
Charolais  x Friesian  and purebred  Charolais  steers would  be worth  £70 and 
£116,  respectively  more  than the Hereford  x Friesians.  This calculation  is based  
purely  on muscle  yield  and  does not allow  for the higher  priced  markets  available  
to the Charolais  or their potentially  higher  carcass  weights.
In conclusion,  the Charolais  progeny  (and cull cows)  result  in carcasses  of 
excellent  quality  (lean and of good conformation)  but the purebred  breeding  
programme  does not avail of hybrid  vigour  and the cows have low milk (and 
colostrum)  production  potential.
Breed  composition  of the suckler  herd
Presently  there are 1.18 million  suckler  cows in Ireland  and they account  
for 48 percent  of the total cow population.  Information  on cow and sire breeds  
in both suckler  and dairy  herd  was collected  in the National  Farm  Survey  (NFS)  
in autumn  1992  and 1998.  In the suckler  herd  Friesian/Holsteins,  early maturing  
breeds  and late maturing  breeds  accounted  for 20, 51 and 29% of the suckler  
cow herd, respectively  in 1992 (Table  8). Corresponding  figures  for 1998 were  
2, 46 and 52 percent.  Thus,  during  this six year period  the Friesian/Holsteins  
(no longer  eligible  for suckler  cow premia)  were  replaced  by continental  crosses  
(mainly  Charolais,  Simmental  and Limousin)  with the early maturing  breeds  
(Hereford,  Aberdeen  Angus  and Shorthorn)  decreasing  by 5 percentage  units.
135
Table 8
Cows and heifer  breed types (%) in suckler  herds
1992Cows
1998Replacement  heifers
1992 1998
Friesian/Holstein 20 2 7 1
Hereford  X 35 31 31 19
Aberdeen  Angus  X 9 12 9 19
Shorthorn 7 3 2 3
Charolais  X 7 17 15 20
Simmental  X 9 16 13 15
Limousin  X 8 15 15 20
Other 5 4 8 4
Total 100 100 100 100
An examination  of suckler  herd  replacements  showed that Charolais,  Simmental  
and Limousin  crosses  combined  increased  from 43 percent  in 1992  to 55 percent  
in 1998.  Thus,  the proportion  of continental  breed  crosses  in the suckler  herd 
is steadily  increasing  and it is also expected  that the proportion  of continental  
genes  in these crosses  is also increasing.  The data from the NFS show that 83 
percent  of mature  suckler  cows are bred to continental  sire breeds  (over half 
of which were to Charolais)  with no major  change  between  1992 and 1998  
(Table  9). Somewhat  more  than half  of the suckler  herd  replacements  were bred 
to continental  sire breeds  with 49 and 42 percent  bred to early maturing  breeds  
in 1992 and 1998, respectively.  The data from the NFS also indicates  that 49 
and 61 percent  of suckler  cows were bred using natural  mating  in 1992 and 
1998,  respectively.  The corresponding  figures  for heifers  were 55 and 46. Thus,
Table 9
Breed  of sire (%) used on suckler  cows and replacement  heifers
Cows Replacement  heifers
1992 1998 1992 1998
Hereford 11 9 20 11
Aberdeen  Angus 2 6 22 29
Shorthorn 2 1 2 3
Charolais 42 46 15 16
Simmental 16 16 11 10
Limousin 20 17 18 25
Other 7 7 10 5
Total 100 100 100 100
136
despite  the small herd size most animals  in the suckler  herd are bred using  
natural  mating  and the trend with mature  cows is for reduced  use of artificial  
insemination  (Al).
Future  breeding  policy  in the suckler  herd
The case for having  the terminal  sire from one of the continental  breeds  is 
clear (based  on growth  potential  and market  demands)  and where  a crossbred  
cow is used,  the bull should  be from  a third breed.  As the majority  will be using  
natural  service  the availability  of bulls  of high beef  merit  will be essential.  The 
breed type of suckler  cow cannot  be as clearly  defined  but the hybrid  vigour  
resulting  from using  a crossbred  and milk production  potential  are important.  
Limousin  x Friesian  spring  calving  cows  bred to an easy calving  Limousin  bull 
for their first calving  at two years of age and subsequently  to Charolais  (or 
Simmental)  sires has been the main cow type used at Grange  in recent  years.  
Conformation  scores  of the steer progeny  slaughtered  at 23/24  months  of age 
at over 390 kg carcass  weight  were 60 percent  U, 39 percent  R and 1 percent  
O (Table  10). Heifer  progeny  slaughtered  at 20 months  of age and 310 kg carcass  
weight  resulted  in 43 percent  of U and 57 percent  R. Fat scores  for both steers  
and heifers  were predominantly  4L and 4H. While the above carcasses  are 
satisfactory,  continued  movement  towards  Holsteins  in the dairy herd will 
gradually  result in a decline  in carcass  quality  from those three-quarter  
continental  animals.  Thus, in the longer  term if carcass  quality  is not only to 
be maintained  but improved  suckler  herd replacements  will need to be sourced  
from within  the suckler  herd.  While  many  breed combinations  can be suggested,  
one suitable  type cow would  be obtained  by alternate  crossing  of Limousin  
(good  conformation)  and Simmental  (milk production  potential)  with a third 
breed used as the terminal  sire (e.g. Charolais).  The potential  of these breeds  
to produce  carcass  of high quality  has been clearly  demonstrated  in previous  
studies  (Table  11; Keane,  1999).  These  breed  types  are already  widely  available  
and it is suggested  that certain  herds should  specialise  in the production  of 
suitable  replacements,  i.e. herds  with Simmentat  X cows use a Limousin  bull, 
while those with Limousin  X herds use a Simmental  sire.
Table 10
Carcass  grades  of the progeny  of Limousin  x Friesian  cows (6 years data)
Steers Heifers
Conformation  score (%) U 60 43
R 39 57
O 1 -
Fat score (%) 3 9 15
4L 42 47
4H 37 32
5 12 6
137
Relative  (FriesianTable 11
100) performance'  of Friesian  and beef x Friesian  steers
Sire
BreedCarcass
weightMuscle
weightConformation
scoreFat
scoreEye
muscle  areaFeed
efficiency
Friesian 100 100 100 100 100 100
Angus 99 94 127 120 100 90
Hereford 104 100 131 124 102 88
Limousin 105 111 140 101 118 83
Blonde 108 117 132 91 119 84
Belgian  Blue 109 119 140 91 120 85
Simmental 108 115 134 101 118 86
Charolais 111 118 144 95 123 84
‘At constant  age for steers out of Friesian  dams
Belgian  Blue
Due to high carcass  merit  the “double  muscled ” Belgian  Blue cattle  receive  
premium  prices compared  to other breed types, particularly  on the Belgian  
market.  For that reason  selection  for double-muscling  was widely  practiced  in 
Belgium  and as a result  the incidence  of dystocia  has increased  with caesarian  
sections  now common  practice.  Use of a Belgian  Blue bull on other  cow breed  
types results  in an incidence  of difficult  calving  similar  to that recorded  with 
other continental  sire breeds.  The main calving  problems  arises in purebred  
double  muscled  Belgian  Blues  and for that reason,  use of Belgian  Blue crosses  
could not be recommended  as suckler  herd replacements.  In a study (Flynn,  
Drennan  and Caffrey,  1999) involving  a relatively  small number  of animals,  
Belgian  Blue x Friesians  (17 animals)  had a higher  incidence  of calving  
difficulties  (29% caesareans)  than Limousin  x Friesians  (10% caesareans)  or 
Simmental  x Limousin  x Friesian  (no caesareans).  However, further  information  
is required  on the incidence  of calving  problems  in (1) Belgian  Blue  x Friesians,  
and (2) the progeny  of Belgian  Blue x Friesian  from a continental  bull breed,  
e.g. Limousin  x Belgian Blue  x Friesians  compared  with (3) conventional crosses  
(e.g. Limousin  x Friesian)  when crossed  with either  a standard  continental  breed  
of sire or a Belgian  Blue  sire. The availability  of such  data would allow informed  
recommendations  on the possible  role of Belgian  Blue as suckler  cow 
replacements.
Summary
• The highest  priced  markets  require  lean animals  of good conformation  and 
thus continental  breeds  must be used.
• Ideally  the cows should  be crossbred  (1/2 to full continental  breeds)  and 
the terminal  sire should  be from a third breed.
• Purebred  Charolais  provide  high quality  carcasses  but obviously  lack the 
advantages  of hybrid  vigour  and have low milk production.
138
Based on muscle  yield, 50 and 100 percent  Charolais  are worth  20p and 
carcass  more than Hereford  x Friesian.
Information  is required  on the incidence  of calving  problems  in Belgian  
Blue cross females.
References
Fallon,  R.J. and Drennan,  M.J. (1999).  Determining  the optimum  suckler  cow breed  
for Irish conditions.  Beef Production  Series No. 12.
Flynn,  J., Drennan,  M.J. and Caffrey,  P.J. (1999).  Level  of dystocia  in Belgian  Blue x 
Friesian  heifers  compared  to existing  suckler  breed types.  Agricultural  Research 
Fomm:  33-34.
Keane,  M.G. (1999).  Beef crossing  on the dairy herd. In: A New Agenda  for 
Dairying  Moorepark  Open Day; 35-38.
McGee,  M. (1997).  Defining  suckler  systems  in terms of efficiency  of lean meat 
production  and market  requirements.  Ph.D. thesis 1997.
139
Marketing  Beef  in Holland
ARNO  BOON
Albert  Heijn  Supermarket  Group,  Holland
In this paper I will summarise  Albert  Heijn ’s purchasing  policy and also 
discuss  consumer  trends,  the way in which  we identify  these trends  and our 
supplier  strategy.  But firstly  I will present  a short  profile  of Albert  Heijn  as part 
of the Ahold  company.
Albert  Heijn is part of Royal  Ahold,  a worldwide  operating  retail trading  
company.  Besides  many supermarkets  in the Netherlands,  Ahold  also has 
supermarkets  in the United  States,  the Far East and in South  America.  Last year  
the total turnover  amounted  to over 58.4 billion  guilders.  Albert  Heijn ’s 
supermarkets  are all found  in the Netherlands  with a high density  population.  
Ireland  is approximately  twice the size of the Netherlands,  yet we have  
approximately  three times the number  of inhabitants  of Ireland.  Albert  Heijn  
has always  been the largest  supermarket  chain  in the Netherlands  and currently  
has some 670 supermarkets,  of which approximately  170 are operated  as 
franchise  stores.  Last  year  the consumer  turnover  was approximately  12 billion  
guilders.  Our market  share in the Dutch foods and beverages  market  is 
approximately  28%. Albert  Heijn has 45,000  employees.  The Albert  Heijn  
formula  is characterised  by a wide  product  range  with a special  focus on service  
and quality.  This places  Albert  Heijn  at the top end of the market.
During  recent  years  we have  abandoned  the concept  of a uniform supermarket  
and have focused  on differentiation  within  and outside  of the supermarkets.  In 
the past, our supermarkets  were  mostly  situated  in the residential neighbourhoods  
of the cities. We are currently  developing  such new concepts  as mini ­
supermarkets  in Shell petrol stations  and in railway  stations,  neighbourhoods  
shops,  inner-city  supermarkets,  teleshopping  and we now also even have  a mini 
Albert  Heijn  in a major  hospital.  Our aim is to create  a service  concept  catering  
for the individual,  allowing  us to serve  customers  wherever  and whenever  they 
want. Because  consumers  often vary per geographical  region,  Albert  Heijn  
supermarkets  in the Netherlands  also vary.  We do our utmost  to take account  of 
and cater  for local circumstances  for the local market.
Albert  Heijn exists  by the grace of the customer.  If the customer  changes,  
we, as market  oriented  company,  will also have to change.  And the Dutch  
customer  is changing.  He has become  more  selective,  less predictable  and he is 
far more  demanding  than previously.  Customers  wish to obtain  their groceries  
in a supermarket  with  a wide  product  range,  at low prices  and with an excellent  
service  level.  Today ’s customer  has less time  and plans  less. Fixed  eating  patterns  
have been abandoned  under  the increasing  influence  of individualisation.  The 
moments  at which  people  eat are now determined  by the individual  himself.
In the Netherlands  the traditional  family  is no longer  the corner  stone  of our 
society.  There is a sharp increase  in the number  of small households  (two or 
three persons)  and the number  of working  women.  Furthermore,  there is a
140
decrease  in the number  of farmilies  with children.  The traditional  values  and 
building  blocks  on which  our society  was based  are slowly  crumbling.  A large 
number  of people  prefer  to create  their own purely  individual  lifestyle.
The customer  doesn ’t exist  anymore.  What  remains  are individual  customers  
whose  purchasing  behaviour  can vary from moment  to moment.  We call this 
the moment  consumer  whose  behaviour  may be characterised  as being  erratic.  
A result  of this change  is that we have  been  forced to increase  the product  range  
in the supermarkets.  Over  the past few years  the assortment  in an average  Albert  
Heijn  has increased  to 20,000  articles.
Albert  Heijn strives  to maintain  its carefully  built up quality  reputation  by 
focusing  on so-called  “anchor  groups ”, such as fresh  vegetables  and fruit,  coffee, 
bake-off  bread,  wine  and fresh  meat  We make  a clear  distinction  in assortments  
which  consist  of daily groceries  and low-priced  articles  and assortments  where  
emotion  and surprise  play an important  role. In this way we cater for both the 
rational  moments  of our customers  (daily  groceries,  ease, inexpensive),  as well 
as the emotional  moments  (surprise,  luxury,  hedonism).  The unique  and 
innovative  characters  of our fresh food products  and the ready-to-heat  meals  
play an essential  role in all of this. Top priority  is that we ensure  that all products  
sold under  our name  are of a consistently  good  quality.  Whereas  previously  the 
retail market  was extremely  fragmented,  nowadays  concentration  is the name 
of the game.  Supermarket  chains  are turning  into brand  names  and Albert  Heijn 
is such a brand  name  for the Dutch  consumer.  Consistent  quality  of our fresh 
food products,  such as meat, can help to establish  and bolster  such a brand 
name.
In order  to serve  the Dutch  consumer  better  and cater  for all his moods  at all 
moments  we have fine-tuned  our strategy  to this consumer.  We have changed  
from serving  the masses  to serving  the individual.  As mentioned  previously,  
differentiation  is of the essence.  Through  differentiation  we aim to be able to 
provide  each customer  with a vibrant  and heterogeneous,  own supermarket,  a 
supermarket  which  is able to satisfy  the true needs of the customer. These  needs  
are constantly  changing  under  the influences  of factors  such as: environmental  
considerations,  better  awareness  of price  and quality, time and demand  for ease. 
Such new demands  require  new answers  from  service-oriented  companies  such 
as Albert  Heijn.
We create  added  value  for our customers  and maintain  our competitive  edge  
through  differentiation  and through  focusing  on quality  both inside  and outside  
our supermarkets.  But in order  to ensure  that the price  difference  with regard  to 
our competitors  doesn ’t get too large, cost management  is an absolute  necessity.
Differentiation,  cost management  and a focus on quality  are therefore  the 
three pillars  on which  our strategy  is built. It is a combination  of three factors  
which,  according  to traditional  economists,  is hardly  feasible.  However,  thanks  
to the implementation  of modern  technology  in our logistical  processes  such a 
combination  has become  possible.  Albert  Heijn is a front-runner  in this field 
thanks  to economies  of scale and its position  as market  leader.
In order  to make  cost  management  and differentiation  possible  we have been 
busy for some time at improving  processes  both at the demand  as well as the
141
supply  side of the chain.  Close  cooperation  with our suppliers  is essential,  not 
only in order  to cut back  costs,  but also to increase  our added value  and be able 
to cater  for the needs of the changing  market  more  quickly,  more  efficiently  and 
in a more flexible  manner.
Our goal is to achieve  far more than simply  to implement  an efficient  
electronic  messaging  system  between  companies.  We hope to be able to co­
operate  with our suppliers  in such far reaching  matters  as product  ingredients,  
production  process,  farming  methods,  promotional  activities  and product  
development.  What  we want is co-makership.
Our latest  advertisement  campaign with the slogan  “Taste  the day” has focused  
on quality:  ‘relax and enjoy  our best quality  products ’ is the message.  When  we 
say ‘relax and enjoy ’ it means  that as the largest  supermarket  chain in the 
Netherlands  Albert  Heijn  has an indisputable  social  responsibility.  The Dutch  
consumer  expects  us to take on such a responsibility  as market  leader,  but also 
based  on the sense  of an individual ’s environmental  and social  awareness.
A good  example  is the successful  introduction  at the beginning  of this year 
of a large  range of organic  products.  As part of the introduction  of these  products  
Albert  Heijn  organised  an open  day during  which our customers  were welcome  
to visit  farms  throughout  the Netherlands  and take a closer  look  at the production  
methods.
The supermarket  is the last link in the chain between  the supplier  and the 
customer,  we offer  a hand that reaches  out to the consumer  and hands  him the 
end product.  Customers  can and do trust the quality  of the products  sold by 
Albert  Heijn.  It is therefore  Albert  Heijn ’s task to ensure  that customers  purchase  
an excellent  piece  of meat each and every  time, which  has been produced  in a 
safe and sound  manner  and which,  thanks  to cooking  instructions  provided  by 
Albert  Heijn,  customers  know  how to cook  properly.
We are no longer  the serving  hatch  through  which  products are simply  passed  
on from the supplier  to the customer,  although  some  suppliers  still think  we are. 
Albert  Heijn  is not the sales  person  for the supplier;  we are the  buying agent  for 
our customers.  This is an essentially  different  approach.  Our customers  wish to 
have a certain  supply  and we offer  it to them.  If we can purchase  the products  
locally  in the Netherlands  we will do so. If not, we will travel  the world  to find 
the necessary  products.
In order  to fully  effect  our responsibility  towards  the customer  and to eliminate  
unnecessary  costs,  Albert  Heijn  is constantly  striving  to improve its supply chain  
management.  We call this from field to yield.  Customers  also want  to know  the 
origin  of certain  products.  They want to have an answer  to specific  questions  
regarding  not only the product  ingredients  but also the production  methods.  
Customers  expect  us to set an example  in such areas  as environmental  care and 
health.  We could  even  state that it is the customer  who has forced  us to improve  
our supply  chain management.  And management  not in the sense of an up- 
down  structure,  but management  in the sense  of co-operation.
Only if we are able to properly  manage  the supply  chain  will we be able to 
guarantee  the origin  and quality  of the products.  We have no use for a product  
that finally  reaches  the shelves  of our supermarkets  after  having  been passed  on
142
between  innumerable  middlemen.  The more parties  concerned,  the higher  the 
cost price and the more anonymous  the product.
Supply  chain management  calls for identification  and traceability.  It is for 
this reason  that Albert  Heijn  insists  on being  informed  by its suppliers  about  the 
origins  and production  methods  of a product.  We call this the supply  chain 
guarantee  system.  Products  can be checked  during  any moment  in the supply  
chain  process  by means  of the so-called  ‘traceability  registration  system’ . This 
system  has been implemented  to a greater  extent  for certain  product  groups  
than for others,  due to such factors  as level of co-operation  with suppliers,  the 
market,  competition,  policy,  etc.
The customer  has become  increasingly  aware  of quality  and expects  to find 
quality  products  in our supermarkets.  He wishes  to be able to purchase  the 
same high-quality  steak  in the supermarket  which  he has eaten in a restaurant.  
Inferior  quality  won ’t do. As we say in the Netherlands:  “the butcher  is as good  
as his steak  is”.
As I have mentioned  previously  there is also the additional  factor  where  
meat  is concerned  and that is the fact that it is an “emotional ” product,  requiring  
that special  touch.  The true experience  of quality  and taste will only be fully 
realised  if certain  boundary  conditions  regarding  product  safety  and health  have 
been met.
The introduction  of Argentinean  beef in 1995 was a success.  For this beef,  
we require  that certain  preconditions  be met in the total supply  chain:  from the 
farm to Albert  Heijn
Argentinean  meat  is produced  in compliance  with a stringent  quality  control  
programme  which  closely  monitors  such matters  as type of cattle, herd 
management,  feed and use of medicines.  This same system  had already  been 
tried and tested  for the Irish beef and is once again  being  used in Ireland  after  
the re-introduction  of Irish beef in May this year.
Whereas  Argentinean  beef  serves  a niche  market  for Albert  Heijn  due to the 
limited  availability  of this beef at the right price/quality  ratio, the Irish Albert  
Heijn  Greenfields  beef  has a far larger  potential  market.  At present,  we import  
between  1200 and 1500 head of cattle per week from Ireland.  During  special  
promotional  activities  this volume  increases  significantly.  We expect  a further  
structural  increase  in volume  once the supply  chain  has been fully optimised.
I will now discuss  in more detail the requirements  set by Albert  Heijn for 
Irish beef. Not only must  Irish cattle  farmers  comply  with stringent  guidelines,  
the processors  must  do so as well. For instance,  we only  want  continental  breed  
from suckler  herds,  weighing  at least  300 kg and at most  400 kg. We also try to 
limit the number  of movements  of the animals.  All cattle should  be traceable  
and be reared  in compliance  with certain  animal  welfare  and environmental  
guidelines. A logbook  must  be kept by the farmer  for registering  animal  health  
planning.  In order to ensure  a proper  production  process,  it is essential  that 
cattle  are clean  on arrival  at the slaughterhouse.
General  conditions  must also be met by the processing  companies.  
Compliance  to these conditions  (like Farm Quality  Assurance)  are checked  
during  audits  conducted  by Albert  Heijn.  Terms  and conditions  that have to be
143
met for the production  of meat for Albert  Heijn  are: carcass  weight,  pH value, 
refrigeration,  tenderisation  process  (i.e. refrigeration  and electro-  stimulation),  
temperature  during  processing,  storage  and transportation  to Albert  Heijn.  In 
addition  to the controls  carried  out by Albert  Heijn,  an independent  certified  
institute  controls  the whole  chain.
We expect  that the total  sales  volume  of Irish  beef  will increase.  It is however  
essential  that we continue  to ensure  a high quality  of the end product  both as 
regards  extrinsic  as well as intrinsic  values.
At the beginning  of the supply  chain, more attention  must be given to 
environmental  aspects.  The environment  is something  that concerns  each one 
of us. It is a production  aspect  which  has during  the past few years received  
much  attention  in the Netherlands.  The farmers  who  raise  cattle  for Albert  Heijn 
must therefore  do their utmost  to use farming  methods  which  do not place a 
burden  on the environment.  We intend  to ensure  that all cattle are delivered  
straight  from the suckler  herds to the meat processing  companies.  Cattle  must  
be traceable,  by means  of an integrated  control  system,  from birth right  through  
to the moment  they are supplied  to Albert  Heijn. As yet, there  are still too many  
loose links in the supply  chain which  could cause problems  in the process.  
Last but not least, a close  relationship  between  farmer  and the meat  processing  
company  is essential  for the fine-tuning  of the process.  Price is still the most  
important  factor.  Although  pricing  will always  remain  important,  it should  be 
given  its proper  place  amongst  other  equally  important  or more important  factors 
which  determine  a co-makership  relationship  between  farmer,  meat processor  
and Albert  Heijn.
As soon as we have been able to create  the perfect  environment  for a  perfect  
product  we will be able to let our customers  experience  the perfect  emotion.  
Meat,  after all, is a product  full of emotion.
144
r -■
r'X ’ :
'::k.:--';. ■'
■T r^< 'mr:.
' -
i. .." 4’ > ^ , ;i' *4
■- -i: ;
‘''''- ■: ' '--K  , 
■ Z ' ■— ■■ '--- ''=-'■■
■ -:V3®
■-'■.-’t >"c^■V  /:->
- >■ '-.-’-I;“"3
