Irish Grassland  
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal  
1991
FARMERS
JOURNAL
'Mf VOICf  Of Ifif LANtjSfilf^lSl  lNDOS»H<The Road  
to Success
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association
JOURNAL
VoL 25 1991
Edited  by
SEAN  FLANAGAN
Printed  by Wicklow  Press Ltd., Wicklow
CONTENTS
Eleventh  Richards-Orpen  Memorial  LecturePage
1. G. Stakelum The production  and utilization  of grass  for grazing
and silage 3
2. C. S. Mayne Silage  intake  - a major  constraint  to low cost 
milk  production? 38
P. O’Kiely  and
T. KeatingBig bale silage 52
W. E. Murphy  and
N. CulletonNutrient  balances  in grassland 56
P. Dillon, Scope  for reducing  the costs  of milk
D. Cliffe  and
C. Flurleyproduction 68
C. F. R. Slade An optimistic  look at sheep  production  in 
the 90's 80
S. Flanagan Cutting  costs  in spring  lambing  flocks 84
A. P. Moloney Scope  for decreasing  feed costs  in winter  
beef  production 88
M. J. Drennan  and Economic  returns  from beef  production  and
M. G. Keane future  prospects 99
P. 0. Brophy Hygienic  nature  of grass  produced  beef 106
P. 0. Brophy External  parasites  of cattle 111
N. Leonard The prevalence  and control  of Leptospirosis  
in cattle 114
P. A. M. Rogers Copper  and iodine  deficiency  in cattle 117
R. J. Fallon Understanding  probiotics 125
J. B. Keane C.B.F.  Beef  Quality  Assurance  Scheme  - 
A marketing  opportunity 128
COUNCIL  1990/91
President : C. Crofts  
Vice-President : P. Caffrey
O. Carton,  M. Dempsey,  P. Dillon,  M. Drennan,  D. Fay, M. Keane,  G. Kerins,  
M. Magan,  K. Mathews,  B. Meade,  D. MacCarthy,  O.McDonnell,  P. O'Keeffe,
P. O'Kiely,  F. Shinnick,  G. Slakelum,  T. Reid.
Hon SecretarylTreasurer  : S. Flanagan  
Irish Gra.ssland  Association,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
ELEVENTH  RICHARDS-ORPEN  MEMORIAL  
LECTURE
1. The Production  and Utilization  of 
Grass  for Grazing  and Silage
G. STAKELUM
Dairy  Husbandry  Department,  Teagasc,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  
Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
I wish to sincerely  thank  the trustees  of the Richards-Orpen  Memorial  Trust  
for inviting  me to deliver  Part 1 of this lecture;  I share  the honour  with  Dr. Mayne  
of Hillsborough.  The work  of Moorepark  in the development  of grassland  based  
systems  of milk  production  goes  back  to the era of M. Walshe  and D. Browne  at 
the foundation  of An Foras  Taluntais.  The invitation  to me is a recognition  of 
Moorepark's  role in this area and a tribute  to the production  research  endeavour  
of the Dairy  Husbandry  Department  over that time.
The first grazing  experiment  at Moorepark  in 1960 was a comparison  of 
rotational  versus  set stocking  systems  of grazing  management.  There  were no 
concentrates  fed and nitrogen  input  was 22  kg/ha  on grazing  ground  and 44 kg/ 
ha on silage  ground.  Milk  yield  per cow and per ha was 2504  kg and 5147  kg, 
respectively,  at a stocking  rate of 0.49 ha/cow  for the rotational  grazing  
treatment.  Thirty  years  later  at Curtins  farm with a nitrogen  input  of 375 kg/ha  
and a stocking  rate of 0.34 ha/cow  with very little concentrate  (125 kg/cow)  a 
yield  of 5393 kg/cow  and 15862  kg/ha  has been achieved.  This is a three-fold  
increase  in milk output  per unit land area. This increase  is mirrored  by great  
technical  improvement  at farm level  and concurrent  changes  in the structure  of 
milk  suppliers.  There  is a core of dairy  farmers  who are now very receptive  to 
technological  efficiency  which  is based  on research  information.  Production  
research  at Moorepark  and its associated  stations  has provided  this information  
and given  dairy farmers  the confidence  to adopt  new practices.
This  paper  is an attempt  to outline  the present  state  of knowledge  with  regard  
to grassland  systems  for milk production,  to describe  the more  recent  research  
results  at Moorepark  and to identify  some  of the more important  areas where  
major  gaps  in knowledge  exist  and where  research  work  should  be focussed  over 
the next number  of years.
Introduction
The value  of total  agricultural  output  in Ireland  from  grassland  based  farming  
enterprises  is shown  in Table  1. Ruminant  based  enterprises  (cows,  cattle  and 
sheep)  represent  87%  of livestock  output  and 77% of gross  agricultural  output.  
Total agricultural  exports  accounted  for approximately  £3.335  billion  in 1989  
which  was about  23% of the total exported  value.
Land  use in Ireland  reflects  this predominance  of livestock  farming  and more  
specifically  grazing  livestock.  Table  2 shows  a breakdown  of land use in Ireland
Table  1
Output  of animal  product  (1989)  (Punts  in Billions)
Value
Cattle 1.208
Milk + Dairy  Products 1.189
Sheep  + Wool 0.179
Total Livestock* 2.949
Gross Agricultural  Output 3.358
*Includes  horses,  poultry,  eggs and pigs
Table  2(Finigelon,  1990)
Land use in Ireland
MiUion  Hectares Type
6,89 Total
5.67 Utilised 82%
2.97 Pasture 1
75%
1.26 Hay and Silage 1
1,00 Rough  grazing 17%
0.44 Tillage 8%
(Finigelon,  1990)
by major  category.  A total of 75% of the utilised  agricultural  land  is pasture  for 
grazing  and conservation.  Tillage  accounts  for less than 10%.
Over  90% of annual  feed requirement  of a spring  calving  dairy  cow and  95% 
for a beef  animal  comes  from grazed  grass  and conserved  grass  products  such  as 
silage  and hay. Food  production  from  arable  crops  is energetically  more  efficient  
than any form  of animal  production  (Van  Es, 1979). In Ireland,  however,  arable  
crops would be no alternative  to grassland  because  of limitations  such as 
unploughable  land, drainage  and climate.  Economic  conditions  also make it 
more profitable  to use grassland  for livestock  production  rather than arable  
crops.
Figure  1 shows  the various  losses  of energy  which  occur  when grazed  grass  
is eaten  by ruminants.  Herbage  growth  is the difference  between  the growth  of 
the new  plant  and material  losses  due to decay.  These  losses  which  occur  during  
sward  growth  development  are also  effective  during  the grazing  period.  Grazing  
effects  such as trampling  and contamination  by faeces  render  some herbage  
unavailable  or more inaccessible  to the animal. The residual  herbage  after  
grazing  can partly  be used in succeeding  grazing  periods.  A proportion  of the 
energy  in the herbage  eaten  by the animal  is lost in faeces,  urine  and methane.  
The energy  of ingested  herbage  less these  losses  gives  the metabolizable  energy  
(ME) which  is converted  into heat and energy  in animal  products.  The most
HERBAGE  GROWTHuLOSSES  10-30%
RESIDUAL  HERBAGE
CONSUMED
I L
DIGESTED
I LPEACES 15-25%
URINE + METHANE 20%
METABOLISED
1 LHEAT (MAINTENANCE)
62%
NET PRODUCTION
Fig. 1 - Sources  of energy  loss in the utilization  of graded  pasture  by dairy  cows
important  energy  loss  within  the animal  is heat. Part  of this  represents  energy  that 
is needed  for maintenance.  The remainder  arises  from  inefficiency  in the use of 
ME for either  maintenance  or production  of milk  and tissues.  The efficiency  of 
utilization  of ME for maintenance  and for production  of milk  appears  not to vary 
much  and is close  to 62%.
Faecal  energy  losses  are variable  because  they are related  to diet  digestibility  
and this can vary  considerably  in relation  to intake,  herbage  species,  climate  and 
stage  of maturity.
The same  principles  apply  to silage  production  and utilization  in that losses  
in the field  allied  to in silo and feeding  losses  all combine  to give accumulated  
inefficiencies.  Herbage  utilization  rates under  cutting  regimes  are higher  than 
that for grazed  grass  (Richards,  1977). Gordon  (1988)  has reviewed  the losses  
associated  with the different  silage  harvesting  systems.
Grassland  and grazing  research  aim to  find  an optimum  compromise  between  
individual  animal  performance  and output  from the farm or per unit land area.  
Optimum  efficiency  of grassland  utilization  is not always  compatible  with 
optimum  nutrition  of the grazed  animal. An understanding  of the various  
elements  in Figure  1 and the controls  and influences  which  alter the various  
processes  is the long term goal of grazing  research.  Many  different  biological  
and statistical  sciences  are involved  from botany  and pasture  ecology  to animal  
biochemistry  and physiology.
Systems  of milk production
The system  of milk  production  adopted  in Ireland  is basically  the conversion  
of grass  to milk  at the lowest  possible  cost. The  system  is based  on high-stocking  
rates,  early  turn-out  to pasture,  300 Kg N/ha  and rotational  grazing  with two  cuts 
of silage. Early  and compact  calving  6-8 weeks  prior  to turn-out  in spring  has 
been adopted  for spring-calving  milk production  systems.  McCarthy  (1979)  
reviewed  the 21 years  of grassland  and grazing  work  at Moorepark  from which 
the system has been developed.  Crosse (1988)  describes  a management  
blueprint  for dairy  farming  on free-draining  and wet land  based  on the linking  of 
key decisions  to calendar  dates. The calendar  approach  was necessary  because  
of lack  of organisation  of both  farm facilities  and managerial  ability.  Winter  feed 
requirement  was identified  as a fundamental  restriction  to intensification.  This 
strategy  outlines  a management  approach  to achieving  those  targets  consistently.  
Dairy  farmers  were  encouraged  through  this approach  to maximise  farm output  
by keeping  as many  cows  per ha as possible.  Output  per cow was secondary  in 
pre-quota  days to output  pier ha. When  the stock  carrying  capacity  of the farm 
was reached  further  increases  in output  were  achieved  by increasing  individual  
output  per animal. Costs  of milk production  were not a central  theme  then. 
Efficiency  was measured  by gross  margins/ha  or as output/ha.  They  ignored  the 
fixed  costs factor. Today,  with the imposition  of quotas  and super-levies,  the 
efficiency  of dairy  farming  is measured  as the cost  per gallon  and dairy  farmers  
should  be concerned  with reducing  this cost of production.
Dillon  and Stakelum  (1990a)  have shown  the costs of milk production  of 
efficient  and less efficient  dairy farmers  in the Cork  area. Grassland  manage ­
ment  on dairy  farms  is the key element  for making  the process  of milk  production  
more  efficient  both in terms  of herbage  utilization  and cost. The principal  issues  
relating  to grass  production  and utilization  for milk production  and how they 
relate  to a simple  low-cost  system  will now be examined.
Grass  production
Maximum  yields  of 27-3()tDM/ha/annum  based  on theoretical  potentials  can 
be produced  from grass  swards  under  our conditions  (Keife,  1978). Moorepark  
cutting  trials  with ploLs  receiving  optimal  N, S, P, and K and cut every 4 weeks  
have  produced  yields  of 13.75t  DM/haover  9 years  (Dulon  & Stakelum,  1988/ 
89). The range  was from 83 to 134% of the average,  depending  on the year. 
These values compare  with similar  values (McCarthy,  1984) found under  
intensive  grazing  conditions.
There  are many factors  affecting  grass  production  and it would  be impossible  
to deal exhaustively  with them in this paper. Some excellent  reviews  are 
available  (Holmes,  1989).  Some  of the more  important  primary  factors  affecting  
production  are soil type and nutrients  status,  climate  and location  and species  
composition.  All of these  factors  interact  with each other. The production  of 
herbage  is also affected  by management  factors  as imposed  by the farmer  such  
as method  of utilization  (e.g. cutting  and grazing),  rest interval,  method  of 
grazing  (e.g. rotational  versus  continuous)  and stocking  rate.
In farm practice  it is not feasible  to operate  at biological  optima. Many  
compromising  restraints  set limits  such  as the economic  optimum.  Additionally,  
there  are issues  of animal  welfare  and environmental  considerations  as well as 
milk quota  restrictions.
Stocking  rates  and nitrogen  input
These  two factors  are the most  important  ones  directly  under  farmer  control  
which  will  determine  the efficiency  of grass  utilization  and maximization  of farm 
output.  The average  stocking  rate in acres  per cow for Ireland  is 1.6 and in the 
mainly  dairying  category  it is 1.5 (Fingleton,  1991).  By soil class  the figures  are 
1.4,1.6  and 2.1 acres/cow  for soil class 1 to 3, respectively.  Nitrogen  usage  is 
85 kg/ha  on dairy farms  with 107 kg/ha  used on silage  ground  (Murphy  and 
O'Keeffe,  1985).  This indicates  a gross  degree  of understocking  on dairy  farms  
nationally.  Table  3 outlines  the average  N input  by farming  system.  The input  
of 12 and 21 kg N/ha on drystock  and mixed  dry stock/dairy  farms  speaks  for 
itself.
Table  3
Nitrogen  usage  (kg/ha)  by farm enterprise
Enterprise Amount
D 85
D + DS 21
D + DS + T 58
DS 12
DS + T 91
HS + DS* 47
For Conservation
Silage 107
Hay 60
(Murphy  & O'Keeffe,  1985)
Priority  use of nitrogen  for dairying  is as follows:  (1) nitrogen  for silage;  (2) 
nitrogen  for early grass;  (3) nitrogen  for grazing.  Grazing  experiments  which  
compared  the responses  to applied  nitrogen  for milk and beef  production  used 
various  low nitrogen  treatments.  Some  were  zero  N or N for silage  only while  
others  used N for silage  and early grass. Gately  et al. (1984)  reviewed  N by 
stocking  rate experiments  at Moorepark  and Johnstown  Castle  carried  out by
Table  4
Increase  in stock-carrying  capacity
Nitrogen  (kg/ha)
BL NH % Change
Dry Land 202 365 19
Wei Land 64 240 32
(Galeley  et al., 1984)
Browne,  McCarthy,  McFeely,  Gately  and Stakelum  from 1967-1980.  Table  4 
shows the mean percentage  change  in stock  carrying  capacity  on freely  and 
imperfectly  drain^  sites used in the studies.  The percentage  change  appears  
much  higher  for wet soils. This  is because  the N levels  studied  were  in the more  
responsive  range.  Analysis  of the data  showed  that  the maximum  change  in stock  
carrying  occurred  on Iwth soil types in all years at 300 kg N/ha. There  was 
considerable  variation  in the change  in stock  carrying  capacity  from  year  to year,
i.e lowest  in Year 1 and highest  in Year  3 of the experiments  in question.  The 
changes  above  300 kg/ha  were  small.  McCarthy  (1985)  found  a 4% increase  in 
milk output  per cow and per hectare  at a stocking  rate of 3.1 cows/ha  by 
increasing  annual  N input from 270 to 390 kg/ha. This is very close to that 
predicted  by the model  of Gately  et al. (1984).
The growth  of grass  over the season  is unevenly  distributed  and utilization  
must  be achieved  by both the grazing  animal  and conservation.  The integration  
of the cutting  and grazing  areas constitutes  a grazing  system.  Extra  nitrogen  
provided  in a system  will increase  the overall  output  of the pasture  and hence  the 
stock-carrying  capacity.  However,  the response  to extra  N will be uneven  across  
the growing  season  and will therefore  also have  an effect  on the components  of 
the system  such as the optimum  area to close  for the various  conservation  cuts,  
the start of the grazing  season,  use of supplementary  feeds,  etc. Increasing  
herbage  output  in a situation  where  a system  is operating  at maximal  utilization  
could be expected  to increase  output  per animal  and per area if the system 
continues  to operate  at that level of efficiency.  The questions  which  arise in 
relation  to this are:
1. How well is the efficiency  of a grazing  system  known?
2. Have  the various  ouq)ut  of pasture  by stocking  rate experiments  operated  at 
optimal  efficiency  throughout  the grazing  season?
3. Would  the responses  achieved  have  been different  under  different  levels  of 
defoliation  or by using  different  systems  or criteria?
Milk production  based  on perennial  ryegrass/white  clover  pastures
In view of the low rates  of N used on dairy  farms  nationally  (much  higher  N 
rates are used on intensively  managed  dairy farms)  and the low stocking  rates,  
white  clover  based  pastures  would  seem to have a place  in milk production  in 
Ireland.  Ryden  and Garwood  (1986)  estimated  that leaching,  denitrification  and 
ammonia  losses were 8, 10 and 12 times higher  in grazed  ryegrass  swards
8
receiving  420 kg N/ha compared  to a grazed  ryegrass/white  clover  sward  
receiving  zero N. In the high-N  sward,  160 kg N/ha  was leached  annually.
Various  estimates  have  been  reported  for theN-fixing  ability  of white  clover.  
Murphy  (1987)  found  a range  from 94-194  kg N/ha  while  Frame  and Newbold  
(1986)  found  values  of 80-280  kg. The fixing  ability  of white  clover  swards  is 
highly  dependent  on the clover  content  of the sward  (Mamott  and Rangeley,  
1984) which is in turn adversely  affected  by the level of applied  nitrogen  
fertilizer.  This is illustrated  in Figure  2 from Frame  and Boyd  (1987). The 
average  response  of a white  clover/ryegrass  sward  to extra  nitrogen  is 8-9 kg 
DM/kg  N (Frame  and Newbould,  1986)  compared  to a response  of 25 kg DM 
from  a grass  sward  in the range  of 0-300  kg N/ha/annum  (Frame  and Newbould,  
1984). Figure  3 shows  a generalised  effect  of increasing  N on grass  and grass/  
white  clover  swards.  The  fertilizer  nitrogen  equivalent  value  for the white  clover  
swards  (the amount  of N which  needs  to be applied  to a grass  sward  to achieve  
the same  yield  of DM as from a white  clover/grass  sward  receiving  zero N) is 
between  175-200  kg N/ha/annum.
An evaluation  of white  clover  swards  for milk  production  between  the years  
1967-1980  at Johnstown  Castle  and  reviewed  by Ryan  (1986)  showed  an average  
response  of 30% in milk output/ha.  This translates  to 40% when  fitted to the 
model  of Gately  et al (1984).  The  do  ver  percentage  in the sward  where  measured  
in these  trials  ranged  from 2-18%.  Five years  of research  (Ryan,  1988)  with a 
Cropper/Francis/Huia  sward  receiving  zero  N on grazing  ground  and 386 kg N/ 
ha on 33%  of the farm  containing  Italian  ryegrass  has been  compared  to perennial  
ryegrass  sward  receiving  361 kg N. The Italian  cut was 3-4 times  each year  and 
slurry  seeded  each  autumn.  The  exua  stock-carrying  capacity  occasioned  by the 
extra  N was  20%. Clover  decreased  from  50%  in first  year  to 20%  in the last year.  
Bryden  et al. (1990)  found  in a trial comparing  zero  N white  clover  and ryegrass  
swards (N=350  kg^a)  that the zero  N swards  had invariably  less (70%)  herbage
Fig. 2 - Effect  of fertilizer  N rates  on white  clover  content (Frame  and Boyd,  1987)
9
YIELD
Fig. 3 Generalised  effect  of N application  on yield (Frame  and Newbould,  1984)
than the N swards,  but consistently  higher  OMD  levels.  Bax (1989)  fed an extra  
300 kg of concentrate  to cows  with  zero N  on white  clover/ryegrass  pastures  to 
maintain  the same  milk  yield  as cows  on the N sward.  The  effective  stocking  rate 
was 2.25 cows/ha  on both swards.
It would seem,  therefore,  that while  output  per hectare  is some  20-30%  lower  
with white  clover  at a given  stocking  rate, at a lower  intensity  output  could  be 
equivalent.  The uncertainty  of pasture  output  from year to year is a major  
problem.  Also  seasonal  production  of herbage  is altered  especially  in spring  by 
re ymg on atmospherically  fixed N. Murphy  (1987)  examined  the effects  of 
spring  N application  (50 kg/ha)  on N fixation  levels  and DM production.  A 
res^nse  of 10 kg DM/kg  extra  N (5%) was achieved.  N fixation  was reduced  
by 29 kg and 52 kg by urea  and CAN,  respectively.  This  indicates  a much  higher  
inhibitory  effect  by CAN  compared  to urea.
Research  priorities  for white  clover
It seems  that white  clover  may play a more  significant  role in the future  in 
grassland  based animal production  systems  especially  due to the possible  
environmental  restrictions  which  may  be enforced  on stocking  rates  and  N usage. 
At present,  the favourable  milk price/nitrogen  price  ratio still favours  N usage.  
At circa  300 kg N/ha,  N will contribute  3-4p  to the cost  of producUon  of 1 gallon  
of quota. However,  certain  priorities  in research  for the future  are necessary.
10
Understanding  Nature
Knowing  when  to give  a helping  hand
At AIR we realise  that a farmer ’s financial  
needs can vary as much as the seasons  
themselves.  And that ’s why we offer seasonal  
finance  to cover  such things  as main  farm inputs,  
and stock retention.  We have short term loans  
for machinery,  and longer  term loans for major  
work on the farm. We ’ve tried to make these  
services  as individual  as we can, to suit your  
individual  needs.
We also offer the full range of AIR Rank  
facilities,  including  Ranklink,  Masterplan,  Visa  
and Spectrum.
And we offer  you our commitment - because  
everyone  at AIR wants  to do better.  Tell us your  
needs.  Help  us understand.  Recause  the more  we 
understand,  the better  we’ll be able to help you.
AIB
.YOU  BRING  OUT  THE BEST  IN US.
11
There  is no clover  work now in progress  since the Grassland  Programme  in 
Johnstown  Castle  was terminated.
(1) Varieties
Eroding  objectives  of white clover  are based on improving  yield and 
reliability,  improving  spring  growth  and cold tolerance,  and disease  resistance.  
Yield  and persistency  under  severe  grazing  is important  for Irish conditions.  
Selection  for seed yield (shortage  of seed is a problem  with the newer  more  
desirable  varieties)  potential  is also a consideration.  An improvement  in N- 
fixation  ability  and a certain  N tolerance  is an advantage  for dairy farming  
systems  especially  where  early  turnout  is feasible.  Non-bloating  clover,  too, is 
important.
The most obvious  problem  with white clover  is its incompatibility  with 
perennial  ryegrass.  Conditions  which  lead to vigorous  growth  of the grass  will 
have an adverse  effect  on white  clover. Tetraploids  are more  compatible  than 
diploids  with no difference  between  early  and late ryegrass  varieties.  The co­
adaptation  concept  (Burdon,  1983;  Harper,  1967)  where  both components  are 
selected  from coexisting  genotypes  offers prospects  for compatibility  and 
production.  Evans  et al. (1985)  showed  a yield  of total herbage  from S23/white  
clover  sward  of 7.4 t/ha (5.1 t^a for white  clover  component)  where  clover  was 
69%  of the sward.  The  production  from the co-adapted  species  was 10.3t/ha  for 
total herbage  (7.It for the white clover  component)  and the clover  remained  at 
69% of the sward.
(2) Establishment
There are firm guidelines  laid out for the establishment  of white clover  
swards.  Management  guidelines  refer  to methods  of sowing,  depth and time  of 
sowing,  etc. Of more  importance,  however,  is the introduction  of white  clover  
into existing  pastures  or where  white  clover  has become  depleted.  Drilling  the 
existing  sward after a heavy silage crop with the use of an herbicide  is 
recommended.  More information  is needed  for the different  circumstances  
which  could  prevail.
(3) Grazing  management
The optimum  grazing  management  for efficient  utilization  and high digesti ­
bility  in pastures  is 6 cm post-grazing  sward  height  (Stakelum  and Dillon,  1988).  
Is this optimum  for white  clover  maintenance?  A height  of 7-9 cm is recom ­
mended  for rotational  grazing  with  cattle.  TTiere  is an obvious  conflict  here. Hay 
and Bax  ter (1984)  in New  Zealand  suggest  that  continuous  grazing  in spring  and 
rotational  grazing  in summer  may be the ideal system. French  methods  
(Pflimlin,  1984)  for cattle  favour  4-5 week rest intervals  in early  season  and 6- 
7 week intervals  in late season.
White  clover  is much more tolerant  of longish  rest intervals  and cutting  
regimes  than once believed.  A silage  sward  based  on clover/grass  can produce  
70% of the yield of a grass sward  receiving  300-350  kg N/ha/year  (Roberts,  
Frame  and Leaver , 1989).  The  incorporation  of a silage  cut has a beneficial  effect  
on white  clover  in a sheep  grazing  system  (Curll  and Wilkins,  1983). The con­
12
struction  of a management  system  integrating  silage  and cutting  may  be difficult  
where  a two sward  system  is adopted  because  of necessity  rather  than  choice.
Strategic  use of N in a way which  does not diminish  white  clover  content  in 
the sward  could  be used to make  up the shortfall  in spring  and autumn  growth.  
Nitrogen  use in spring  is more  detrimental  than autumn  applied  nitrogen.
Conclusions
The contribution  of white  clover  to pasture  production  at low N rates  at farm  
level is most  certainly  much  lower  than that found  at experimental  level. The 
reasons  are likely to be many and varied. The evaluation  of managements  
designed  to optimise  white clover  performance  are very different  to what  
pertains  on farms. There  are many  other  priorities  in production  systems  other  
than sward  management  for white  clover  encouragement  or maintenance.  A 
system  which  can maintain  clover  at 30-40%  of the sward  year  in year  out is the 
task which  research  in this area has to solve.
Reseeding  pastures
In Ireland,  about 130,000  ha are reseeded  annually.  Many methods  of 
reseeding  exist  from  spring  and autumn  seeding  with  full cultivation,  undersow ­
ing cereals  or arable  silage  crops to various  forms  of overseeding  and direct  
drilling.  It is not the intention  here to review  the various  reseeding  techniques  
but to discuss  the place  of reseeding  in animal  production  systems  in Ireland.
Pastures  are reseeded  for a number  of reasons.  The productivity  or output  of 
the existing  pasture  may  be considered  too low due to a poor  proportion  of highly  
productive  grasses  like  perennial  ryegrass.  In that  context,  the present  utilization  
rate should  be optimum  and the boost  in production  which  ensues  should  be 
utilised  fully in order to justify  reseeding.  In the context  of existing  low 
production  levels  from pasture  it should  be clearly  identified  as to what  factors  
are inhibiting  production.  Soil nutrient  status  and levels  of fertilizer  inputs  may 
be sub-optimal  for the desired  production.  A change  in grazing  strategy  by 
increasing  the level of herbage  removed  at individual  grazings  will have  a very 
beneficial  effect  on pasture  composition  over a few years. In situations  where  
tillage  is an integral  farm enterprise  or where  land reclamation  is carried  out, 
reseeding  pastures  may be necessary  as a normal  or necessary  farm operation.  It 
is in thearea  of silage  production,  especially  on two-sward  systems,  where  silage  
yields  are insufficient  to meet  winter  feed requirements,  that reseeding  has its 
most  important  role to play in dairy  production.
Comparisons  of permanent  and reseeded  pastures
A general  point  is worth  making  at the outset. Comparisons  of reseeds  and 
permanent  pastures  suffer  notably  from the fact that "permanent  pastures  can 
mean anything  from a ryegrass  dominated  pasture  to something  with a zero 
ryegrass.  Many  observations  on the differences  lack any quantification  of the 
composition  of the permanent  pasture.
The outstanding  attribute  of perennial  ryegrass  is, as its name implies,  
persistency  over  a range  of management  techniques.  Yield  levels  are higher  than 
for the Poas, Holcus  lanatus  and the Agrostis  species  (Table  5). These  are
13
Table  5
Herbage  yields  of different  grass  species  (TDM/ha)
240Fertilizer  N nce/hat
480 OMD
PRG 9.7 13.2 0.80
HL 8.8 11.5 0.76
AS 8.6 10.5 0.71
AT 8.0 10.0 0.70
PT 6.8 8.8 0.75
Frame,  1983
common  grasses  in permanent  unimproved  old pastures.  Also,  the digestibility  
and growing  season  are higher  and longer  respectively  than those  grasses  and it 
has higher  ensilability  characteristics.  Higher  intakes  at similar  digestibility  
levels  are also a feature  of ryegrass  due possibly  to palatability  effects.
The inferior  grasses,  however,  are not outyielded  to the same extent  by 
perennial  at more modest  N input levels  (Table  5.) Smith  and Alcock  (1985)  
showed  that when pastures  contain  mixtures  of species  which vary in yield  
potential,  the output  reached  is higher  than the mean  for the species  present  and 
similar  to that of the highest-yielding  component  (Table  6). Hopkins  et al. 
(1990)  concluded  that while  reseeds  (Melle)  were more  productive  in the year 
after sowing,  many  permanent  swards  are capable  of high levels  of production  
and that  reseeding  to a ryegrass  sward  cannot  ^ways  be  justified,  particularly  for 
grassland  receiving  low or moderate  inputs  of N. Figure  4 outlines  data  extracted  
from this experiment  across  16 sites in England  and Wales  and at two N input  
levels.  It shows  a large  response  in Year  1 and  small  or negative  responses  to 300 
and 150kg/N/ha,respectivelyinthe2subsequentyears.  The  permanent  pastures  
were  mostly  over  20 years  and contained  less than 30% ryegrass.  Quality  (fibre) 
assessments  indicated  a small  advantage  to the reseeded  swards.  Figures  5a and 
5b, from the same  experiment  show the production  averaged  for years  over a 
range  of N inputs  for the 3 subsequent  years  from the seeding  year (Figure  5a) 
and including  the production  in the seeing  year (Figure  5b). At N levels  up to 
150 kg/ha  or greater  the response  to reseeding,  if the establishment  year was 
ignored,  was relatively  constant.  With the inclusion  of the establishment  year, 
the response  disappears.  This emphasises  the need to use sowing  techniques
Table  6
Yields  gf sward  types  at 300kg  N/ha
i DM/HA
PRG + WC 12.6
Mixture12.9
Mean  of monoculturc,s  of mixture 10.5
(Smith  & Allcock,  1985)
14
which  minimize  the loss of production  in the sowing  year.
Conway,  McLoughlin  and Murphy  (1972)  reported  that perennial  ryegrass  
responds  to improved  management  and fertilizer  inputs by increases  in its 
contribution  to overall  pasture  output. Culleton  (1989)  reported  that stock ­
carrying  capacity  of old permanent  pasture  increased  from 86% to 94% of that 
of a reseeded  sward  (Melle)  in the third year when  measured  by liveweight  gain 
of grazing  steers. This increase  was associated  with an increase  in perennial  
ryerass  content  in the sward  from 3% in Year 1 to 32% in Year 3. The yield  
improvement  under  a cutting  regime,  however,  for the old permanent  pasture  
while it  increased  from 9.3 to 10.8 t DM/ha  was not associated  with an increase  
in ryegrass  in the first 2 years. The reseeded  swards  under  the same cutting  
regime (Talbot) decreased  from 14.9 to 13.6 and 12.2 1 DM/ha  in Years  1,2 and 
3, respectively.  This was associated  with a decrease  in the ryegrass  component  
of the sward  from  99 to 75% in the first  2 years.  The yield  advantage  was 60,33  
and 13% in Years  1 to 3, respectively  in favour  of the reseed.  The comparisons  
were carried  out on a three-cut  silage system. The author  concluded  that
15
16
reseeding  of old pastures  gave increased  liveweight  gain under  grazing  for the 
first  2 years  and by Year  3 the advantage  was small  due to improvement  in yield  
and animal  performance  on the old pasture  due to increased  ryegrass  content.  
Under  silage the yield advantage  was maintained  over the duration  of the 
exjreriment  but the reseeds  tended  to deteriorate  in spite  of adequate  nutrition  and 
management.
McCarthy  and Cullinane  (1982),  working  on a whole-farm  comparison  of 
reseeded  and  old permanent  pasture  for milk  production  reported  an overall  10% 
increase  in silage harvested  over 3 years in a two-cut  regime. The yield  
advantage  was 20% for the first cut (6.7 versus  5.6 t DM/ha)  and -3% for the 
second  cut (4.5 versus  4.6 1 DM/ha).  The milk  production  response  to reseeding  
was 3% and 8% at low and high stocking  rates,  respectively.  The differential  
response  illustrates  the point made  earlier  that responses  to increased  pasture  
output  depend  on the level of utilization  achieved.  Poa Trivialis  predominated  
the old pastures  at 36% by tiller  count  followed  by Agrostis  species  at 29%. The 
perennial  was 7% and other  grasses  were 29% and were comprised  mostly  of 
Holcus  lanatus  and Fcstuca  Rubra.  The major  change  in composition  of the old 
pasture  over  4 years  was a decrease  in P. trivialis  from 38 to 22% and an increase  
in ryegrass  from 7 to 17%. The major  change  in the reseeds  was an increasing  
density  and an invasion  of unsown  species  particularly  P. trivialis.
Keating  et al (1989,1990)  found  that  carcass  gains  and  carcass  output/ha  were  
substantially  higher  on Italian  and perennial  ryegrass  silages  than  old permanent  
grass silages. The carcass  gains/day  were 0.59,  0.57 and 0.54g  for 1987,  and 
0.54,0.44  and 0.38  for 1988 for Italian,  perennial  and old pastures,  respectively.  
The quantities  of silage  harvested  in the first  year  showed  a substantial  advantage  
in favour  of the Italian ryegrass  (16.9 tonnes/ha  for 5 cuts)  compared  to 14.3 and 
14.0 tonnes  (from  4 cuts) for the perennial  and old permanent  pastures,  respec ­
tively. In the 2nd year the quantities  were  identical  for all swards.  In Year 1, all 
material  had broadly  similar  digestibilities  and preservation.  In Year  2, however,  
the Italian  and perennial  silages  preserved  well and had high digestibilities  
(>73%).  The old pasture  preserved  more poorly  and had lower  digestibility  
(67%).  While  there  was no advantage  in intake  and daily  liveweight  gain in Year  
1, there  were large differences  in liveweight  gains  (0.92,0.76  and 0.67 kg/day  
for Italian,  perennial  and old pastures)  and intake  (7.4,6.6, and 6.5kg  DM/day  
for Italian,  perennial  and old pastures)  (7.4,6.6,  and 6.5kg  DM/day)  in Year  2. 
The results  showed  that carcass  output/ha  for finishing  steers  was higher  for the 
reseeded  pastures  compared  to the old pastures  in each of the two years.
Translation  of dry matter  production  responses  under cutting  to grazing  
situations  is not correct  lor many  reasons.  Most  comparative  response  work  to 
different  ryegrass  culiivars  has been done under cutting  and therefore  the 
influence  of the animal  in terms  of treading,  pattern  of defoliation,  recycling  of 
nutrients,  etc. is ignored.  There  arc problems  associated  with the evaluation  of 
ryegrass  cultivars  under  grazing,  not least  being  their  different  heading  dates  and 
seasonal production  pattern.  This raises  issues  regarding  their  managements  in 
that optimum  output  may be achieved  with one cultivar  with  a specific  grazing  
management  system,  the optimum  output might be achieved  with another
17
cultivar  with a different  system. Gately  (1984)  examined  cultivars  of Melle  
(vigour)  and Cropper  for milk production  over 5 years  in a grazing  trial at two 
stocking  rates. He found  a 9% advantage  to Melle  at low stocking  rate  and a -7% 
disadvantage  to Melle  at high  stocking  rate in terms  of milk  output  per hectare.  
This interaction  between  cultivars  and stocking  rate raises  a central  pxtint in 
grazing  management  for milk production,  i.e. in situations  of undergrazing  
digestibility  declines  and intakes  and hence  performance  deteriorates.  Gately  
(1984)  showed  (Figure  6) a substantial  digestibility  decline  in mid-season  with  
the early-heading  variety  compared  to the later one at low-stocking  rate. The 
author  suggested  on the basis  of no stocking  rate effect  with the early  ryegrass  
that still further  improvements  in output  per hectare  could  have  been achieved  
with further  increases  in stocking  rate. What  is implicit  is that management  or 
defoliation  severity  was not optimum.  The author  also  drew  attention  to the fact 
that the seasonal  production  pattern  of the early  ryegrass  may be  more  suited  to 
the appetite  requirements  of the spring-calving  cow.
Oigesiibihly  (X OMO)
Fig. 6 - Mean  digestibility  for each grazing  cycle  at the low stocking  rate in 1981
(Gately,  1984)
18
VOLACSHawrap
■ ” TM
Ireland's  No. 1 system  for Big Bale Silage
EVERY  DAIRY  FARMER  
SHOULD  MAKE  SOME
BIG BALE  SILAGE
High quality,  cost effective  and flexible  
that's  the Volac  Silawrap  System  for 
conserving  your  valuable  forage.  Proven  
all over Ireland,  make  sure your stock  
benefit  next Winter from all the 
advantages  of the Volac  Silawrap  System.
For further  information  on Volac  Silawrap 
Film, Balertwine,  Silawrappers,  Silagrips,  
Silachops  etc. contact  your local Volac  Area 
Manager  now or write to Michael  
Newman,  Sales Manager,  Volac  Feeds  Ltd., 
Church  Street,  Killeshandra,  Co. Cavan.
Tel: (049) 34755/6.- Give your  Silage  the Volac  
seal of quality
VOLAC
Putting  10 years  expertise  with Big Bale Silage  at your  service.
Cow factors  affecting  output  from grazed  pastures
The question  is often  posed,  "What  is the potential  of our cows to produce  
milk given the elimination  of restraining  factors  such as feed composition,  
management  influences,  etc?" The question  really  needs  to be put in a different  
context.  Given  a genetic  merit for milk production,  what is that potential  in 
relation  to pasture  feeding  conditions  and how does it compare  to silage  and 
concentrate  rations?  Is grass as good given optimum  quality  and quantity  as 
indoor  diets?
Stakelum,  Gleeson  and Murphy  (1985)  compared  at Moorepark  two systems  
of milk production  in order  to answer  this question.  System  1 was based  on all­
year-round  indoor  feeding  with high-quality  silage  ad-libitum,  3 feeds  of a high- 
energy  density  ration  daily,  in addition  to one feed  of beet  pulp  nuts  at mid-day.  
System  2 was  an optimum  grazing  treatment.  The  cows  grazed  aftermaths  during  
the entire  grazing  season  at a daily  allocation  of twice  their  intake  requirement.  
The cows  received  fresh  pasture  every  day of 3-4 weeks  regrowth  interval.  Table  
7 shows  the performance  of the two groups.  Milk  volume  and protein  yield  was 
9 and 5% higher  respectively  for the indoor  group The pasture  fed group  had 
higher  fat and protein  content  and equal  fat yield  compared  to the indoor  group. 
In all, the aggregate  yield of the milk fat and protein  was similar  for the two 
groups.  The intakes  of the indoor  group  was substantially  higher  (circa  18 kg 
OM/head/day)  than the grazing  group  (14-15  kg OM).  The  liveweights  at the end 
of the grazing  season  were  644 versus  556 kg for the indoor  and grazing  group,  
respectively.  The results  indicated  that higher  feed intakes  achieved  by dietary  
regimes  indoors  were  channelled  into large  body  weight  gains.  The  cows  lacked  
the ability  to produce  ex&a  milk constituents.  The potential  of the cows  would  
be expressed  by a diet of grazed  grass liberally  supplied  with its quality  
controlled.  The experiment  at Curtins  reported  by Pat Dillon  in this issue  has 
shown  that in a systems  framework  under  tight grazing  and low concentrate  
inputs  where  cows calve onto grass,  comparable  yields  as found  here can be 
achieved.
Assuming  that tlie genetic  potential  of the Moorepark  herds  represents  the 
national  average,  the yield of 387 kg of fat and protein  on pasture  can be 
considered  an optimum.  Increasing  that yield  through  genetic  selection  for milk 
production  (or fat and/or  protein  content)  would lead to higher  yields per
Table  7
Potential  milk production  from pasture
High intake Pasture
Milk Yield (kg) 6091 5596
Fat % 3.32 3.64
Protein  % 3.17 3.27
Fat Yield  (kg) 202 204
Protein  Yield (kg) 193 183
Fat + Protein  (kg) 395 387
(Slakelum,  Gleeson  and Murphy,  1985)
20
individual  animal  if feed  sources  did not present  a barrier.  Increases  in milk  yield  
occasion  higher  intakes  per cow. The  equation  A and B shown  below  are simple  
and predict  intake  reasonably  accurately  for groups  of grazing  dairy  cows  from  
milk yield and liveweight.
Equauon  A: TDMI  = O.IMY  = 0.025LW  (Caird  and Holmes,  1986)  
Equation  B: TDMI  = 0.2MY  = 0.022LW  (Neal,  Thomas  & Colby,  1984)  
(TDMI,  Total  Dry Matter  intake; MY,  Milk  Yield; LW,  Liveweight,  all in Kgs)
More complex  equations  using herbage  allowance,  stage of lactation  and 
supplementary  feed can provide  more accurate  predictions  of individual  ani­
mals. Stakelum  and Connolly  (1987)  found  that 91 % of the variation  in herbage  
intake  between  cows  could  be described  by a multiple  regression  relating  intake  
to milk  yield,  liveweight,  the interaction  term of milk yield  and liveweight  and 
quadratic  liveweight  term. Inclusion  of surface  area measurements,  fat score,  
and the calving  date did not add significantly  to the descriptive  model. Figure  
7 shows  a graph of intake  against  average  body  weight  over  the lactation  for five 
yield categories  of cows. The milk yield is the average  yield from April to 
October for  early  February  cows. The curves  demonstrate  that intake  increases  
as milk yield and bodyweight  increases.  Daily  dry matter  intake  increases  by 
between  0.41-0.45  kg per 1 kg extra  FCM  (3.6%  fat) per day. An extra 100 kg 
bodyweight  in cows necessitated  an extra 1.5 to 2.2 kg of herbage  DM intake  
daily. Table  8 shows  in tabular  form intakes  extracted  from Figure  7 for two
Fig. 7 - Predicted  daiiy  dry matter  intake  for cows  of different  iiveweights  and 
daiiy fat corrected  (3.6%)  miik yieid during  the experiment  
(Staieium  and Connoiiy,  1987)
2’
Table  8
Liveweight  and milk yield effects  on voluntary  DMI of fresh grass  by dairy  cows
Milk yield  
kg/day 500 kg 600 kgKg DM/Extra  100 
liveweight
08.3 11.5 15.36 3.71
12.5 14.15 16.57 2.42
15.0 15.66 17.30 1.64
17.5 17.16 18.03 0.87
20.0 18.66 18.76 0.10
Kg DM/kg  milk 0.60 0.29
(Stakelum  and Connolly,  1987)
weight  categories  of cows.  The salient  point  here  is that at low to moderate  milk 
yields,  the extra  body  size of cows  is expensive  from  a feed  point  of view. At the 
higher  end of the milk yield scale extra size causes  only a small extra feed 
demand.
The  gross  feed  efficiencies  calculated  as daily  fat corrected  milk  yield  (kg)  per 
100 MJ of digestible  energy  intake  is shown  in Figure  8. The data from Figure  
8 is used  to calculate  these  data  sets. Highest  gross  efficiencies  are always  at the 
higher  milk yields while smaller  cows are more efficient  than large cows. 
However,  the decrease  in feed  efficiency  with increasing  size is small  at higher  
yields  and large  at lower  yields.  Holmes  (1988)  draws  attention  to the quantity
LUo
oo
OLL
■q
g>
mQ
Fig. 8 - The relationship  between  gross  efficiency  of milk production  (kg of daily  
fat corrected  (3.6%)  milk yield per 100 MJ of digestible  energy  intake)  and body  
weight  for different  levels  of milk production  (Stakelum  and Connolly,  1987)
22
of nutrients  needed  to maintain  a cow. Clearly,  the higher  the output  of milk  the 
higher  the gross  efficiency  because  of the dilution  of the maintenance  require ­
ment. This is aptly illustrated  by Figure  8.
This definition  however,  of cow efficiency  is too narrow.  It ignores  fluctua ­
tions in body tissues  gain or loss. A simple  input : output  relationship  can 
encompass  inputs  and outputs  defined  as physical,  biological  or financial.  They  
can be measured  over  a full productive  cycle  of an animal  or system  or over  the 
lifetime  of an animal.  Young  cows  are less efficient  than older  cows  within  a 
lactation  cycle. Lifetime  efficiency  increases  with succeeding  lactations  be­
cause the fixed costs of rearing  are diluted. Ostergaard  et al. (1990)  drew  
attention  to the term residual  food intake  which  takes into account  estimated  
energy in food  minus  estimated  energy  in products  (milk,  gain/loss,  foetus)  and 
for maintenance.  The ratio  of the two terms  is feed efficiency.
The effect  of genedc  selection  for milk yield on feed conversion  efficiency  
can be estimated  from 5 experiments  (Bryant,  1981; Bryant  and Trigg,  1981;  
Grainger,  1981; Pearson  et al., 1981; Weinberg,  Wilk and McDaniel,  1981;  
Grainger,  Davey  and Holmes,  1985;  Gibson,  1986). Holmes  (1988)  estimated  
in a review  of these works that over a 25-30 year period,  that the genetic  
improvement  is represented  by the following  differences:
Milk  fat yield  +19%
Liveweight  - 1%
Intake  + 6%
FCE +13%
The data show  that the increased  yield  caused  an increase  in FCE similar  to 
that  outlined  above.  There  was  no evidence  of changes  in digestive  or metabolic  
efficiency  and no effect  on maintenance  requirement.  There  was  increased  body  
weight  loss or decreased  liveweight  gain during  lactation.  This  is an importrant  
issue.  The  loss  or mobilization  of body  tissue  helps  the cow  overcome  limitations  
in intake  in early lactation.  However,  the restoration  of liveweight  loss must  
come  from  the diet  late  in the lactation  cycle.  Estimates  of net efficiencies  of m ilk 
production  from  dietary  sources  is around  62-66%  while  the efficiency  based  on 
the utilization  of bodystores  is 82-84%.  Liveweight  gain in lactating  animals  is 
performed  at an efficiency  of utilization  of ME close  to lactational  efficiency  
(62%)  which  is much  higher  than for non-lactating  animals.
Comparisons  of HBI and LB 1 in New Zealand  with  both  Jerseys  (Bryant  and 
Trigg, 1981)  and Friesians  (Grainger,  Davey  and Holmes,  1985)  showed  that the 
HBI cows produced  higher  yields of milk, fat and protein  than their LBI 
counterparts.  Milk  fat content  was not different.  During  lactation,  the HB 1 cows  
lost more  weight  than the LBI cows  when  body  condition  score  at calving  was 
>5.5. Where  body score at calving  was close  to 4 the HBI cows gained  less 
weight  during  grazing.  Bryant  (1984 and 1985)  demonstrated  in a large  grazing  
experiment  over 3 years  that HBI cows  were  more  efficient  convertors  of feed 
to milk. They  produced  19% more  milk,  23% more  fat, and 19% more  protein.  
The differences  were  comparable  to the 25% difference  in breeding  index. The 
feed intake  was 14% greater  than the LBI cows. The HBI cows were more  
competitive  graziers  and grazed  their  pastures  more  uniformly.
23
Experiments  at Moorepark  and its stations  examined  grazing  strategies  for the 
preferential  treatment  of high yield  cows. The high  yielding  cows  may benefit  
from selective  grazing  ahead  of the low yielders  in the herd. Conversely,  the 
lower  yielders  it could  be argued,  are more  timid  graziers  and might  benefit  also 
from preferential  treatment.  A two year  experiment  ('85-'86)  was carried  out to 
examine  the interaction  between  dairy merit and grazing  strategy  as leader/  
follower  (Crosse  and Fitzgerald,  1988).  There  was  no interaction  between  dairy  
merit  and system  of grazing.  The leaders  increased  their milk yield by 10% 
(regardless  of merit)  compared  with the combined  herd but the followers  (also  
regardless  of merit)  were  reduced  by 9% in yield eroding  any possible  overall  
benefit  to the system. This is in agreement  with another  study carried  out at 
Moorepark  in 1987 (Crosse  and Fitzgerald,  1988) and by others  (Archibald,  
Campling  and Flolmes,  1975). Mayne,  Newberry  and Woodcock  (1988)  found 
a 26%  increase  in milk  yield  by high  yielders  as leaders  and  only  a 12%  reduction  
in yield  by followers  compared  to similar  groups  in a combined  control  group  
during  the experiment.  The  net effect  was a 9% overall  benefit  to the L/F system . 
However,  the total  lactation  yields  were  increased  by only  4% by the L/F system.
Supplementary  feeding  at pasture
It is beyond  the scope  of this paper  to give a detailed  review  of this topic. 
Phillips  (1988) has reviewed  supplementatry  feeding  of grazing  dairy  cows  with 
forage. A more general  review  is published  by Siebert  and Hunter  (1982). 
Leaver,  Campling  and Holmes  (1968)  reported  an average  response  of 0.33 kg 
milk per kg concentrate  fed. More  recently,  Joumet  and Demarquilly  (1979) 
found a response  of 0.40 kg milk. Stakelum,  Dillon  and Murphy  (1988a)  
examined  the range of Moorepark  experiments  on this subject  from 1976  
onwards.  The  response  ranged  from  0.13 to  0.98  kg milk  with  an average  of 0.53 
kg. Generally,  responses  to concentrates  are poor and in very many cases,  
uneconomic.  Substitution  of concentrates  for grass  occurs  and its effect  is very 
large when daily herbage  intake  is high (i.e. when grazing  pressure  is low/ 
herbage  allowance  high).  Additionally,  if the herd  is milking  close  to its potential  
very little if any milk production  response  will be got.
Our experiments  at Moorepark  recently  have focused  on the effects  of 
different  concenU'ate  types  on substitution  rates,  milk production  responses  and 
rumen fermentation  pattern. Well managed  grass swards  are very high in 
digestibility  and offer a very different  set of circumstances  with regard  to 
concentrate  feeds  compared  to silage. Two indoor  feeding  experiments  were  
completed  in 1987 and 1988 (Stakelum  and Murphy,  1988b;  Dillon,  Stakelum  
and Murphy,  1989)  to compare  the effects  of fibrous  versus  starchy  concentrates  
when fed to laclating  cows with fresh herbage.  Figures  9 and 10 outline  the 
rumen  fluid  pH and L-laciate  levels  over  a daily  cycle  for a grass  only  and a grass  
plus either  3 kg of barley  or molassed  beet pulp nuts (Dillon  et al., 1989). The 
decreased  acidity  al 1.5 to 4.5 hours  after concentrate  feeding  coinciding  with 
peak  lactate  levels  on the barley treatment  indicates  a fermentation  pattern  which  
is highly  undesirable  and was associated  with a much  more  depressed  level of 
herbage  intake  compared  to the herbage  only and molassed  beet-pulp  supple ­
24
mented  group. The herbage  intake  data showed  a substitution  rate of 0.80 
compared  to 0.4 kg/kg  of concentrate  fed for barley  and MBP,  respectively . The 
L-lactate  levels  were identical  to the D-lactate  levels  for all treatments  both in 
their absolute  levels  and in their  pattern  of change  over the day. This result  is 
supported  by previous  studies  at our Centre  (Stakelum  et al., 1988b)  and 
confirms  the results  of a grazing  trial  with  high  yielding  dairy  cows  at Moorepark  
where  barley  supplementation  at high daily herbage  allowances  gave substitu ­
tion rates of 1.4 compared  to 0.7 and 0.40 kg/kg concentrate  beet pulp and
molassed  beet  pulp,  respectively  (Stakelum  and Dillon,  1988).  The significance  
of a substitution  rate greater  than zero is of enormous  importance.  It means  a 
negative  effect  on total  intake.  In this experiment,  the conditions  were  such  that 
the digestibility  of the herbage  selected  by cows  was comparable  to that of the 
concentrate  itself  and it indicates  that quite  clearly  starchy  cereal  grains  under  
those conditions  are unsuitable  as a supplement.  A more recent  experiment  
(Dillon  and Stakelum,  1990b)  confirmed  that both molasssed  beet  pulp  nuts and
L-lactate  Concentration
Fig. 9 - L-lactate  concentration  in rumen  fluid of cows  receiving  grass  (G), grass  
+ barley  (G+B)  or grass  + molas.sed  beet pulp  nuts (G+M).  C and G indicates  
time of concentrate  and grass  feeding  on a horizontal  axis (Dillon  et al., 1989)
25
Rumen  Fluid pH
JCa.
TIME
Fig. 10 - Rumen  fluid pH of cows  receiving  diets  shown  in Figure  9 (Diiion  et al.,
1989)
brewers  grains  gave a much higher  milk production  response  than barley  in a 
simulated  farm  level  study. Gleeson  (1981)  reported  responses  of 0.80  kg/kg  of 
concentrate  fed in whole  farm system  comparisons.  The responses  found  were  
higher  in late lactation  than early lactation  coinciding  with reduced  herbage  
availability.
Quite  clearly,  concentrate  type  and level,  quality  and quantity  of herbage  on 
offer,  stage  of lactation  and appetite  capacity  and dairy  merit  will determine  the 
magnitude  of the response.  In short-term  experiments  the carry  over  effect  of 
supplementary  feed on condition  score  and the persistency  of the milk  produc ­
tion response  is also of importance.  If a milk  production  difference  continues  
after  the concentrate  is withdrawn  the response  calcuated  over  the feeding  period  
will very  much  understate  the actual  benefit.  Additionally,  a benefit  may  also  be 
translated  into the next lactation  (particularly  at high stocking  rates not as yet 
used  under  Irish  conditions)  whereby  the condition  of the cows  is improved  at the 
next  calving.  Joumet  and Demarquilly  (1979)  quoted  a response  of 0.40  kg milk/  
kg of concentrate.  The residual  effects  over the next winter  were  large  enough  
to give  an overall  response  of I kg of milk/kg  concentrate.  Burstedt  (1983) also  
found responses  in late lactation  to feeding  concentrates  during  the grazing
26
The farmer  who's  
had his Keenan  
Easi^eeder  for 
seven  years
Plus specialist  nutritional  advice.  
Absolutely  free.
The smile  comes  with peace  of mind.
For the full story  call 0503 73214
taEWAII
Richard  Keenan  and Company  Ltd. 
Borris,  Co. Carlow,  Ireland.
27
season.  Residual  responses  of 1.6-4.0  times  the direct  response  were  found in  a 
number  of studies.  This has great  practical  significance  for late calving  spring  
cows. The time of concentrate  feeding,  viz-a-viz  the cyclical  change  in pH 
during  the day may also be important.
The most  obvious  effect  of feeding  concentrates  at pasture  is to alleviate  the 
grazing  pressure.  This means,  where  other  factors  remain  constant,  that more  
herbage  will be left behind  on the pasture  after  grazing.  This  is a direct  result  of 
substitution  rate. It means  that even at high grazing  pressures  where  herbage  
intake  is restricted,  feeding  concentrates  will still cause  some  increase  in the 
quantity  left grazing.  Concentrate  feeding  can be used therefore  to allow for 
higher  stocking  rates than would  be normally  used. Also,  with the advances  in 
our knowledge  of grazing  management,  silage  quantity  on farms  is not now as 
big an issue  as say 10 years  ago. Silage  surplus  to winter  requirements  is very 
much a spin-off  benefit  from grazing  management  strategies  based  on pxjst-  
grazing  sward surface  heights. The integration  of this forage  into a defined  
system  is an issue requiring  more research  especially  in mid-season  and late- 
lactation.  The possibility  of much  cheaper  concentrates  under  the CAP  reforms  
could  render  them competitive  with second  and third cut silages  and obviously  
again  raise  the issue  of their use in grazing  systems.  The clear  definition  of the 
degree  of pasture  deficit  which  would  necessitate  the introduction  of supplemen ­
tary feed is not yet defined.
Herbage  intake  at pasture
The level of herbage  intake  achieved  at pasture  is an important  determinant  
of the level  of animal  performance  achieved  under  a set of circumstances.  In this 
regard,  industry  supported  research  for producdon  experiments  usually  falls 
short  of allowing  scientists  to pursue  aspects  of research  aimed  at understanding  
fee complex  mechanisms  involved  in the grazing  process.  A fuller  understand-  
ing of a process  allows  some  prediction  of the effect  of a treatment  or a range  of 
treatments  and in the context  of production  based  experiments  facilitates  the 
extrapolation  of results  to other  situations.  Our  knowledge  of fee grazing  process  
and grazing  systems  in general  had proceeded  without  any precise  and accurate  
data  on individual  animal  intake  at pasture.  Many  techniques  have  been  used  and 
are still in use which  have bias and major  inaccuracies.  Techniques  based  on 
sward  cutting  (herd  estimates  of intake)  demand  special  grazing  conditions  to 
facili^te  the technique  feat render  the relevancy  of fee experiments  rather  
questionable  in some  cases.
However,  advances  in this area have  been dramatic  since  the mid-80s.  Since  
the publication  of fee first  work  by Mayes,  Lamb  and Colgrove  (1986)  on the use 
of herbage  an dosed  alkanes  to measure  herbage  intake  with  indoor  fed sheep,  the 
progress  in this area has accelerated.  Many experiments  have been  conducted  
at Moorepark  since 1987 (Dillon  and Stakelum,  1988, 1989, 1990c and d); 
Stakelum  and Dillon,  1990)  to examine  the use of this technique  for dairy  cows  
under  rotational  grazing  situations.  We now use it routinely  at Moorepark  and 
Curtins  in our grazing  studies.  Data sets are now being  assembled  which  will 
begin  to answer  some  of the questions  regarding  the gross  efficiency  of different
28
cows in their conversion  of grass to milk and herbage  intake  pattern  of cows  
under  different  grazing  conditions.  This has been  a wonderful  development  in 
grazing  research  and was supported  by the Farmers'  Journal  Trust  Fund  and the 
Management of Teagasc.  Work  is continuing  in this area.
Sward  quality
The context  in which  quality  is used here refers  to the digestibility  of the 
material  on offer  or selected  rather  than the botanical  composition  of the sward.  
In most  of the grazing  experiments  done  in temperate  regions  the independent  
effects  of reduced  digestibility  in a grazed  sward  on animal  performance  has not 
been examined.  This is in spite of the many  references  in the literature  to the 
possible deleterious  effects  of lenient  grazing  on the accumulation  of stem and 
dead material  in grazed  swards.
Our  knowledge  of how the sward  reacts  to different  defoliation  treatments  has 
developed  greatly  over  the last number  of years  (Robson,  Parsons  and Williams,  
1989). Swards  are not managed  under  grazing  in order  to maximise  growth  rates  
of the swards.  Additionally,  neither  are they managed  to sustain  optimal  animal  
performance  in the case of dairy cows. Maximum  grass growth  rates are 
achieved under  conditions  of lenient  defoliations.  However,  tissue  death  is also 
maximal  in this situation.  Net production  of herbage,  which  is the difference  
between  gross production  and death is optimised  under  grazing  management  
where  grass production  is well restricted.  Very severe  grazing  can lead to a 
reduction  in all three  components.
The control  of the development  of the inflorescent  tillers  in the spring  is a 
major  consideration  in grazing  management.  The use of rigid  rotational  grazing  
can lead to substantial  under-grazing  of paddocks  in the April-June  period.  The 
use of sward height,  as a simple  and effective  method  of judging  the severity  of 
grazing  is now accepted  as a means  of achieving  an efficient  herbage  utilization  
rate throughout  the season  and a control  of herbage  supply. Experiments  in 
Moorepark  since 1986  have focussed  on this aspect  of grazing  management  and 
have b^n described  in some  detail  by Stakelum  and Dillon  (1991).  Using  2.5 
cows/acre  (during  the 1 st silage  conservation  period  in April  to June  will, given  
an average  growth  rate of herbage  for that time,  graze  the pastures  to 6 cm. The 
effect  of this will be to create  a green  leafy  sward  for the remainder  of the grazing  
season,  to maximise  the amount  of silage  which  can be harvested  from  the 1st cut 
at the end of May  and to avoid  excessive  per cow depressions  in milk  production  
in the early half  of the grazing  season.  The sward  structure  and morphological  
composition  which  exists  from mid-summer  onwards  is eminently  more  'graz-  
ible' and promotes  higher  intakes  of higher  digestible  material  than more laxly 
grazed swards.  The significance  of these  broad  findings  are of enormous  impor ­
tance  to grazing  management  practices  for dairy  cows.
Because  growth  rates fluctuate  very widely  within  seasons  from year to year 
it is important  to develop  and evaluate  flexible  management  approaches  to 
grazing  in order  to avoid  surpluses  and react  to deficits.  The degree  to which the  
deficits  should be tolerated  is also a very big question  but to achieve  a relatively  
constant  grazing  height  of 6 cm in the first half  of the grazing  season necessarily
29
implies  a large  degree  of flexibility.  The optimum  height  for grazing  later  on in 
the season  needs  to be identified  in relation  to previous  management.  The very 
many  environments  in which  milk  is produced  in Ireland  creates  many  different  
starting  points  and  conditions  at the commencement  of the grazing  season.  These  
range  from the early  March  to late April  turn-out  and a spectrum  of soils  with 
different  degrees  of drainage.  The later-tum-out  areas present  a particularly  
difficult  situation  with regard  to controlling  quality.
The digestion  of fresh  grass
When  fresh grass is ingested  by the cow, bacteria  in the rumen  digest  the 
carbohydrate  fraction  (the fibre and soluble  sugar  component)  to volatile  fatty 
acids  (VFAs  of which  acetate,  propionic  and  butyrate  are the major  components).  
This causes  a major  downward  shift in rumen  pH especially  when  concentrates  
are fed (see  previous  section).  When  the pH falls  below  6.0, fibre  digestion  will 
be impaired.  This is a major reason  for the depression  in grass intake  when 
starchy  concentrates  are fed at pasture  (see previous  section).
Ammonia  Concentration
O
ocoo
r>
h-!or>on
TIME
Fig. 11 - Rumen  ammonia  concentration  of cows  on grass  (G), grass  + barley  
(G+B)  and grass  plus moiassed  beet pulp  nuts (G+M).  Time  of feeding  Indicated  
(Stakelum  and Connolly,  1987)
30
The crude  protein  fraction  of fresh  grass  (total-N)  consists  of protein  and non­
protein  material  (NPN).  The NPN  component  can range  from 15-50%  of total 
N and consists  mainly  of amino  acids  and peptides  (short  chains  of chemically  
bonded  amino  acids). Most  of the NPN  is soluble  and quickly  fermented.  The 
protein  fraction  can be either  soluble  or insoluble  and this will determine  their  
degradability  characteristics.  The protein  of grass  is extensively  degraded  in the 
rumen.  The high rumen  ammonia  levels  following  degradation  is indicative  of 
this . Figure  11 shows  the reduction  in rumen  ammonia  with  energy  supplemen ­
tation  of grass  fed cows  from  an experiment  at Moorepark  (Dillon  et al, 1989).  
The starch  supplement  (barley)  gave  a transitory  reduction  while  the sugar/fibre  
supplement  (molassed  beet  pulp)  gave  a persistent  reduction.  The imbalance  of 
energy to  protein  ratio  in highly  digestible  grass  is not as large  as with silage  but 
is still not ideal. Samples  of herbage  representative  of that selected  by grazing  
cows  were  found  to have  a rumen  protein  degradability  of around  77%  (Stakelum  
etal., 1988).  The apparent  loss of N between  the rumen  and duodenum  on fresh  
grass  diets  high  in nitrogen  has been  described  by Beever  and Siddons  (1989)  and 
represents  a major  inefficiency  of N utilization.  Table  9 shows  some  data from 
Beever  and Siddons  (1989)  to illustrate  this point. Three  diets ranging  from 
1(X)%  ryegrass  to a 50:50  ryegrass/white  clover  mixture  were  fed to cows.  There  
was a loss of 84,87  and 147 g N/day  between  the rumen  and the duodenum  on 
the three diets. Also,  over 50 g/day  ammonia-N  was lost on all three  diets by 
outflow  from rumen  to duodenum.  This is probably  facilitated  by a rumen  pH 
well below  7.0 when highly  digestible  forage  diets  are fed. However,  microbial  
protein  synthesis,  expressed  as g of microbial  N/kg  organic  matter  apparently  
digested  in the rumen  is considerably  higher  with fresh forages  (33-58g)  than 
silages  (13-28g)  (Gill, Beever  and Osbourne,  1989). Microbial  N constitutes  
over  70% of the duodenal  non ammonia  nitrogen  fraction  on perennial  ryegrass  
diets.
The efficiency  of utilization  of absorbed  amino  acids  by an animal  is partly  
dependent  on the ratio of amino  acids  relative  to the reaqirements  for specific  
aminoacids  and the relative  proportions  of proteins  which  need  to be synthesised  
for milk  or meat  production.  There  is ample  evidence  to show that  the provision  
of extra  protein  to animals  on forages  with  high  levels  of digestible  crude  protein  
can improve  their  performance.  Rogers  etal. (1980) reported  a 15% increase  in 
milk yield  from feeding  1 kg/day  of formaldehyde  treated  casein. Ad-libitum
Table  9
Nitrogen  digestion  (g/day)
Ryegrass  : white  clover  mixture
100:0 75:25 50:50
N intake 519 604 693
NloSI 435 517 546
Duodenal  ammonia  flow 55 51 58
(Beever  and Siddons,  1986)
31
feeding  of ryegrass  or white  clover  resulted  in a 30%  increase  in milk  yield 
on the white  clover  diet  (Rogers,  Porter  and Robinson,  1979).  The  causes  
and mechanisms  for these  responses  are poorly  elucidated.  Dillon  and 
Stakelum  (1990b)  found  a response  of 0.58 kg milk per kg of protected  
soya  compared  to 0.16  and 0.24 kg milk  per kg of barley  and unprotected  
soya,  respectively,  for grazing  dairy  cows  in late lactation.  An increased  
outflow  of protein  from  the rumen  to the small  intestine  may be the cause  
of the responses  thereby  correcting  an amino  acid shortfall  or imbalance.  
It may  however  be related  to an increased  level  of DM intake  as occurs  for 
example  on clover  diets. O'Mara  et al. (1991)  reported  a 7% and 3.5%  
response  in milk yield to protected  soya and fishmeal  to grazing  cows  
compared  to a similar  level of beet  pulp  nuts. Both these  diets  contained  
similar  levels  of UDP.  Experiments  are ongoing  at Moorepark  to examine  
the effects  of providing  supplements  with ryegrass  on microbial  protein  
synthesis  and duodenal  nitrogen  flow rates.
Conclusions
In the more  applied  area  of grass  utilization,  work  needs  to be focussed  
on the area of whole  season  utilization  of herbage  encompassing  such 
issues as early and late season management,  regional  and soil type 
limitations  and  a flexible  approach  to grazing  management.  These  studies  
need  to be extended  to include  asp)ects  of dairy  and genetic  merit  of cows.  
Use of white  clover  in grazed  pastures  is an important  subject  requiring  
experimentation.  Much  is known  but many factors need  study  in produc ­
tion systems.  Low cost  reseeding  techniques  need  continual  work. This 
is particularly  relevant  for dairy farmers  operating  at high levels of 
efficiency.  Tlie evaluation  of newer  grass varieties  for milk production  
under  the various  conditions  of farming  practices  is also  of importance  for 
intensive  systems.
On the more  basic  levels,  we need  an active  programme  on patterns  of 
selection  by grazing  cows under  rotational  grazing,  detailed  studies  on 
tissue  turnover  in grazed  and cut pastures,  use of alkanes  to measure  diet 
composition  of grazing  animals,  rate of decomposition  of dung  pads and 
utilization  and digestion  of ingested  herbage.  Additionally,  studies  on the 
factors  which  cause  sown  swards  to revert  over  time to mixed composi ­
tional  sward  are central  to our understanding  of how perennial  ryegrass  
and other  grasses  grow  and survive  under  various  managements.
Our grassland  farming  practices  arc now operating  under  much  more  
restrictive  constraints  such as quotas  and environmental  factors.  Allied  
to these  are issues  of animal  welfare  and ethics  which are  quite  important  
in Europe.  The political  and economic  environment  is not supportive  of 
production  research  now to the extent  it once was. It is unlikely  if the 
many  issues  of research  priority  outlined  above  will be possible  under  the 
present  major  cut-backs  in the Teagasc  resources.  Farming  groups  need 
to recognise  this and become  more supportive  of production  research  
aimed  to greater  farm efficiency.
32
References
Archibald,  K. A. E., Campling,  R. C. and Holmes,  W. (1975).  Milk  production  and herbage  intake  
of dairy cows kepi on a leader  and follower  grazing  system.  Animal  Production,  21, 147-156.
Beever,  D. E. and Siddons,  R. C. (1986). Digestion  and metabolism  in the grazing  ruminant.  In: 
Control  of Digestion  and Metabolism  in Ruminants  (Eds.:  MiUigan,  L. P., Grovum,  W. L. and 
Dobson,  A.), Pentice-HaU,  New Jersey,  pp. 479-497.
Bryant,  A. M, (1981). The efficiency  of cows differing  in breeding  index. Proceedings  of the 
Ruakura  Framers'Conference,  pp. 145-149.  Hamilton,  New Zealand.
Bryant,  A. M. (1984).  Effects  of breeding  index on  dairy  farm productivity.  Research  Division  of 
the Ministry  of Agriculture  and Fisheries  of New Zealand  Annual  Report,  p. 50.
Bryant,  A. M. (1985).  Effects  of breeding  index  on dairy  farm productivity.  Research  Division  of 
the Ministry  of Agriculture  and Fisheries  of New Zealand  Annual  Report,  p. 41.
Bryant,  A, M. and Trigg,  T. E. (1981).  Progress  report  on the performance  of Jersey  cows  differing  
in breeding  index. Proceedings  of the New Zealand  Society  of Animal  Production,  41, 39-43.
Burdon,  J. J. (1983). Biological  flora of the British  Isles. Trifolium  repens. Journal  of Ecology,  
71, 307-330,
Burstedt,  E. (1983). The effect  of summer  feeding  systems  on the performance  of spring  calving  
dairy cows. Report  No. 106, Swedish  University  of Agricultural  Sciences.
Caird,  L. and Holmes,  C. W. (1986). The prediction  of voluntary  intake  of grazing  dairy cows.  
Journal  of Agricultural  Science,  Cambridge,  107, 43-54.
Conway,  A., McLoughhn,  A. and Murphy,  W. E. (1972).  The development  of a cattle  and sheep  
farm. Annual  Management  Series,  No. 2, An Foras  Taluntais.
Crosse,  S. (1988),  Systems  of mUk  production  based  on grassland.  In: Moorepark  Dairy  Farmers'  
Conference,  Teagasc,  Fermoy,  p. 48-51.
Crosse,  S. and Fitzgerald, S. (1988).  The effect  of a leader/follower  system  of grazing  management  
on the performance  of spring-calving  dairy cows. Moorepaik  Dairy Farmers'  Conference,  
Fermoy,  p. 44-45.
CuUeton,  N. (1989). Aspects  of reseeding  old permanent  pasture. Proceedings  of the World  
Grassland  Congress,  Nice,  p. 1167-1168.
Curll,  M. L. and Wilkins,  R. J. (1983).  The  comparative  effects  of defoliation,  treading  and excretia  
on the LoUum  pereime-Trifolium  repens  pasture  grazed  by sheep. Journal  of Agricultural  
Science,  Cambridge,  100. 451-468.
Dillon,  P, and Stakelum,  G. (1988). The use of n-alkanes  and chromic  oxide as markers  for 
determining  feed intake,  faecal  output  and digestibility  in dairy  cows. Proceedings  of the 12th 
General  Meeting  of the European  Grassland  Federation,  (Dublin,  Ireland),  July 1988,  pp. 154- 
8.
Dillon,  P. and Stakelum,  G. (1988/89).  Annual  grass production.  Animal  Production  Research  
Report,  Teagasc,  p. 133.
Dillon,  P. and Stakelum,  G. (1989).  Herbage and dosed  alkanes  as a grass  measurement  technique  
for dairy  cows. Irish Journal  of Agricultrual  Research,  28, 104 (Abstract).
Dillon, P. and Stakelum,  G. (1990a).  Reducing  the costs  of milk production.  Irish Farmers'Journal,  
December  22, p. 20-21.
Dillon,  P. and Stakelum,  G. (1990b).  A review  of the grass growing  year  of 1989. Irish Grassland  
and Animal  Production  Association  Journal,  3-12.
Dillon,  P. and Stakelum,  G. (1990c).  The analysis  of n-alkanes  in faeces  and herbage.  Proceedings  
of the 7lh European  Grazing  Workshop  (Wageningen,  The Netherlands),  October  1990.
Dillon,  P. and Stakelum,  G. (1990d).  Dosed  and herbage  alkanes  for predicting  silage  intake  with 
dairy  cows: The  effect  of concentrate  type  and level  of feeding.  Proceedings  of the 7th European  
Workshop  (Wageninen,  The Netherlands),  October  1990.
Dillon,  P. and Stakelum,  G. and Murphy,  J. J. (1989). The effect  of level of herbage  intake  and 
concentrate  type on rumen fermentation  pattern,  in situ herbage  degradability  and blood
33
metabolile  levels  in lactating  dairy  cows. Proceedings  of the International  Grasssland  Congress,  
Nice, 1155-1156.
Evans, D. R., HUl, J., Williams,  J. A and Rhodes,  I. (1985). Effcts of co-existence  on the 
performance  of white  clover/perennial  ryegrass  mixtures.  Oecologia  (Berlin),  66, 536-539.
Fingleton,  W. (1990). Irish Agriculture  in Figures,  Teagasc.
Fingleton,  W. (1991).  Personal  communication  on data derived  from Farm  Management  Survey,  
1990.
Frame,  J. (1983).  Yield  and quality  response  of secondary  grasses  to fertiliser  nitrogen.  Efficient  
Grassland  Farming,  Occasional  Symposium  No. 14, British  Grassland  Society,  pp. 292-294.
Frame,  J. (1990). Exploiting  grass/white  clover swards: 1. Agronomy.  Training  Course  at 
Koldkaergard  Landboskole,  Arhus,  Denmark.
Frame,  J. and Boyd,  A, G. (1987).  The effect  of fertilizer  nitrogen  rale, white  clover  variety  and 
closeness  of cutting  on herbage  productivity  from  perermial  ryegrass/white  clover  swards.  Grass  
and Forage  Science,  42, 429-438.
Frame,  J. and Newbould,  P (1984). Herbage  production  from grass/while  clover  swards.  Occa ­
sional  Symposium  of the British  Grassland  Society,  No. 14, p. 15-35.
Frame,  J. and Boyd,  A. G, (1987).  The effect  of fertilizer  nitrogen  rale, white  clover  variety  and 
closeness  of cutting  on herbage  productivity  from  perennial  ryegrass/white  clover  swards.  Grass  
and Forage  Science,  42, 429-438.
Frame,  J. (1990A).  Exploiting  grass/white  clover  swards. 1. Agronomy.  Training  Course  at 
Koldkaergard  Landboskole,  Arhus,  Denmark.
Frame,  J. (1990B).  Exploiting  grass/white  clover  swards.  2. Utilisation  and animal  performance.  
Training  Course  at KcHkaergard  Landboskole,  Arhus,  Denmark.
Frame,  J. and Boyd,  A. G. (1987). The effect  of fertilizer  nitrogen  rate, white  clover  variety  and 
closeness  of cutting on herbage  productivity  from  perermial  ryegrass/white  clover  swards.  Grass  
and Forage  Science,  42, 429-438.
Frame,  J. and Newbould,  P. (1984). Herbage  production  from grass/white  clover swards.  
Occasional  Symposium  of the British  Grassland  Society,  No. 16, pp. 15-35.
Frame,  J. and Newbould,  P. (1986). Agronomy  of while  clover. Advances  in Agronomy,  40. 1- 
88.
Gately,  T. (1984). Early  versus  late perennial  ryegrass  (Lolium  Pemne)  for milk  production.  Irish 
Journal  of Agricultural  Research,  23, 1-10.
Gately,  R. F., O'Keefe,  W. F. and Connolly,  J. (1984). Review  of nitrogen  and stocking  rate 
experiments  for milk production.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research,  23, 11-26.
Gibson,  J. P. (1988). Efficiency  and performance  of genetically  high and low milk-producing  
British  Friesian  and Jersey  Cattle. Animal  Production,  42, 161-182.
Gill, M., Beever,  D. E. and Osbourn,  D. F. (1989).  The feeding  value of grass and grass  products.  
In: Grass,  Its Production and Utilizauon  (Ed.:  Holmes,  W.), British  Grassland  Society, Blackwell  
Scientific  Publications,  pp. 89-129.
Gleeson,  P. A. (1981). Concentrate  supplementation  for spring  calving  cows. Grass  and Forage  
Science,  36, 138-140.
Grainger,  C., (1981).  Performance  of Friesian  cows  with  high  or low breeding  indices.  Dairyfarming  
Annual,  Massey  University,  78-82.
Grainger,  C., Davey,  A. W. F. and Holmes,  C. W. (1985),  Perfonnanceof  Freisiancows  with high 
or low breeding  index. Animal  Production,  40, 379-388.
Harper,  J. L. (1967). A Dtrwinian  approach  to plant  ecology.  Journal  of Ecology,  55, 247-270.
Hay, R. J, M. and Baxter,  G. S. (1984).  Spring  management  of pasture  to increase  summer  white  
clover  growth.  Proceedings  of the Lincoln  College  Farming  Conference,  No. 34, pp. 132-137.
Holmes,  C. W. (1988). Genetic  merit and efficiency  of milk production  by the dairy cow. In: 
Nutrition  and Lactation  in the Dairy  Cow (Ed.: Gamsworthy,  P. C.), 195-215,  Butlerworths,  
London.
Hopkins,  A., Gilbcy,  J., Dibb,  C., Bowling,  P. J. and Murray,  P. J. Response  of permanent  and
34
Introducing  an uncommon  
agricultural  policy.
INTERVENTION
We tolerate  no intervention  or outside  
interference  in your private  financial  affairs.
COLD  STORAGE
Absolutely  no cold storage  of your hard 
earned  money  — with Bank of Ireland  healthy  
all year round  growth  is assured.
QUOTAS
No quotas  or artificial  restrictions  on your 
earning  power.
SAFETY  NET
In these uncertain  times we provide  youwith the ultimate  safety  net — the solid security  
and financial  strength  of Bank of Ireland.
POLICY  REFORM
Our commitment  to our farming  customers 
will be maintained  and is not subject  to 
policy  reform.
Call into any branch  of Bank of Ireland  and 
discover  how our uncommon  agricultural  policy  
helps your money  grow.
Bank  OF Ireland
Helping  to make things  happen
reseeded  grassland  to fertilizer  nitrogen.  1. Herbage  production  and herbage  quality.  Grass  and 
Forage  Science,  45, 43-56.
Joumet,  M. and Demarquilly,  C. (1979). Grazing,  In: Feeding  Strategy  for High Yielding  Dairy  
Cows  (Eds.:  Broster,  W. H. and Swan,  H.). Granada  Publishing,  London,  pp. 295-321.
Keating,  T., O'Kiely,  P. and Keane,  G, P. (1989).  Annual  beef  production  from silages  produced  
from  Lolium  Multiforum,  Lolium  Perenne  and permanent  grassland  swards.  Proceedings  of the 
15th Armual  Research  Meeting.  Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  50-51.
Keating,  T., O'Kiely,  P. and Keane,  G. P. (1990).  Annual  beef  productions  from silages  produced  
from  permanent  and reseeded  grass  swards.  Proceedings  of 16th Annual  Research  Meeting.  Irish  
Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  55-56.
Leafe, E. L. (1978). Physiological  environmental  and management  factors  of importance  to 
maximum  yield of the grass crop. Proceedings  of a joint ADAS/ARC  Symposium  on 
'Maximising  yields  of Crops',  37-49,  London,  HMSO.
Leaver,  J. D., Campling,  R. C. and Holmes,  W. (1968).  Use of supplementarty  feeds  for grazing  
dairy  cattle. Dairy  Science  Abstracts,  30, 355-361.
MacCarthy,  D. (1979). Milk production  from grassland.  In: Proceedings  of a Milk Production  
Seminar,  An Foras  Taluntais,  Moorepark,  paper  0, pp. 25.
MacCarthy,  D. (1984).  Milk  production  from  grassland.  Moorepark  25th Anniversary  Publication,  
Part 1 (Ed.: O'Shea,!.),  An Foras  Taluntais.
MacCarthy,  D. (19895).  Grass  produaion  for grazing  and silage. Milk Production  Seminar,  An 
Foras Taluntais,  Fermoy,  Appendices  1-10.
MacCarthy,  D. and Cullinane,  T. (1983).  MUk  production  from  permanent  and reseeded  pastures.  
In: Efficient  Grassland  Farming  (Ed.: CorraU,  A. J.), Occasional  Symposium,  No. 14, British  
Grassland  Society,  141-143.
Marriott,  C. and Rangley,  A. (1984).  HUl Farming Research  Organisation  Biennial  Report,  1982- 
83, pp. 109-118.
Mayes,  R. W., Lamb,  C. S and Colgrove,  P. M. (1986). The use of dosed  and herbage  n-alkanes  
as markers  for the determination  of herbage  intake.  Journal of Agricultural  Science,  Cambridge,  
107, 161-1790.
Mayne,  C. S., Newberry,  R. D. and Woodcock,  S. C. F. (1988). The effects  of flexible  grazing  
management  strategy  and leader/follower  grazing on the milk  production  of grazing  dairy  cows  
and on sward  characteristics.  Grass  and Forage  Science,  43, 137-150
Murphy,  P. M. (1987).  The contribution  of white  clover  in grassland.  Irish  Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal,  3-10.
Murphy,  W. E and O'Keeffe,  N. F. (1987).  FertUizer  Use Survey.  FertUizer  Association  of Ireland,  
Publication  No. 28, November  1987,
Neal, H. D. St. C., Thomas,  C, and Colby,  J. M. (1984).  Comparisons  of equations  for predicting  
voluntary  intake  by dairy  cows. Journal  of Agricultural  Science,  Cambridge,  103, 1-10.
O'Mara,  F., Murphy,!.  Dillon,  P., Stakelum,  G. and Rath,M.  (1991).  Effect  of different  concentrate  
supplements  and additives  on mUk production  by grazing  cows. Irish Journal  of Agricultural  
Research,  30, 82.
Ostergaard,  'V., Kower,  S., Solbuy,  H., Andersen,  B. B., Oldham,  J. and WUctorrsson,  H. (1990).  
Main Report  - E.A.A.P.,  Working  Group  on Efficiency in the Dairy  Cow, Livestock  Production  
science,  24, 287-304.
Pearson,  E. E., MiUer,  R. H., Smith,  J. W., Falton,  L. A., Rothschild,  M. F., Balaine,  D. S. (1981).  
Single  and multiple  trail sire selection.  First lactation  milk yield and composition.  Conforma ­
tion, feed intake,  efficiency  and net income.  Journal  of Dairy  Science,  64, 77-86.
Pflimlin,  A. (1984). In Britany,  dairy  farmers  switch  over  to while  clover. In: Forage  Legumes,  
Occasional  Symposium  of the British  Grassland  Society,  No. 16, p. 217.
Phillips,  C. J. C. (1988).  The use of conserved  forage  as a supplement  for grazing  dairy  cows. Grass  
and Forage  Science,  43, 215-230.
Richards,  I. R, (1977).  Influence  of soil and sward  charcteristics  on the response  to nitrogen.  In:
36
International  Meeting  on Animal  Production  from  Temperature  Grassland,  An Foras  Taluntais,  
Dublin  (Ed.: B. Gilsenan),  p. 45-49.
Roberts,  D. J., Frame,  J. and Leaver,  J. D. (1989).  A comparison  of a grass/white  clover  sward with 
a grass sward  plus fertilizer  nitrogen  under  a three-cut  regime.  Research  and Development  in 
Agriculture.,  6, 147-150.
Robson,  M. J., Parsons,  A. J. and WilUams,  T. E (1989).  Herbage  produaion:  Grasses  and Legumes.  
In: Grass,  Its Production  and Utilization  (Ed.: Holmes,  W.), The British  Grassland  Society,  
Blackwell  Scientific  Publications.
Rogers,  G. L., Porter,  R. H., D. and Robinson,  I. (1979).  The utilization  of perennial  ryegrass  and 
white  clover  by lactating cows.  Research Report,  Dairy Research  Institute,  EUinbank,  Victoria,  
p. 59.
Rogers,  G. L, Porter,  R. H., D., Qarke,  T. and Steardt,  J. A. (1980). Effect  of protected  casein  
supplements  on pasture  intake,  milk yield  and composition  of cows  in early  lactation.  Australian  
Journal  of Agricultural  Research,  31,1147-1152.
Ryden,  J. C and Garwood,  E. A. (1986).  The flow  of  nitrogen  in grassland.  In: 'Better  use of nitrogen  
- the prospect  for grassland'.  Proceedings  of a NAC  Conference,  Stoneleigh,  NAC/AFRC.
Siebert,  B. Dand  Hunter,  R. A. (1982).  Supplementary  feeding of grazing  animals.  In: Nutritional  
Limits  to Animal  Production  from Pastures  (Ed.: Hacker,  J. B.), CAB  Famham  Royal,  U.K.,  pp. 
409-426.
Smith,  A. and Allcock,  P. J. (1985).  The influence  of species  diversity  on sward  yield  and quality.  
Journal  of Applied  Ecology,  22, 185-198.
Stakelum,  G. and ConnoUy,  J. (1987).  Effect  of body  size and milk  yield  on intake  of fresh  herbage  
by lactating  dairy  cows  indoors.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research,  26, 9-22.
Stakelum,  G. and Dillon,  P. (1988). The effea  of concentrate  type on the herbage  intake  of high  
yielding  grazing  dairy  cows. Proceedings  of the 12th Gener  j Meeting  of European  Grassland  
Federation,  pp. 143-147.
Stakelum,  G. and Dillon,  P. (1990).  Dosed  and herbage  alkanes  as feed  intake  predictors  with  dairy  
cows:  the effect  of feeding  level and frequency  of perennial  ryegrass.  Proceedings  of the 7th 
European  Workshop  (Wageningen,  The Netherlands),  Oaober,  1990.
Stakelum,  G. and Dillon,  P. 1991). Influence  of sward  structure  and digestibihty  on the intake  and 
performance  of lactating  and growing  cattle. In: Management  Issues  for the Grassland  Farmer  
in the 1990's  (Ed.: Mayne,  C. S.). British  Grassland  Society,  Occasional  Symposium,  No. 25, 
pp. 30-42.
Stakelum, G.,  Dillon,  P. and Murphy  J. J. (1988a).  Supplementary  feeding  of grazing  dairy  cows.  
Moorepark  Dairy  Farmers'  Conference,  Fermoy,  pp. 25-27.
Stakelum,  G., DiUon,  P. and Murphy  J. J. (1988b).  The effea  of concentrate  type on the rumen  
fermentation  pattern  of grass fed  cows and  dry matter  and cmde  protein  degradability  of herbage.  
Proceedings  of the 12th General  Meeting  of the European  Grassland  Federation,  414-416.
Stakelum,  G., Gleeson,  P. and Murphy  J. J. (1985).  Comparison  of two groups  of cows  managed  
to achieve  maximum  intake  on all-grass  high concentrate  : forage  diets. Animal  Produaion  
Research  Report,  An Foras  Taluntais,  p. 33.
Van Es, A. J. H. (1979).  More  food for mankind  by plant  and animal  husbandry.  In: Bowman,  J. 
C. and Dusmel,  P. (Eds). The future  of beef  production  in the European  Community.  Mastinus  
Nyhoff  Publishers.  The Hague/Boston/London.
Weinberg,  C. F., Wilk,  J. C and McDaniel,  B. T. (1981).  Correlated  response  in feed efficiency  to 
selection  for milk yield in Randleigh  Jerseys.  Journal  of Dairy  Science,  64 (Suppl.  1), 77.
in
ELEVENTH  RICHARDS-ORPEN  MEMORIAL  
LECTURE
2. Silage  Intake  - A Major  Constraint  
to Low Cost Milk Production?
C. S. MAYNE
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of  Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,
Co. Down,  BT26  6DR.
At the outset  I would  like to thank  the Irish Grassland  Association  for their 
invitation  to address  this Conference  as one of the Richards-Orpen  Memorial  
Lectures.  It is indeed  an honour  to be associated  with the memorial  to someone  
who  made  such  a tremendous  conu-ibution  to the Irish  Grassland  Association  and 
to grassland  farming  in Ireland.
Introduction
With increasing  pressure  on dairy  farm incomes  arising  through  constraints  
on milk production  in the form of milk quotas,  reductions  in milk prices  and 
rising  input  costs,  it is imperative  that the lowest  cost  combination  of resources  
on the farm are used  to produce  each  litre  of milk. Under  the prevailing  climatic  
conditions  in Ireland  and western  parts of the United  Kingdom,  this inevitably  
necessitates  a high reliance  on grass,  either  in the grazed  or conserved  forms.  
Whilst  current  discussions  within  GATT  (General  Agreement  on Tariffs  and 
Trades)  and the CAP (European  Common  Agricultural  Policy)  may result  in 
lower  grain  prices  throughout  the European  Community,  the competitiveness  of 
milk  production  on the western  fringes  of Europe  will ultimately  depend  on the 
full exploitation  of the milk  production  potential  of grass.
One  of the major  obstacles  limiting  milk  production  from  grass  in these  areas  
is that, on average,  utilization  through  grazing  is only feasible  for between  6-8 
months/year.
Production  from  forage  for the remaining  period  is dependent  upon  conserved  
forage  - primarily  in the form of grass  silage.  However,  many  previous  reviews  
(Gill et al, 1988;  Harris  and Raymond,  1963  and Reeve,  1989)  have  highlighted  
the low intake  characteristics  and lower  nutritive  value  of grass  silage  compared  
to grazed  grass. Indeed  as early as 1963,  Harris  and Raymond  in their  review  
stated  that "the  value  of silage  as a ruminant  feed  may  be limited  at present  either  
by low digestibility  or by low intake if it is of high digestibility.  If high 
digestibility  and high intake  can be combined,  silage  should  provide  a feed of 
much  higher  animal  production  charcteristics  than is often  now accepted".  The 
purpose  of this review  is to examine  recent  information  on the limitations  of grass  
silage  and to highlight  possible  opportunities  for overcoming  such limitations.
Changes during  ensilage  and effects  on intake
The major  changes  which  occur  during  the ensilage  of grass  are the fermen ­
tation of grass sugars by lactobacilli  bacteria  to form lactic acid and the
38
Table 1
Typical  composition  of fresh grass  and silage  (after  Wilkinson,  1981)
Fresh grass Grass  silage
Water  soluble  carbohydrate  (g/kg DM) 150 10-20
pH 6.0 3.8-4.0
Fermentation  acids (g/kg DM) 0 100-150
Crude  protein  (g/kg DM) 160 160
Non protein  nitrogen  (g/kg  total N) 180 500
Ammonia  nitrogen  (g/kg  total N) 3 80
breakdown  of true protein  to form non protein  nitrogen.  The end result  is a 
marked  change  in chemical  composition  as shown  in Table  1 (Wilkinson,  1981).  
The ultimate  consequence  of these changes  in composition  are a marked  
reduction  in the intake  potential  of grass  as compared  to grass  at ensiling.  In one 
of the most  comprehensive  studies  on this topic Demarquilly  (1973)  evaluated  
a range  of 45 grasses  and 87 silages  through  sheep  and observed  that,  on average  
dry matter intake was reduced  by 33% following  ensilage,  with a range  
from 1-64%.
However,  as indicated  above,  the extent  of the reduction  in intake  is extremely  
variable,  and whilst  several  studies  have  indicated  that part  of the variation  may 
be attributed  to fermentation  end products  (Wilkins  et al, 1971 and Gill et al, 
1988),  in particular  the level  of acetic  acid  produced  (Tayler  and Wilkins,  1976), 
results  of recent  studies  indicate  that mark^  differences  in intake  characteristics  
can occur,  even  in the absenceof  changes  in fermentation  pattern  (Gordon,  1989;  
Mayne,  1990  and Keady  and Steen,  1990).
One of the major  difficulties  involved  in examining  effects  of specific  silage  
parameters  on dry matter  intake  is the risk of confounding  animal  effects  with 
silage  per se. For example  Rook  et al (1991) attempted  to produce  a prediction  
model  to account  for variations  in silage  intake  in situations  where  silage  was 
offered  ad libitum  and concentrates  offered  on a flat rate basis. The model  
derived  from a comprehensive  data set accounted  for 63% of the variation  in 
silage  intake in early  lactation  or 58% in mid lactation.  However  animal  factors  
including  factors  such as yield of fat plus protein,  post calving  liveweight  and 
week of lactation  were the major factors  in the model. Only two factors  
associated  with silage,  digestibility  and ammonia  nitrogen  content  were found  
to be important.
In order  to evaluate  the critical  silage  factors  which  influence  intake,  animal  
effects  need  to be eliminated.  This can best be achieved  by screening  a diverse  
range of silages  through  a single  species  of animal  under  a constant  nutritional  
regime.
Implications  of reduced  silage  intake  on animal  performance
Providing  a satisfactory  fermentation  is achieved  during  ensilage,  ensiling  
does not directly  affect  the digestibility,  metabolizable  energy  (ME)  concentra ­
tion or efficiency  of utilization  of ME (Wilkins,  1974). However,  the reduction
39
Table  2
Intake  and milk production  from silage  only diets
Source Silage  D-value  
(gAg)DMI
(kg/day)Milk yield  
(kg/day)
Autumn  calvers
CasUe  (1982) 702 13.2 14.4
Rae eta/ (1986) 650 11.4 15.8
Mayne  (1989) 745 11.0 17.8
Tedstone  (1990) 689 - 12.3
Spring-calvers
Rae et al (mi) 700 12.4 21,1
in intake  compared  to the fresh crop results  in depressed  animal  performance.  
The majority  of studies  on silage  only diets carried  out in the United  Kingdom  
and Ireland  have been undertaken  with late winter  or spring-calving  cows  and 
thus the winter  feeding  period  has been of relatively  short  duration.  Results  of 
a number  of recent  studies  are reviewed  in Table  2. It is important  to contrast  
these  results  with typical  performance  from grazed  grass  in early  lactation,  with 
herbage  intakes  of 15-17  kg DM/day  and milk yields  in excess  of 25 kg/day.
The  low si lage  intakes  and  poor  ani  mal performance  obtained  with  silage  only 
diets will generally  preclude  the adoption  of silage  as a sole feed with autumn ­
calving  herds.  However,  results  obtained  at this Institute  indicate  that mean  milk  
yields,  adjusted  for liveweight  loss,  of 21 kg/cow/day  can be achieved  over  the 
first ten weeks  of lactation  with cows  calving  in late March  and going  to grass  
in mid April. Similar  levels  of animal  performance  have been recorded  with 
spring-calving  cows  on silage  only diets (Rae  et al, 1987).
The  results  presented  in Table  2 also  indicate  a wide  range  in silage  intake  and 
milk production  which  apparently  bear little relation  to silage  digestibility  (D- 
value). This effect  may be atu-ibutable  to the many  interacting  factors  which  
appear  to influence  silage  intake.
Factors  influencing  silage  intake
Digestibility.  One  of the principal  factors  influencing  silage  intake  and hence  
animal  production  from silage is digestibility.  Recent  studies  carried  out in 
England  and Wales,  based  on herbage  samples  collected  on farms  over  a number  
of years  (Givens  et al, 1989)  indicate  that herbage  D-value  (digestible  organic  
matter  in the dry matter)  declines  linearly  from 1st May,  with a mean  decrease  
of 2.5 g/kg per day i.e. equivalent  to a decrease  in D-vdue  of 18 g/kg per week  
(Figure  1). Gordon  (1990)  in a review  of experiments  carried  out at Hillsborough  
noted  that a 10 g/kg decrease  in D-value  on average  depressed  silage  intake  and 
milk yield  by 0.16 and 0.37 kg/day  respectively.  Assuming  the mean decline  in 
D-val  ue of 18 g/kg/weck  recorded  by Givens  etal  (1989),  this would  indicate  that 
each week  delay  in cutting  of silage  beyond  1 May will result  in depressions  in 
silage  intake  and milk  yield  of 0.29  and 0.67  kg/day  respectively.  In a milk  quota
40
context  these results may be more meaningfully  assessed  in terms of the 
increased  concentrate  requirement  associated  with reduced  silage  digestibility.  
Gordon  (1990)  derived  a value  of 0.67  kg additional  concentrate/day  required  to 
achieve  a given milk output  for each 10 g/kg decrease  in silage D-value.  
Consequently for each week  in cutting  after 1 May  on average  an additional  1.2 
kg concentrates/day  will be required  in order  to maintain  milk yield.
Season  of  harvest.  A number  of studies  have  shown  reduced  silage  intake  and 
animal p)erformance  with  herbage  harvested  in the autumn  compared  to similar  
species  of herbage  harvested  ih spring.  For example  Castle  and Watson  (1970)  
observed  silage  intakes  from autumn-harvested  herbage  were 9% lower  than 
those  produced  from spring  herbage  of relatively  similar  digestibility.  Similar  
studies  reported  by Peoples  and Gordon  (1989)  have  shown  depressions  in silage  
intake  of 12% with autumn  harvested  material  compared  to those  recorded  with 
silage  produced  from the same  sward,  harvested  in the spring,  even  though  both 
silages  had similar  digestibilities  and fermentation  patterns.  Similar  depressions  
in intake have been recorded  with autumn  pasture  in comparison  to spring  
herbage  (Marsh,  1975  and Reid,  1978).  Peoples  and Gordon  (1989)  noted  lower  
cmde  protein  and ash concentrations  but higher  fibre  concentrations  in spring-
harvest  material  with improved  animal  performance  with first harvest  material  
being  directly  attributable  to increased  energy  intake.
Dry matter  concentration.  Dry matter  intake  of silage  is generally  positively  
correlated  with dry matter  concentration.  For example,  Small (1986),  in a 
comprehensive  review  of 38 dairy  cow studies,  noted a mean  increase  in intake  
following  wilting  of 13.7%,  with  greatest  responses  in intake  occurring  follow ­
ing wilting  of low dry matter  herbage.  However,  many  of the unwilted  silages  
examined  in these  comparisons  were  poorly  preserved  and consequently  part  of 
the increase  in intake may  be attribute  to improvements  in silage  preservation.  
Rohr  and Thomas  (1984)  and Gordon  (1990)  in their reviews  of the effects  of 
wilting  on silage  intake,  when  unwilted  silages  were  generally  well preserved,  
noted  increases  in silage  intake  of 4% and 6% respectively.  However,  increases  
in dry matter  intake following  wilting  have not been reflected  in improved  
animal  performance,  with  Rohr  and Thomas  (1984) and  Gordon  (1990)  observ ­
ing reductions  in milk  yield  of 2% and 3% respectively.  Unsworth  and Gordon  
(1985)  have attributed  the reduced  animal  performance  with wilted  silages  to 
lower  digestibility  and reduced  gross  energy  concentrations  in comparison  to 
unwilted  silages  made  from the same  herbage.  These  results  clearly  indicate  the 
need to ensure  that changes  in ensiling  technique,  designed  to improve  silage  
intake,  are reflected  in commensurate  improvements  in animal  performance  as 
otherwise  overall  efficiency  of silage  utilisation  will be decreased.
Fermentation  pattern.  The fermentation  pattern  of silage  has a major  effect  
on silage intake  although  the exact mechanisms  for these effects  are poorly
Figure  2 Effect  of total volatile  fatty acid content  in silage on
dry matter  intake
(after  Demarquilly,  1973)
60
% Reduction  
in dry matter  
intake  following  40 - 
ensilage  
(relative  to 
intake  of 
herbage  as 
ensiled)  '
— t—
750 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Total volatile  fatty acids ( mmoles/kg  DM)1750
42
What's  in a name?
Over  £1,000,000,000  a year, when  you 
lappen  to be called  An Bord Bainne.
And in that name  there  seems  to be 
some confusion.
It must  be the "Bord".  It sounds  like 
1 semi-state  company.
Which  we are not.
Not since 1973,  when  we chose  
;o become  a co-op.
We are first and foremost  
3 business  and a very successful  one, 
with sales  last year of more  than  
£1 billion.At An Bord  Mmne  we have  
another  name  of which  we re 
very proud  - Kerrygold.
One of the most  valuable  names  
in the country.
Kerrygold  is our world  brand,  
Ireland's  biggest  brand,  spearheading  
dairy  exports  throughout  the world.  
Berlin  to Barcelona,  Rio to Rotterdam.  
That's  what's  in a name. Or two.
IRISH DAIRY  BOARD
understood  as indicated  earlier. Demarquilly  (1973)  concluded  that the extent  
of the reduction  in silage  intake  was closely  correlated  with the levels  of lactic  
acid  and volatile  fatty  acids  present  in silage  (Figure  2). Further,  it was  noted  that 
the effects  of pH, ammonia  nitrogen  and butyric  acid  were  much  less significant.  
However,  it is also important  to note  that the final  characteristics  of the silage  as 
fed provides  little indication  of the time  course  of the fermentation  process  and 
clearly  this may have important  effects  on residual  water  soluble  carbohydrate  
levels  (Mayne  and Steen,  1990)  and possibly  intake.
There  are a wide  variety  of silage  additives  available  to modify  the pattern  of 
fermentation  within  the silo. Steen  (1991)  carried  out an extensive  review  of this 
topic  and results  are summarised  in Table  3. Treatment  of grass  with  formic  acid 
(2.8 litres/t)  has generally  improved  silage  fermentation  with significant  im­
provements  in silage  intake  (mean  response  -i- 0.82  kg DM/day)  and in the yield  
of milk fat and protein. However,  it is important  to note that Parker  and 
Crawshaw  (1982) and Mayne  and Steen  (1990)  noted  that formic  acid  treatment  
had much less effect  on silage  intake  or animal  performance  when untreated  
silage  was well preserved.  Overall,  treatment  with sulphuric  acid has produced  
much smaller  increases  in silage  DM intake  (mean  response  -i- 0.43  kg DM/day)  
and has tended  to marginally  depress  animal  performance  relative  to untreat^  
material.  In contrast,  treatment  of grass with bacterial  inoculants  based on 
Lactobacillus  planatarum  has produced  relatively  modest  improvements  in 
silage  fermentation  and silage  intake  (mean  response  + 0.46 kg/day)  but has 
significantly  enhanced  animal  performance.
More  recently  there  has been  renewed  interest  in the possibility  of overcom ­
ing some  of the factors  contributing  to reduced  silage  intake,  through  restricting  
the extent  of fermentation  in the silo by the application  of high levels  of organic  
acids. However,  even  when applied  at levels  in excess  of 6 litres/t  considerable
Table  3
Effect  of silage  additive  treatment  on silage  fermentation,  silage  intake  and animal  
performance  (After  Steen,  1991)
Formic
acidSulphuric
acidInoculants High  levels  
organic  acids
Change  relative  to untreated  silage*  
pH -0.4 0 -0.1 0
Ammonia  N
(g/kg  total nitrogen) -42 -14 -25 -53
Silage  intake
(kg DM/day)  +0.82 +0.43 +0.46 + 1.1
MUk production
(fat + protein  yield,  g/day) +57 -43 +67 + 110
Fat + protein
Yield/kg  additional  DM intake  (g/kg) 69 0 145 100
* Untreated  silages  differed  with differing  additive  type
44
fermentation  may still take  place  within the silo, although  on average  lactic  acid 
levels  have  been reduced  by approximately  50% in two recent  studies  (Jackson  
and Fumiss,  1990  and Chamberlain  et al, 1990). This approach  has resulted  in 
large increases  in silage intake  (+ l.lkg/day)  across  five experiments  with 
commensurate  increases  in animal  performance.  Furthermore,  in a more  recent  
study at this Institute  (Mayne,  1991),  application  of high levels  of organic  acids  
has resulted  in increases  in silage  DM intake  and fat plus protein  yield of 2.91 
kg/day  and 320 g/day  respectively.
Other  options  for increasing  DM intake  with silage
Inclusions  of legumes  in silage
There  has been renewed  interest  within  the United  Kingdom  in recent  years  
in the role of legumes  in high forage  production  systems.  A series  of studies  
conducted  by Castle,  Reid  and  Watson  (1983  and 1984)  indicated  that  high  levels  
of intake  and animal  performance  could  be obtained  from white  clover  silage  as 
a sole feed (Table  4) with milk  yields  up to 26.3 kg/day  being  obtained  on silage  
only diets. However,  more recent  evidence  (Wilman  and Williams,  1991)  
indicates  that silage  .produced  from grass/white  clover  mixures  may produce  
much more modest  improvements  in animal  performance  than would  be pre­
dicted  on the basis  of silage  produced  from  pure  white  clover  swards  (Table  5).
Mixed  forage  diets. An alternative  approach  to increase  dry matter  intake  
which  has been examined  recently  (Phipps  et al, 1988)  involves  mixing  of two 
differing  forages  prior to feeding.  For example,  the data presented  in Table  6 
indicate  that higher  total DM intakes  and improved  animal  performance  were  
obtained  by offering  mixtures  of grass  and maize  silages  than by offering  either  
silage  separately.  These  results  indicate  the potential  to increase  total  dry matter  
intake  from forage  by inclusion  of complementary  forage  crops  such as maize  
silage  or fodder  beet (Roberts,  1987).
Table  4
Intake  and production  from white  ciover  silage  (Castle  el at, 1983 and 1984)
D-value Silage  DM intake Milk yield
(g/kg) (kg/day) (kg/day)
623 15.2 15.7
680 19.3 26.3
Table  5
Comparison  of grasf and grass/white  clover  silage  for milk production  (Wilman  and
Williams,  1991)
Grass  Silage Grass  /while  clover  silage
Dry matter  intake  (kg/d) 14.6 16.0
Milk yield (kg/d) 23.3 24.0
Butterfat  (g/kg) 40.1 38.2
Prolein  (g/kg) 29.1 28.4
45
Table  6
Integration  of grass  and maize  silage  - effects  on intake  and animal  performance
(Phipps,  1988)
Grass
silage
only75% Grass  
silage  -t
25% maize  silage50% Grass  
silage  -t
50% maize  silage25% Grass  
silage  -H
75% maize  silage
Grass  silage  
(D-value  630 g/kg)  
Dry matter  intake  
(kg/day)7.8 8.2 8.5 9.6
Milk yield  
(kg/day) 23.8 24.7 24.9 26.4
Grass  silage  
(D-value  680 g/kg)  
Dry matter  intake  
(kg/day)8.8 8.8 10.7 8.9
Milk yield  
(kg/day) 24.5 24.8 26.3 25.5
Effects  of concentrate  supplementation  on silage  intake
Provision  of supplementary  feed can also have a marked  effect  on silage  
intake  with supplements  tending  to depress  intake. The extent  of this intake  
reduction,  or substitution  rate, is extremely  variable  although  recent  evidence  
(Thomas  and Thomas,  1989)  suggests  a close  correlation  between  substitution  
rate and the intake  of silage  as a sole feed. The higher  the intake  potential  of the 
silage,  the greater  the depression  in silage  intake  when the supplement  is fed. 
Consequently,  substitution  rates  will ultimately  depend  upon  the many  interact ­
ing factors  which  influence  the intake  potential  of silage,  as outlined  earlier.  
However,  the clear implication  which can be drawn from the relationship  
between  intake  potential  and substitution  rate is that responses  in both total  dry 
matter  intake  and animal  performance  from supplementation  of high potential  
silages  will be much lower than those obtained  with silages  of low intake  
potential.
Supplement  type. A wide variety  of supplement  types  are used in practice  
ranging  from high starch,  cereal-based  concentrates,  through  digestible  fibre-  
based  concentrates  to high  protein  concentrates.  At normal  levels  of supplemen ­
tary feeding  used in practice  e.g. 4-10 kg/cow/day  there is little evidence  to 
indicate  that  concentrate  energy  source,  i.e starch  vs fibre  has any effecton  silage  
intake.  Indeed,  in some  studies  replacement  of starch  with  digestible  fibre  as the 
principle  energy  source  has resulted  in a reduction  in silage  dry matter  intake  
(Mayne  and Gordon,  1984).
More  recently,  investigations  at this Institute  have examined  the effect  of 
protein  content  of the supplement  on silage  intake  and animal  performance.
46
Gordon,  Unsworth  and Peoples  (1981)  observed  that increases  in protein  content  
increased  overall  ration  digestibility  and silage  intake. Further  studies  have  
examined  the effect  of offering  concentrates  containing  1(X), 220, 340 and 460 
g crude  protein/kg  on silage  intake  and animal  performance  (Mayne,  1990b). 
The results  of these  studies,  presented  in Figure  3 provide  further  evidence  of 
positive  effects  of'high  protein  supplements  on silage  intake. For example,  
offering  supplements  containing  100 and 220 g crude  protein/kg  resulted  in 
substitution  rates  of 0.32  and 0.01,  whereas  with  supplements  containing  340  and 
460 g crude  protein/kg  silage  intakes  were  increased  by 0.09  and 0.31 with each  
additional  kg supplement.  Consequently  a fat plus protein  yield  of 1.50 kg/day  
could  be produced  by offering  grass  silage  ad libitum  with 8.3,4.7,3.3  or 3.3 kg/ 
day of concentrates  containing  100,220,340  and  460 g crude  protein/kg  respec ­
tively. It is clear from these studies  that provision  of specific  nutrients  as 
supplements  to silage  may facilitate  the use of lower  levels  of supplements  than 
used hitherto. However,  the specific  nutrients  required  to fully exploit  the 
potential  of a given  silage  may well depend  upon the intake  and degradability  
characteristics  of the silage,  which  ultimately  reflect  the fermentation  process  
occurring  during  ensilage.
Method  of supplementary  feeding
Method  of feeding  of supplementary  feeds may also influence  silage  dry 
matter  intake,  particularly  when high levels  of supplements  are offered. For 
example,  the data  summarised  in Table  7 indicate  that  complete  mixing  of silage  
and concentrates  prior to feeding  has, on average,  increased  total dry matter  
intake  by 7% relative  to offering  silage  and concentrates  separately.  Gibson  
(1984)  suggested  that more  frequent  feeding of concentrates  prevented  marked
Figure 3Effect of crude protein  content  of concentrate  and feed level 
on silage intake
Silage  intake  
(kg DM/day)
47
Table  7
Effect  of method  of concentrate  feeding  with grass  silage  based  diets  on silage  intake  and
animal  performance
Reference Dry matter  intake  
(kg/day)Fat plus  protein  yield  
(kg/day)
Complete  diet Separate Complete  diet Separate
Phipps  el at (1984) 16.4 16.1 1.73 1.75
Agnew  and Mayne  (1990) 12.8 II.7 1.33 1.29
Murphy  and Gleeson  (1991) 16.4 14.8 1.69 1.85
Overall  mean 15.2 14.2 1.58 1.63
declines  in rumen  fluid pH, thereby  facilitating  improved  forage  digestion  and 
increased  dry matter  intake. However,  from the data presented  in Table  7 it is 
clear that improvements  in total dry matter  intake,  as a result  of complete  diet 
feeding,  are not necessarily  always  translated  into improved  animal  perform ­
ance. Further  work is needed  to examine  the optimum  combination  of feed 
ingredients  to accompany  grass silage  in complete  diets  for dairy  cows.
Conclusions
With the prevailing  climatic  and soil conditions  throughout  much of the 
United  Kingdom  and Ireland,  utilization  of grass  through  grazing  is only  feasible  
for between  6-8 months/year.  Consequently  conserved  forage,  principally  grass  
silage,  forms  a major  component  of the diet for the remaining  period.  However  
grass silage  has a lower  nutritive  value and lower  intake  characteristics  than 
grazed  grass  and this is a major  limitation  in developing  low cost  milk  production  
systems.  In part the lower  intake  of silage  can be attrributed  to fermentation  end 
products,  particularly  acetic  acid, although  recent  studies  with inoculant  addi­
tives suggest  that the rate of fermentation  following  ensilage  may also be an 
important  factor.  Silage  digestibility  also  has a major  effect  on intake,  with  each 
week  delay  in harvesting  after  1 May  resulting  in a depression  in silage  dry matter  
intake  of 0.29 kg/day.
Provision  of supplementary  feeds  tends  to depress  silage  intake,  with  greater  
reductions  being obtained  with silages  having  a high intake  potential  when  
offered  as a sole feed. However,  recent  evidence  indicates  that, with silages  of 
high intake  potential,  provision  of low levels  of high  protein  concentrates  can 
stimulate  silage  intake.  Further  work  is required  to identify  the most  appropriate  
type of supplements  to use with silages  of differing  chemical  composition  and 
fermentation  characteristics.
References
Agnew,  K. and Mayne,  C. S. (1990).  An evaluation  of the effect  of method  of concentrate  feeding  
on yield and composition  of milk of dairy  cows offered  a grass silage-based  diet. Proceedings  
British  Grassland  Society,  2nd Research  Conference,  Ayr, September  1990.
CasUe,  M. E. (1982).  Making high quality  silage. In: Silage  for Milk Production,  Ed. J. A. F. Rook
48
and P. C. Thomas,  pp. 127-150,  Reading,  Technical  Bulletin  No. 2, National  Institute  for 
Research  in Dairying,  Ayr, Hannah  Research  Institute.
Castle,  M. E. and Watson, J. N. (1970).  Silage  and milk produaion  : a comparison  between  grass  
silages  made  with and without  formic  acid. Journal  of the British  Grassland  Society,  25,65-79.
Castle,  M. E., Reid, D. and Watson,  J. N. (1983).  Silage  and mUk  production  ; studies  with diets  
containing  white  clover  silages.  Grass  and Forage  Science,  38, 193-200.
Castle,  M. E., Reid,  D. and Watson,  J. N. (1984).  Silage  and milk  production : a comparison  between  
supplements  of barley  and soyabean  meal  and white  cover  silage.  Grass  and Forage  Science,  39, 
287-290.
Chamberlain,  D. G,, Robertson, S., Martin,  P. A. and Jackson,  D. A. (1990).  Effects  of the addition  
of ammonium  salts of methanoic  and propanoic  acids and octanoic  acid at ensiling  on the 
nutritional  value  of silage  for mUk production.  Proceedings  of the Ninth  Silage  Conference,  
University  of Newcastle  Upon  Tyne,  pp. 120-122.
Demarquilly,  C. (1973). [Chemical  composition,  fermentation  characteristics,  digestibility  and 
volunury  intake  of grass  silage  : changes  relative  to the initial  herbage].  Ann. Zootechnie,  22. 
1-35.
GUI,  M., Rook,  A. J. and Thiago,  L. R. S. (1988).  Factors  affecting  the voluntary  intake  of roughages  
by the dairy  cow. In: Gamsworthy,  P. C. (Ed.). Nutrition  and Lactation  in the Dairy  Cow,  pp. 
162-279,  London,  UK; Butterworth.
Givens,  D, I., Everington,  J. M and Adamson,  A. H. (1989). The nutritive  value  of spring  grown  
herbage  produced  on farms  throughout  England  and Wales  over  four  years. 1. The  effect  of stage  
of maturity  and other  factors  on chemical  composition,  apparent  digestibUity  and energy  values  
in vivo. Animal  Feed Science  and Technology,  27, 157-1732.
Gordon,  F. J. (1989).  An evaluation  through  lactating  catUe  of a bacterial  inoculant  as an additive  
for grass sUage. Grass  and Forage  Science,  44, 169-179.
Gordon,  F. J (1990). The principles  of making  and storing  high quality,  high intake  silage. In: 
Mayne,  C. S. (Ed.). Silage for Milk Production,  Occasional  Symposium  No. 23, British  
Grassland  Society,  pp. 3-19.
Gordon, F. J., Unsworth,  E. F. and Peoples,  A. C. (1981).  Protein  supplementation  of sUage-based  
diets  for mUk  production.  Fifty  fourth  annual  Report, Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  
Ireland,  pp. 13-23.
Harris,  C. F. and Raymond,  W. F. (1963).  The effect  of ensiling  on crop digestibility.  Journal  of 
the British  Grassland  Society,  18, 204-212.
Jackson,  D. A. and Fumiss,  S. (1990).  Restriction  of sUage  fermentation  by the application  of high 
levels  of mixed  aliphatic  carboxylic  acids  on the productive  performance  of lactating  dairy  catUe.  
Animal  Producuon,  50, 584 (Abst.),
Ready,  T. and Steen, R. W. J. (1990).  The effect  of a bacterial inoculant  on the digestibility  of grass  
silage  and energy  intake  by young  growing  cattle. Animal  Production,  50, 563 (Abst.).
Marsh,  R. (1975).  A comparison  between  spring  and autumn  pasture  for beef  cattle  at equal  grazing  
pressures.  Journal  of the British  Grassland  Society,  30, 165-170.
Mayne,  C. S. (1989).  The effect  of cmde  protein  concentration  of the supplement  on the response  
to level of supplementation  for dairy cows with ad libitum  access  to grass silage. Animal  
Production,  48, 624 (abst.).
Mayne,  C. S. (1990a).  An evaluation  of an inoculant  of Lactobacillusplantarum  as an additive  for 
grass silage  for dairy  cattle. Animal  Production,  51, 1-14.
Mayne,  C. S. (1990b).  The effect  of protein  content  of the supplement  on the response  to level  of 
supplementation  with dairy  cattle  offered  grass  silage  ad libitum.  Animal  Production,  50, 556-  
557 (Abstr.).
Mayne,  C. S (1991).  An evaluation  of an organic acid additive  (Maxgrass)  as an additive  for grass  
silage  offered  to dairy  cattle.  Internal  Report,  Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland.
Mayne,  C, S, and Gordon,  F. J. (1984).  The effect  of type of concentrate  and level  of concentrate  
feeding  on milk production.  Animal  Production,  39, 65-76.
49
Murphy.  J. J. and Gleeson,  P, A. (1991).  The nutritional  implication  of complete  diet feeding  - A 
research  perspective.  Irish farmers  Journal,  43, 17.
Parker,  J. W. O. and Crawshaw,  R. (1982). Effects  of formic  acid on silage fermentation,  
digestibility,  intake  and performance  of young  cattle. Grass  and Forage  Science,  37, 53-58.
Peoples,  A. C and  Gordon,  F. J. (1989).  The influence  of wilting  and season  of silage  harvest  and 
the fat and protein  concentration  of the supplement  on milk production  and food utilization  by 
lactating  cattle.  Animal  Production,  48. 305-317.
Phipps,  R. H. Weller,  R. F. Elliott,  R. J. and Sutton,  J. D. (1988). The effect  of level  and type of 
concentrate  and type of conserved  forage  on dry matter  intake  and milk production  of lactating  
cows. Journal  of Agricultural  Science  (Cambridge),  111, 179-186.
Phipps,  R. H.. Bines,  J. A., Weller,  R. F and Thomas.  J. (1984).  Complete  diets for dairy  cows  : a 
comparison  between  complete  diets and separate  ingredients.  Journal  of Agricultural  Science,  
Cambridge,  103, 171-180.
Rae, R. C., Thomas,  C., Reeve,  A., Golightly,  A. J., Hodson,  R. G. and Baker,  R. D. (1987).  The 
potential  of an aU grass  diet forthe  late-winter  calving  dairy  cow. Grass  and Forage  Science,  42, 
249-257.
Reed,  K. F. M. (1978).  The effect  of season  of growth on  the feeding  value  of pasture.  Journal  of 
the British  Grassland  Society,  33, 227-2324.
Reeve,  A. (1989).  What  can silage  produce?  An R and D view. In: Mayne, C. S. (Ed.). Silage  for 
Milk Production,  Occasional  Symposium  No. 23, British  Grassland  Society,  pp. 31-41.
Roberts,  D. J. (1987). The effects  of feeding  fodder  beet to dairy  cows  offered  silage  ad libitum.  
Grass  and Forage  Science,  42, 391-395.
Rohr,  K. and Thomas,  C. (1984).  Intake,  digestibility  and animal  performance.  In: Zimmer,  E. and 
Wilkins,  R. J. (Eds.),  Eurowilt  Efficiency  of silage  systems:  a comparison  between  unwilted  and 
wilted  silages,  pp. 64-70.
Rook,  A. J., Gill, M., WiUink,  R. D. and Lister,  S. J. (1991).  Prediction  of voluntary  intake  of grass  
silages  by lactating  cows  offered  concentrates  at a flat rate. Animal  Production,  52, 407-420.
Small,  J. (1986). An evaluation  through  dairy  cattle  of systems  of harvesting  grass  for silage  and 
the response  in milk production  to source  of supplementary  protein.  Phd. Thesis,  The Queen's  
University  of Belfast.
Steen,  R. W. J. (1991).  Recent  advances  in the use of silage  additives  for dairy  cattle. In: Mayne,  
C. S. (Ed.). Management  Issues  forthe  Grassland  Farmer  in the 1990's.  Occasional  Symposium  
No. 25, British  Grassland  Society,  pp. 87-101.
Taylor,  J. C. and Wilkins,  R. J. (1976). Conserved  forage - complement  of competitor  to 
concentrates.  In: Principles  of Cattle  Production  (Ed. H. Swan  and W. H. Broster),  pp. 343-364,  
London:  Butterworths.
Tedstone,  G. (1990).  What  can silage produce?  - a farmer's  view. In: Mayne,  C. S. (Ed.). Silage  
for MUk Production,  Occasional  Symposium  No. 23, British  Grassland  Society,  pp. 42-46.
Thomas,  C. and Thomas,  P. C. (1989).  Response  to supplementary  feeding.  In: Mayne,  C. S. (Ed.). 
SUage  for MUk Production,  Occasional  Symposium  No. 23, British  Grassland  Society,  pp. 49- 
60. Unsworth,  E. F. and Gordon,  F. J. (1985).  The  energy  utilization  of wUted  and unwilted  grass  
sUage by lactating  dairy cows. In: 58Ui Annual  Report,  Agricultural  Research  Institute  of 
Northern  Ireland,  pp. 13-20.
Wilkins,  R. J. (1974).  Effect  of ensilage  on nutritive  value  of forage.  In; Swan,  H. and Lewis,  D. 
(Eds ). Proceedings  Nutrition  Conference  for Feed Manufacturers,  8, I67-I89.
Wilkins,  R. J, Hutchinson,  K. J., WUson,  R. Fand  Harris,  C. E. (1971).  The  volunury  inuke  of silage  
by sheep. Journal  of Agricultural  Science  (Cambridge),  77, 531-537.
Wilkinson,  J. M. (1981). Interrelationships  between  pattern  of fermenution  during  ensUage  and 
initial  crop  composition.  In: Proceedings  of 14th International  Grassland  Congress,  pp. 631 -636.
Wilman,  D. and WUliams,  S. P. (1991).  A comparison  of grass/white  clover  with grass,  for sUage  
fed without  supplementation  to dairy  cows. Grass  and Forage  Science  (in press).
50
Where  
there ’s growth  
—there ’s 
Giassland  
I^rtilizers
HEAD  OFFICE:
75 Meirion  Square.  Dublin  2.
Tel. (01) 613211. Telex  93214  
Fax No. (01) 607537
FAtrrORIES :
Carrigrohane  Road,  Ckjrk. Tel. (021) 544188  
Dock Road, Limerick.  Tel. (061) 301788  
The Pound  Road.  Slane.  Co. Meath.
Tel. (041) 24124 & 24160
Greissland  
covers  Ireland.!
Grasslan
Grassland  Fertilizers  Ltd. The Pound Road. Slane Tel (041) 24124 & 24160
51
Big Bale Silage
P. O'KIELY  and T. KEATING 
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Introduction
Of the approximately  20 million  tonnes  of silage  produced  in Ireland  at 
present,  less than 10% is conserved  as big bale silage. However,  national  farm 
survey  data  assembled  by Teagasc  (Power,  1991 - unpublished)  indicates  that  on 
farms  of less than 10 ha area,  68%  of those  with silage  make  only baled  silage.  
This  percentage  decreases  to 40%,  24% and 16% for those  in the 10 to 20 ha, 20 
to 30 ha and 30 to 50 ha categories,  respectively.  These  proportions  are steadily  
increasing.  The method  of storing  big bales  under  plastic  has progressed  from 
storage  in clamps  to individual  bags  in individually  wrapped  bales. The  present  
system  is a major  technical  advance  on the baled  silage  system  of the 1970's 
which  were  based  on the available  hay-making  technology  and involved  small  
rectangular  bales  tightly  packed  in a polythene  covered  clamp.  Manual  handling  
of heavy  bales  and susceptibility  to aerobic  deterioration  at feeding  time made  
that system  unpopular.
Large  round-bale  silage  is relevant  in two types  of circumstances.  Firstly,  for 
farmers  who  normally  make  hay,  itrepresents  an opportunity  to achieve  some  of 
the benefits  of silage-making,  without  the ability  to conserve  their  crops  of grass  
when weather  conditions  for hay-making  are unsatisfactory.  Secondly,  baled  
silage  has a place  on many  farms  making  silage  by conventional  systems.  It can 
be used  to complement  the existing  silage-making  systems  where  the quantity  of 
grass  to be ensiled  is insufficient  to justify  opening  the conventional  silos,  and 
risking  excess  wastage.
The baled  silage  can be used as a buffer  feed for grazing  cattle  when  grass  
growth  is poor,  or at the start  of silage  feeding  in winter  if stock  numbers  are low . 
In both cases it can help to reduce  wastage  due to aerobic  deterioration  at the 
silage  face in conventional  silos. Baled  silage  also  has a role in allowing  silage ­
making  and feeding  on an outfarm  where  conventional  silos are not available.
Quality  on farms
Based  on over 6500  silage  samples  from Irish farms  chemically  analysed  by 
Grange  Laboratories  each year.  Tables  1 and 2 compare  the composition  of big
Table 1
Irish farm silages  1990
Dry matter  
(g/kg)pH Crude  protein  
(g/kg DM)DMD  
(g/kg DM)
Bie bale _ _
Average 342 5.1 148 OZJ
Max 720 g.8 244 754
Min 134 3.7 86 222
Conventional  _ _
Average 230 4.0 160 6yu
52
Table  2
Irish farm silages  1991 (incomplete  data-base)
Dry matter  
(g/kg)pH Crude  protein  
(g/kg DM)DMD  
(G/kg  DM)
Big bale
Average 327 4.9 175* 645
Max 602 6.4 212 728
Min 234 4.1 143 580
Conventional
Average 220 4.0 155 690
* small sample  size
bale silages  with that of conventional  (i.e. single,  double  and precision-chop)  
silages.
Wilting  is clearly  a more  integral part  of the baled  silage  system  than of other  
silage  making  systems;  however  baled  silages  ranged  from very wet (134  g DM/  
kg) to very  dry (720  g DM/kg).  Whereas  higher  pH values  are associated  with 
big bale compared  to conventional  silages,  due both to the higher  degree  of 
wilting  and slower  release  of cell contents  associated  with  big bale silage,  some  
values  were  so high as to indicate  extensive  aerobic  deterioration.  Both crude  
protein  and in vitro  DMD  values  tend  to be lower  for the big bale silage  samples  
analysed  than for samples  from conventional  silages.  This is more  a reflection  
of differences  in the quality  of the grasses  ensiled  in the different  silage-making  
systems  than any effects  of the big bale silage  system  itself. The results  clearly  
show that the quality  of big bale silage  ranges  from very good to very poor in 
terms  of preservation  and feeding  value.
Feeding  value
The quality  (feeding  value) of baled silage is dependent  firstly on its 
digestibility  and then by how well preserved  it is. Baled  silage  with a high 
digestibility  (DMD  over 700 g/kg DM) is made from leafy grass whereas  
stemmy  grass will produce  a low digestibility  (DMD  below  650 g/kg DM).  
Table  3 shows  the type  of performance  expected  from  450 kg steers  offered  well 
preserved  baled  silages  of either  high  or low DMD.  Clearly  stemmy  grass  cannot  
make  good  baled  silage.
Table  3
Expected  performance  from well preserved  baled  silage  offered  to steers
DMD  (g/kg DM) 730 630
Silage  DM intake  (kg/day) 8.57 7.72
Liveweight  gain (kg/day) 0.76 0.42
Carcass  gain (gk/day) 0.46 0.22
53
Good  preservation  of baled  silage  depends  on :
a) ensiling  clean  grass  - no contamination  by soil,  animal  manure,  rotted  grass  
etc.
b) wilting,  if possible
c) getting  the bales  into  the air-free  environment  quickly,  and  strictly  maintain ­
ing these  conditions  until feeding  time.
Although  recent  experiments  at Grange  have  shown  that  excellently  wrapped  
baled  silage  can be kept for a second  year, it is advisable  in most  cases  not to 
attempt  to carry  over bales  from one year to the next.
Research  at Grange  has shown  that good  quality  silage  offered  ad libitum  to 
cattle is similar  in feeding  value to comparable  silage made using more  
conventional  machinery  (Table  4).
Table  4
Comparison  of baled  silage  with precision-chop  silage  (silage  ad libitum  ■ 
concentrates  daily)1.6 kg
Unwilted Wilted
Precision-chop Big bale Big bale
DM (g/kg) 220 200 510
pH 3.8 4.2 5.9
DMD  (g/kg) 710 730 690
Intake  (DMI,  % Iwt) 1.5 1.7 1.7
Liveweight  gain (kg/day) 1.1 1.1 1.0
Sheep  are more  sensitive  to silage  chop-length  than  cattle  and intakes  may  not 
be as high with big bale silage  as with finely-chopped  silage  (Table  5). This 
would  not be the case  with  cattle  (Table  4), where  chop  length  has little  effect  on 
intake.
Table  5
The effects  of cutting  date, wilting  and chop length  of silage  when  offered  to sheep
Silage  DM intake  
(Kg/day)Ewe weight  change  (kg) 
(housing  to lambing)
Cutting  date 17 May 1.07 -1.5
5 June 0.91 -6.5
Wilting - Unwilt 1.21 1.3
WUt 1.31 0.2
Harvester - Long chop 0.97 -5.0
Fine chop 1.29 0.1
Source  : Chesinuii,  N.I.
54
Other  factors
When  drying  conditions  permit,  grass  for  big baling  should  be wilted  to about  
30% dry matter.  Achieving  this target  quickly  will involve  tedding/tuming  the 
crop. Even  though wilting  is very  sensitive  to weather  conditions  and will cause  
the loss of some nutritive  value,  it removes  the requirement  for preservation  
treatment,  eliminates  effluent,  reduces  the cost  of baling  and wrapping/bagging  
per hectare  and makes  bales  lighter  and therefore  easier  to handle.
If wilting  is attempted  during  wet weather,  the crop could  remain  on the 
ground  indefinitely.  Such grass would  continuously  lose nutritive  value  and 
become  progressively  more  difficult  to preserve.  Under  circumstances  where  
clean  fresh grass  cannot  be wilted  and where  it is harvested  as big bale silage,  it 
should  be baled  and wrapped  as soon  as possible  after  mowing.  Wet,  leafy  crops  
of grass  would  usually  need the addition  of adequate  effective  preservatives  to 
the grass  before  it is baled. It is pointless  applying  preservatives  onto the bale 
after  it is made.
It is fundamental  to the success  of baled  silage  that an air-free  environment  
within  the wrap is achieved  quickly  and maintained  thus until feeding  time.  
Failure  to achieve  air-free  conditions  quickly  after  baling  or to strictly  maintain  
them during  storage  is the major  reason  for disappointing  results  with baled  
silage  on Irish farms. It is important  to wrap/bag  bales  within  3 to 4 hours  of 
baling.  The air wrapped  within  the bale after  wrapping/bagging  has very little  
effect,  since  it will be used  up within  the first  two hours.  Good  quality  polythene,  
properly  applied,  must be used. Any handling  of the wrapped/bagged  bales  
should  be very  gentle  and cause  no damage  to the plastic.  Obviously  the bales  
should  be fenced  off during  storage  and preventive  methods  taken to exclude  
vermin.  Damage,  from whatever  source,  must  be repaired  immediately.
If mould  is found  in baled  silage  at feeding  time,  it indicates  that  the silage  had 
access  to air for some  time  before  the bale  was  opened.  This  silage  will have  lost 
some  of its feeding  value  and may be unsuitable  for certain  classes  of livestock  
(e.g. pregnant  cows  or ewes).
5*?
Nutrient  Balances  in Grassland
W. E. MURPHY  and N. CULLETON  
Teagasc,  Johnstown  Castle,  Co. Wexford.
The nutrient  supply  in grassland  is continuously  changing  with changes  in 
inputs,  outputs  and recycling  of elements.  A knowledge  of the sources  of new 
supplies  of nutrients  and the methods  whereby  nutrients  are lost to the system  is 
needed  in order  to manage  the system  so that the supply  of feed to the animals  
is measured  and the quality  of the feed is adequate  in terms  of actual  mineral  
contents  and the balance  between  the nutrients.
The general  scheme  of sources  and of losses  of nutrients  and also of internal  
cycling  of nutrients  is shown  in Fig. 1.
New  supplies  of nutrients  are brought  into the grassland  system  from the soil 
minerals,  the atmosphere,  imported  feeds,  fodder  crops  and fertilisers.
Nutrients  are lost to the system  by leaching  and runoff  volatilization  transfer  
to other  crops  and also in animal  products.
Nutrients  in the grassland  ecosystem  are in a constant  state of flux. They  
move,  or are cycled  from different  forms  in the soil to the plants,  to the animals  
and back again  to the soil.
The nutrients  essential  for plant and animal  production  occur in varying  
amounts  in the system.  They interact  with each other  and with other  soluble  
nutrients  to produce  herbage  of different  yields  and mineral  contents.
This mineral  supply  in the soil must  be within  certain  limits  relative  to each  
other  i.e. 'balanced'  in order  to produce  high yields.  Minerals  in plants  must  also 
be balanced  in order  to be suitable  for animal  health  and production.
Of most imjx)rtance  under  Irish conditions  are phosphorus,  potassium,  cal­
cium, manganese,  cobalt,  nitrogen,  sulphur,  sodium,  copper,  molybdenum,  
selenium  and iodine.  Maps  of areas  of high  and low availability  of these  elements  
have been produced  by B. Coulter  at John.stown  Castle  and are now available.
Nutrient  movements  In Grassland
56
Sources  of nutrients
Nutrients  coming  into the grassland  system  are derived  from a variety  of 
sources.  These  include  soil process  resulting  in the breakdown  of minerals  and 
organic  matter  in the soil. The natural  weathering  of soil constituents  is a slow 
process  but does result  in a small steady  supply  of nutrients  to the grassland  
system.  The breakdown  of soil organic  matter  especially  fresh organic  matter  
such as roots and leaves  is quite rapid and makes  available  nutrients  such as 
nitrogen  on a seasonal  basis.
Fixation  of atmospheric  nitrogen  is an important  source  of fresh nitrogen  
supplies  to grassland . This  process  has  been  the subject  of extensive  research  and 
has been the subject  of several  reviews.
Nutrients  are deposited  from the atmosphere  in small  amounts.  Apart  from  
electrical  storms  which  supply  small  amounts  of nitrogen,  the usual  sources  of 
these  nutrients  are industrii  discharges  which  supply  mostly  sulphur  but also 
other sometimes  less desirable  elements  such as lead and cadmium.  The 
atmosphere  can also  pick up some  nutrients  such  as sodium and potassium  from  
the sea surface  and deposit  this on land.
A major  source  of nutrients  for grassland  is imported  feedstuffs.  These  supply  
nutrients  such as nitrogen,  phosphorus,  calcium,  sodium  and magnesium  by 
virtue  of the natural  content  of the nutrients  in the grain and also by virtue  of 
minerals  added  by feed compounders.  Often the supplementary  minerals  are 
equal  to or in excess  of the naturally  occurring  ingredients.
Fodder  crops fed to ruminants  and pigs use another  important  source  of 
nutrients  for grassland.  These  crops usually  redistribute  nutrients  within  the 
same  farm or district  whereas  concentrated  cereal  feed can come  from any part 
of the world.  The  root  crops  tend  to be high  in Ca and low in phosphorus  and these  
balances  have  been  discussed  by Mengel  and Kirby  (1982).
Fertilisers  are the main  external  source  of nutrients  for grassland.  They  supply  
mainly  nitrogen,  phosphorus,  potassium  and sulphur.  Other  elements  such as 
sodium,  calcium,  magnesium  and small  amounts  of trace  elements  are usually  
present  as contaminants.
Losses  of nutrients
Nutrients  are removed  from the grassland  system  by several  mechanisms,  
these include  leaching,  runoff,  erosion,  volatilisation,  animal  manure  disposal  
and constituents  of animal  products.
Leaching  is the movement  of nutrients  down  the profile  in the drainage  water.  
When  the nutrients  are moved  permanently  below  the rocky  zone they are lost 
to the grassland  system.  The  amounts  of nutrients  that  can be lost  in this way vary 
greatly  from virtually  zero in the case  of phosphorus  to amounts  of excess  of 50 
kg per hectare  in the case of nitrogen.
Runoff  of surface  water  occurs  mostly  in winter  when soils  are saturated  with 
water  and the next rain that falls has to run over the surface  to the surrounding  
drains. Any material  that is in solution  such as fertiliser  or material  that can be 
suspended  in the water  such  as slurry  is in danger  of being  lost to the waterways.  
Erosion  is not considered  to be a serious  problem  in Irish grassland.  Whenever
57
it occurs  nutrients  that are already  incorporated  in the topsoil  can be lost in this 
way. Some erosion  occurs  on over grazed  hill peat soils. The problem  is 
becoming  more  widespread  as sheep  grazing  pressure  increases.
The influence  of leaching  erosion  and volatilisation  on nitrogen  is dealt  with 
in more  detail  by Sherwood  in another  paper  at this conference.
Volatilisation  is a pathway  for loss to the aunosphere,  it affects  mostly  
nitrogen  and selenium.
Slurries  and farmyard  manure  contain  large  quantities  of nutrients.  Normally  
they  are recycled  to the grassland.  When  they  are used  as sources  of nutrients  for 
tillage  crops  the grassland  nutrients  taken  is affected.
Animal  products,  milk,  meat,  wool,  all contain  nutrients  that are removed  in 
the harvesting  of such products  from the system.  The amounts  removed  vary 
with the stocking  rate and with the product.  The amounts  of Ca, P, K and Mg 
removed  by different  animal  categories  are shown  in Table  1.
Table 1
Nutrients  removed  (kg per L.U.)
Animal Ca P K Mg
Young  Cattle 11.0 7.0 1.2 0.4
Mature  CatUe 3.9 1.6 0.6 0.2
Cow 4,500  kg Milk 6.2 4.6 7.3 0.6
Sheep 8.9 5.0 1.6 0.4
These  losses must be replaced  from one of the input sources  if livestock  
productivity  is to be maintained.
Nutrient  cycling  and storage
Nutrients  are stored  in several  areas in the grassland  systems  and cycled  
between  these  storage  points.
The main  storage  points  outside  the soil are the sward  (tops  and roots),  hay or 
silage  and slurry  pits or dungstead.  In the soil the nutrients  exist in several  
conditions  from easily  available  to mineral  and organic  reserves.  The easiest  
available  nutrients  are in the soil  solution.  These  are removed  by the plant  roots  
and replaced  from  a labile  pool  of easily  exchangeable  or soluble  nutrients.  This 
pool is in turn kept  in equilibrium  by weathering  of soil particles  and breakdown  
of relatively  stable  organic  matter. The system  tends  to remain  in equilibrium  
influenced  by the element  involved,  the climate,  soil conditions  and types  of soil 
minerals.  Thus when nutrients  are added  to the soil they may remain  readily  
available  for a long time or go into a longterm  storage  form i.e. become  'fixed'.
Soil conditions
The availability  of nutrients  to plants  is influenced  greatly  by soil drainage  
and pH conditions.  Low pH tends to reduce  the availability  of the essential  
nutrients  and increase  the solubility  of manganese  and aluminium.  At the same  
time  the rate of breakdown  of organic  matter  is reduced.  Where  drainage  is poor  
anaerobic  conditions  arise and nitrogen  supply  is reduced.  However,  other  
elements  including  toxic elements  are more  soluble.
58
Enrich  
your  soil.
Enhance  
your  profit.
Invest  in your land and it will 
repay  you handsomely.  But invest  
wisely.  With Goulding  Fertilisers!  
Known  and trusted  for their  
quality-and  for giving  the best 
returns.
GOULDmGGoulding
Chemicals  Limited.  
Dublin Cork  
New Ross Sligo
59
Phosphorus
Phosphorus  was almost  universally  deficient  in the past. Farmers  have  
been building  up P levels  in the soil by fertiliser  application  (Fig.  2) and in 
more  recent  times  by extra  concentrate  feeding  and better  management  of 
slurries  and farm wastes. Fig. 2 shows  that on a national  scale soil P test 
results  coincide  with national  P use figures  with a lag phase  of 2-3 years.  
Average  P levels  are now satisfactory.  In some  farms  levels  are high (>10  
ppm)  in 26% of the country  (Tables  2 and 3).
Table  2
Phosphorus  levels  in Irish soils. Percentage  of soil test results  in different  categories
% of soils in each soil test category  (ppm)
0-3 4-8 7-10  10-1 Mean
1989-1990 25 28 21 26 8,3
N, P & K use in Ireland  since 1953
Year 
Fig. 2
60
Table  3
Phosphorus  levels  in Irish soils for grazing  and silages
% of soilin each soil test category
0-3 4-6 7-10 10+ Mean
Grazing 29 29 19 23 8.1
1st Cut Silage 20 30 23 27 8.7
When  P levels are very high there is a clanger  of removal  by some P to 
waterways,  rivers  and lakes  with the consequent  risk of eutrophication.  Infor ­
mation  on the actual level of P in various  soils at which P is lost to the 
environment  is not available.  Table  3 shows  that P levels  can be high in the top 
few cm, and yet very low at 12 cm. This  suggests  that soil erosion  could  tend  to 
lead to run-off  of P. This is further  illustrated  by Table  4. In terms  of balance  
of nutrients  P supply  to plants  can be adversely  affected  at high pH by excess  
calcium  in the soil at low pH by the presence  of Fe and AI.
Table  4
Distribution  of extractable  P (using  Morgan's  extractant),  with depth,  in soils which  
received  different  fertiliser  and slurry  treatments
Depth  (cm) Soil extractable  P (mg/PI)  using  Morgan's  extractant
rira7.p.d  prafvstand  .E. Murohv. unoublished  datal
0-2Pq*
4.6P *
13.1P *^30
27.8
2-4 3.5 8.2 18.4
4-8 3.1 6.8 15.1
8-12 2.8 5.6 12.6
12-16 2.2 3.7 7.6
16-20 1.4 2.6 4.0
Cut erassland  fM. Sherw od. unoublished  datal
0-1.25Po**
11p
* 300
30p
* 900
67
1.25-2.5 13 20 52
2.5-5.0 9 13 43
5-10 6 9 22
10-15 5 5 11
5" ^30 treatments  where  grazed  grassland  received  0, 15 and 30 kg fertiliser  P/ha/year  
for twenty  years  prior  to sampling.
^0’ ^300 ^900 treatments  receiving  a total of ca 0, 300 and 900 kg P/ha respectively  in
7 split applications  of pig slurry  over a 30 month  period  prior  to sampling.
Potassium
Potasssium  (K) levels  in grassland  under  grazing  have  tended  to be satisfac ­
tory over large  areas  of the country.  Table  5 shows  that the 56% of country  is
61
Table  5
Potassium  levels  (ppm)  In grazing  and 1st cut silage
% of Soil in each ;Soil Test Cateeorv
0-50 51-75 76-100 101-150 150+ Mean
Grazing 7 12 15 30 36 124
1 St Cut Silage 13 23 20 26 18 102
satisfactory.  Under  continuous  cutting  of hay or silage  K levels  have  fluctuated  
considerably  as fertiliser  and organic  manure  application  varied.  This was due 
to the large  removals  of K in the crops  especially  silage  where  high yields  and 
high levels  of K in the dry matter  were  common.  At present  over 50% of soil 
samples  show low K levels  (Table  5).
Farmers  have  been applying  K for many  years  and Fig. 2 shows  that the soil 
fertility  levels  are still rising  despite  the fact that K consumption  has levelled  out 
since the mid 1970's. This reflects  what has happened  throughout  Europe  
(Kochi,  1984).  AsinthecaseofP,  this suggests  that farmers  are probably  using  
the slurry  on the farm more  effectively  than was the case in the past. In times  
when  the price  cost squeeze  is very intense,  the potential  savings  in both P and 
K can be significant  if soil indices  are high.  Table  6 shows  thatat  soil index  4 there  
is no need to apply  P and K grazing  situations.
High soil K levels  and application  of high  rates  of K and N have  been shown  
to reduce  the level  of Mg uptake  in the spring  and thus increase  the risk of grass  
tetany  in cattle. The splitting  of the linkage  between  P and K fertilisers  by the 
introduction  of the N-P  and N-K  of fertiliser  go some  way towards  rectifying  the 
dilemma  of spring  applications  of P-K.
Magnesium  and lime
Magnesium  levels  in herbage  vary throughout  the growing  season.  It is low 
in spring  and increases  in mid season  (Fleming  & Murphy,  1986).  The removal  
of Mg by silage  is of the order  of 25 kg/ha  ; this quantity  is easily  supplied  by 
dolomitic  limestone  (10-12%  Mg) on this basis. (line tonne  would  supply  total 
requirements  for 4 years.
Calcium  levels  in Irish  soils  are usually  high enough  to support  plant  growth.  
Ground  limestone  is used  as a soil conditioner  to adjust  the pH of the soil  and thus 
to reduce  the availability  of iron and aluminium.  In high  pH soil there  is free  lime
Table  6 
Soil index
Index Response p K
1 Definite  Response 0-3 0-50
2 Moderate  Response 4-6 50-100
3 Maintenance  Requirement 7-10 101-150
4 No P or K Requirement 10+ 150+
62
Table  7
The national  figures  for the lime requirement  status  of the country
XSL 0-4% Soils in each soil test category
5-10  11-15  15-(- Mean  (t/ha)
15 39 31 11 4 5.2
the excess  calcium  has the effect  of reducing  the availability  of phosphorus.  
Water  soluble  phosphates  are rapidly  converted  to insoluble  calcium  phosphates  
which  are not available  to plants.
The application  of calcium  carbonate  increases  the availability  of molybde ­
num to plants,  especially  legumes.  Where  molybdenum  is plentiful  in the soil 
a balance  must  be struck  between  the beneficial  effects  of reduced  soil acidity  
and the detrimental  effect  of increased  Mo uptake  by plants.  At present  the policy  
in such  cases  is to restrict  the pH to a maximum  of 6.3. The  national  usage  of lime 
has declined  significantly  in recent  years and it is quite clear that it is false  
economics  in that the lack of lime can lead to the inefficient  use of other  
fertilisers,  especially  P.
Nitrogen
The  sources  of nitrogen  for intensive  grassland  are fertiliser,  nitrogen  fixation  
of atmospheric  nitrogen  and supplementary  feeds. The losses  from the system  
are leaching,  slurry  application  to other  crops,  volatization,  dentrification  and 
animal  products  (Sherwood,  1991).
The amount  of nitrogen  removed  in animal  products  is about  70 kg per ha 
under  high  stocking  rate milk  production  and 70 kg p»er ha under  beef  production.  
The inputs  of nitrogen  of highly  stocked  dairy  farms  are frequently  400 kg N per 
ha from  fertiliser  plus  60 kg pter ha from  meal  feeding  and imported  fodder  crops.  
The amount  supplied  by clover  is virtually  nil when high  rates  of N are used on 
the swards  but can be over 150 kg N per ha in the absence  of applied  N. Some  
small  amounts  are obtained  from the atmospheric  precipitation  leaving  almost  
400 kg N per ha to be accounted  for in accumulation  in soil organic  matter,  
leaching  losses,  dentrification  and volatilisation  losses  and transfer  to other  crop 
systems  as slurry.  There  is only  a limited  possibility  of maintaining  a balance  of 
nitrogen  from  year  to year  to meet  the requirement  for intensive  production  in the 
system  as transformations  of N in the soil tend to produce  nitrate,  which is 
leached  below  the rooting  zone in the winter.  However,  there  is some  build-up  
of available  nitrogen  over  the first  4 years  of high  niU'Ogen  treatment.  In a study  
of response  to N in a number  of grazing  trials  in Ireland,  Ryan  et al, 1984  showed  
that the response  to 2(X) kg N ha ' at low clover  contents  decreased  from a  range  
of 30 to 45% in the first year to 23 to 33% in the second  year. Volatilisation  of 
ammonia  can be very high when  N is applied  as slurry  or urea and runoff  from 
the surface  after  spreading  can also  account  for a large  proportion  of slurries  and 
mineral  fertilisers.  The environmental  implications  of the loss of N from the 
system  is a major  cause  of concern  in all countries  where  intensive  agriculture
63
Effects  of Nitrogen  on herbage  Copper
Fig. 3
is practised.  Sherwood  and Fanning  (1981)  showed  that rate of runoff  depends,  
on rainfall  immediately  after application,  the moisture  content  of the soil, the 
permeability  of the soil and weather  conditions  at the time of spreading.  The 
losses  can be over 30% of the nutrients  applied.  When  nitrogen  is applied  to 
herbage  on copper  deficient  soils  the increased  growth  has the effect  of diluting  
the copper  in the herbage.  However,  when nitrogen  is applied  to soil with a 
plentiful  supply  of Cu, the Cu concentration  in the herbage  is increased  over  the 
Cu concentration  in the herbage  not receiving  nitrogen  (Fleming,  1977)  (Fig. 3). 
This effect  of nitrogen  can also be observed  for other  elements  e.g. Mg, Se and  
S.
Sulphur
Sulphur  is an important  element  in grassland  systems.  The  sources  of sulphur  
are atmospheric  deposition  and fertilisers  plus small quantities  in imported  
feeds. Losses  of sulphur  from the system  are caused  mainly  by leaching  and 
transfer  to other  crops via slurry. TTie quantities  in animal  products  are very 
small. In recent  years there has been a tendency  to change  the systems  of 
manufacturing  fertiliser  so as to exclude  sulphur  from compounds  and also to 
permit  blending  rather than compounding  of fertilisers.  This reduces  the 
amounts  of S available  to crops  and grassland.  This tendency  has advanced  
further  in Ireland  than in any other  European  countries.
As the level of emission  of sulphur  dioxide  from fuel combustion  is low in 
Ireland  responses  to sulphur  have been  found  over  wide  areas  (Murphy  (1963).  
The responses  were found on light textured  soils where the possibility  of 
leaching  was greatest.  The results  of one experiment  in Co. Kilkenny  is shown  
in Table  9.
64
Table  8
(N+P+K)/S  ratio  of fertiliser  in some European  countries  1990
CountryN/S ratio
Ireland30
France12
U.K.8
Italy3
Spain2
Table  9
Effect  of sulphur application  (50 kg/ha) on DM yield (kg/ha)
Date of harvest response 0 50 Per cent
April 3640 3917 8June 2296 2546 11
August 1589 2735 72October 2050 4370 113
Total 9575 13568 42
It may be expected  that the requirement  for added  S will increase  as fertiliser  
technology  changes  and sulphur  dioxide  emissions  are controlled.
Copper  problems
Simple  copper  deficiency  only account  for a small proportion  of copper  
problems  in grassland.  The vast majority  of problems  are concerned  with 
nutrient  balances.
The presence  of levels  of molybdenum  in grazed  plants  higher  than 3 ppm 
may cause  an interference  in the ability  of animals  to utilize  coppier  even  when  
it is present  in the plant  at maximum  uptake levels. It has been  found,  Walsh  et 
al (1951)  that the application  of sulphur  reduces  the uptake  of Mo by the plant.  
However,  it has also been found  (Suttle,  1978)  that the presence  of high levels  
of diet^y  sulphur  enhances  the ability  of the molybdenum  to interfere  with the 
utilization  of Cu by the animal.  It is also well  known  that high soil pH increases  
the availability  of soil molybdenum.  All these circumstances  are present  in 
several  intensive  grassland  areas  in northwestern  Europe.  They  are a cause  for 
concern  ^d indicate  a need  for extreme  care and vigilance  in farm and advisory  
practice  in problem  areas. Where  molybdenum  is high and pH low, a compro ­
mise must  be reached  between  the best practice  for herbage  yield and the best 
practice  for maintaining  a satisfactory  trace  element  balance.
Cobalt  and manganese
Cobalt  deficiency  in sheep  is well known  and has traditionally  been associ ­
ated  with  granitic  hill soils. More  recenUy  the importance  of high  soil manganese  
in interfering  with the uptake  of cobalt  has been  established  (Adams  et al. 1969;
65
Heming,  1977).  The  situation  occurs  in many  intensive  grassland  areas  and may 
well affect  bovine  as well as ovine  animals.  In these  situations  application  of 
cobalt  to the soil is of little  value  and  cobalt  supply  must  be maintained  by treating  
the animals.
Conclusions
It is essential  for intensive  production  to maintain  a balance  of nutrients  in the 
grassland  swards  that not only allows  maximum  growth  of herbage  but also 
provides  correct  levels  of optimum  animal  health  and production.  In intensive  
grassland  there are problems  of deficiency  and excesses  of nutrients.  The 
deficiencies  can usually  be corrected  by using fertiliser  and by improved  
management  of the nutrient  cycles. Some  of the problems  of excess  such as 
excess  molybdenum  are associated  with paiticular  soil types  and may require  
particular  skill in managing  the situation  to even achieve  suboptimal  levels  of 
productivity.  In other  cases a long term build up of major  nutrients  such as 
phosphorus  and potassium  may be due to feeding  large amounts  of imported  
feeds  and the spreading  of pig slurry  on land  that is either  in grassland  or part of 
a grassland/tillage  rotation.  In the long term, soil fertility  conservation  and 
protection  of the environment  considerations  may force farmers  to rely more  
completely  on grassland  for animal  production.  The apparent  productivity  of 
intensive  grassland  is frequently  due to large  quantities  of imported  feedstuffs  
which  lead to excessive  build  up of nutrients  causing  imbalances  and danger  to 
the environment.
On the other  hand intensive  production  from grassland  and ptroper  nutrient  
balance  can be maintained  by the rational  use of fertilisers  and limited  imported  
feed inputs.
References
Adams,  S. N., Houysett,  J. L., Tuller,  K. E., Norrish,  K. R (1969).  Aust. J. Soil Res. 7, 29-42.  
Fleming,  G. A., Murphy.  W. E. (1968).  Journal  of the British  Grassland  Society,  23. 174-195.  
Fleming,  G. A. (1977). Proceedings  of the Intemauonal  Meeting  on Animal Production  from  
Temperate  Grassland,  88-95.
Kochi,  A. (1984).  Nutrient  Balances  and Fertiliser  Needs  in Temperate  Agriculture.  International  
Potash  Institute.  Proc. 18th CoU. of the Int. Potash  Institute.  Gardone,  Italy, 177-185.  
Mengel,  K., Kirby,  E. A. (1982). Principals  of Plant  Nutrition,  pp. 655.
Murphy,  W, E. (1963). Proc. 1st Coll.  Int. Poush  Inst. Bern. 1963.
Ryan, M., O'Keeffe,  W. F., Connolly,  J., Collins,  D. P. (1984). Irish Journal  of Agricultural  
Research,  Vol. 23, 27-40.
Sherwood,  M., Tunney,  H. (1991). Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association.  17th 
Annual  Research  Meeting,  67-68.
Sherwood,  M., Fanning,  A. (1991).  Surface  runoff  from  land spreading  of manures,  5-17,  Ed. J. C. 
Brogan,  Martinas  Nijhoff,  W. Junk, 1981.
Suttle,  N. F. (1978).  Trace  Elements  in Soil, Plant,  Animal  Systems.  Ed. D. J. D. Nicholas  and A. 
R. Egan,  Acad.  Press,  271-289.
Walsh,  T., Neenan,  M., O'Moore,  L. B. (1951).  J. Dept. Agriculture,  48, 32-43.
66
Creenvofe  
ANIMAL FEEDS
PRODUCT  RANnP-  
Beet Pulp Nuts
Super  Milker  Ewe and Lamb Nuts
Super  Thrive  Lamb Creep
Ewe & Lamb  50/50 Whole  Grain Supiement
Start to Grass  Coarse  Caif Feed
Super  Graze  Calf Rearer  Nuts
Super  Lean beef
Super  Cream  Dairy
Cal Mag Nuts
Gowla  Classic  Bloodstock  Conditioner  
Gowia  Breeder  International  
Mineral  + Vitamin  Mixes
HIGHLY  PALATABLE,  HIGHLY  DIGESTIBLE  
FEEDS  - FROM  GREEN  VALE  -THE  EXPERTS  
IN FEEDING.
A division  of Greencore  Agrisales  Limited
ANIMAL  FEEDS
Phone  Carlow  0503-31489
Scope  for Reducing  the Costs  of Milk  
Production
P. DILLON  and D. CLIFFE
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
C. HURLEY  
Irish  Farmers ’ Journal
Dairy  farmers'  incomes  are likely  to be reduced  in coming  years  due to falling  
milk  and calf  prices,  and possible  further  quota  reductions.  Also,  incomes  from  
alternative  enterprises  relative  to dairying  are poor. The outcome  of the GATT  
negotiations  may cause  further  erosion  in the coming  years  and in this situation  
dairy farmers  must  consider  all aspects  of technical  efficiency  and cut costs  of 
production.
In pre-quota  days it almost  always  made  good financial  sense  to lift milk 
production  by increasing  stocking  rate (i.e. carry more  cows)  and lifting  milk 
yield  per cow. The emphasis  was on expanding  production  at a given  level of 
efficiency,  rather  than improving  efficiency  at a given  level  of production.  The 
objective  now on dairy  farms  is to maximise  the profit  margin  per litre of quota.  
If the quota  could  be produced  on an all grass silage  based  system  it would  
significantly  reduce  the costs  of milk production  (Table  1).
The results  of a survey  (Dairymis  II) on the cost of producing  a litre of milk  
are shown  in Table  2. The average  cost of producing  a litre of milk was 1 L4p/  
litre. The average  cost of the top 25% was 8.8p/litre,  and the lower  25% was 
14.7p/litre.  It is obvious  that there is a large variation  between  the farms  
surveyed.  The large  costs  (concentrates,  fertilisers,  hired  labour,  machinery  and 
contractor  charges)  were  4.4p/litre  on the least  efficient  farms  compared  to the 
most efficient  ones. Table  3 shows  the costs of producing  a litre of milk for 
different  quota  sizes (Dairymis  II and Irish Farmers'  Journal  Survey).  This 
indicates  that there  is very little  difference  in the efficiency  of milk  production  
with different  quota  sizes. In this article,  a number  of options  are outlined  for 
reducing  costs of milk production  where milk price is falling and quota  
dininishing.
1. Fertiliser  and grassland  management
The Dairymis  II Survey  showed  that the average  cost of fertiliser  was L5p/
Table 1
The relative  costs of grass  and concentrate
£/tonne £Aonne Relative
DM DDM
Grass 30 40 100
Silage 86 122 305
Concentrate 150 202 505
68
Table  2
Costs  per litre of quota  (p/litre)
Average Low Cost Producer High Cost  Producer
Concentrates 2.8 2.2 3.2
Fertiliser 1.5 1.6 1.8
Hired  labour 1.1 0.2 1.9
Machinery  hire and silage 0.9 0.8 1.1
Med. & Vet. 0.5 0.4 0.7
A.I. & BuUs 0.3 0.3 0.4
Machinery  costs 1.8 1.3 2.5
Milk replacer 0.2 0.2 0.3
A/C ‘s & Lease 1.0 0.9 1.1
Farm maintenance 0.4 0.3 0.6
Parlour  sundries 0.2 0.1 0.2
E.S.B. 0.3 0.3 0.4
Miscellaneous 0.3 0.2 0.6
Total 11.4 8.8 14.8
Table  3
Costs  per litre for different quota  sizes
Average Low Costs High Costs
<136,000 13.6 10.5 17.5
136 - 273,000 12.7 10.9 14.8
>455,000 13.5 10.1 17.7
litre where  stocking  rates  of 3.1 -2.8 cows/ha  were  recorded.  Given  that 0.5-0.7  
of this is associated  with P, K and lime,  around  0.9 would  be accounted  for by 
nitrogen.  Moorepark  experiments  have  shown  that a depression  of less than 182 
litres/cow  results  from reducing  total nitrogen  from 390 to 270 kg/ha  at high 
stocking  rate (3.1 cows/ha)  (MacCarthy,  1984).  The  potential  saving  is therefore  
around  0.2p/litre.  Savings  of up to 0.2p/litre  can be made  where  urea is used  
instead  of CAN for first cut silage  and on grazing  ground  up to late May.  
However,  where  stocking  rates  are lower  (2.1  -1.7  cows/ha)  much  lower  levels  of 
nitrogen  or systems  based  white  clover  could  be used.
These  savings  are small  when  compared  to the saving  that can be achieved  by 
reducing  the input of concentrate  and correctly  managing  pastures.  Correct  
grazing  management  is probably  the most  undervalued  operation  on dairy  farms  
where  cost  reduction  isconcemed.  Management  procedures  which  will increase  
the potential  production  at pasture  will by default  reduce  the feed cost. Recent  
research  at Moorepark  has highlighted  the potential  of high quality  pasture  to 
sustain  high levels  of milk production  (Stakelum  and Dillon  1988).
This series  of experiments  have shown  that the quality  of grass is just as 
important  as the quantity.  Tight  grazing  in spring  (April-June)  to a surface  height
69
Daily Milk Yield (kg) - 1987
June July Aug. Sept.
Fig. 1 - Daily  milk production  curves  for the cows  grazing  high,  medium  and low
quality  swards  in 1987
of 5-6 cm will produce  a pasture  of much  better  quality  for the remainder  of the 
grazing  season.  This is achieved  where  cows  are stocked  at 6.2 cows/ha  with  a 
high level  of nitrogen  (240  kg/ha  to end of June)  application.  Tight  grazing  will 
lead to a pasture  of high digestibility  which  will promote  higher  intakes  and 
support  higher  milk yields  afterwards.  Figure  1 shows  the milk production  
profde  of cows  for the second  half  of the grazing  season  on three  pasture  types.  
The high quality  pasture  supported  average  daily yields of 19.1 litre/cow  
compared  to 17.7 and 16.8 for the medium and low  quality  swards  respectively.  
The high  qual  ity pastures  were  the result  of grazing  to 6 cm while  the low quality  
pastures  were the result  of grazing  to 10 cm in the April-June  period.
The other  important  benefit  to dairying  from  using  correct  grazing  strategies  
at that  time  is the effect  on the amount  of silage  conserved  on the farm . Increasing  
the early season  stocking  rate from 4.9 to 6.2 cows/ha  will result  in approxi ­
mately  1 tonne  extra  of silage  conserved/cow.  The  significance  ofthis  should  not 
be underestimated  as it highlights  a relatively  low-cost  method  of increasing  the 
quantity  of silage  conserved  on the farm without  resorting  to high cost methods  
of reseeding  or increased  inputs  of fertilizer.  Additionally,  first cut silage  is far 
cheaper  than later culs (see later section).
70
The loss in milk  production  by using  high stocking  rates  (6.2 cows/ha)  in the 
April-June  period  is likely to 1^ small. The difference  in milk production  
between  6.2 and 4.9 cows/ha  in the April-June  period  was 4-5% in 1989 and 
1990.
2. Silage  costs
Table  4 shows  the cost of producing  first, second  and third  cut silage. The 
source  of nitrogen  for first  and third  cut silage  is urea  and for second  cut is CAN.  
Contractor  charges  for first, second  and third  cuts were  £124,  £99 and £74/ha,  
respectively.  A fixed  charge  for land of £124,  £99 and £74/ha  was associated  
with  first  to third  cut silage,  respectively.  The silage  additive  used  was  sulphuric  
acid. First  cut silage  costs/hectare  are 20% and 48% higher  than the second  and 
third  cuts,  respectively.  Table  5 shows  the effect  of cut and yield  on the cost per 
tonne  of silage:  (a) including  cost of land,  and (b) excluding  cost for land. The 
much  higher  yields  of first cut silage  gives  a major  advantage  in costs/tonne  of 
DM.
The first point  to be made  is that first  cut silage  at high yields  (27 tonnes  of 
settled  silage/ha)  is by far the cheapest  silage.  There  is a progressive  increase  in 
silage  costs  as you  go to second  and third  cuts. Increasing  yields  of silage  for  each  
cut has a dramatic  effect on costs/tonne.  Third cut silage at low yields is 
extremely  expensive  and is almost  equivalent  to purchased  concentrate  feed. 
Where  medium  yields  are got with third  cuts,  the silage  is comparable  in costs  
to the lower  cost byproduct  feeds. Where  the opportunity  cost of land is not
Table  4
Silage  Conservation  costs per hectare
First  Cut Second  Cut Third  Cut
Fertiliser  - Nitrogen 44 47 42
- P&K 54 27 17
- Lime 5 5 2
Total Fertiliser  Costs 104 79 62
Machinery  Hire 124 111 99
Reseeding 17 17 17
Acid 17 15 10
Covering 17 10 10
Mach,  Dep. & Rep. 15 12 10
Misc. 2 2 2
Working  Capital 15 12 10
Sub Total 207 180 158
Fixed  Charge  for Land 124 99 74
Total  costs 435 358 294
71
Table  5
Effect  of cut and yield  (tonnes/hectare)  of settled  silage  on costs per tonne silage  DM 
(a) (including  costs for land)
First Cut Second  Cut Third  Cut
Yield £/tonne Yield £Aonne Yield £/lonne
22 98 15 121 10 149
25 88 17 104 12 119
27 80 20 91 15 99
(a) (including  costs for land)
First Cut Second  Cut Third  Cut
Yield £/tonne Yield £/tonne Yield £Aonne
22 70 15 88 10 112
25 63 17 76 12 89
27 57 20 66 15 74
included  the costs/tonne  of DM is in the range  of £140-£173/ha  for first silage  
over the range  of silage  yields  listed. This fixed  charge  for land may not be as 
important  in the future  if the returns  from alternative  enterprises  to dairying  
disimprove.
3. Machinery  costs
The survey  on cost  per gallon  showed  that machinery  and contractor  charges  
were 2.7p/litre.  Table  6 shows  that these  potential  costs  on a dairy  farm where  
silage  and slurry  spreading  is contracted  out, could  be reduced  to 1.5p/litre.  On 
most  dairy  farms  the only other  equipment  needed  is a fertiliser  spreader,  roller  
and maybe  a topper.
Where  a good  contractor  service  is available,  machinery  ownership  for silage  
harvesting  is only viable  where  more than 40 ha are cut on an annual  basis  
(Forristal,  1988). This is based  on a double-chop  harvesting  system  and where  
tractors  are available  on the farm. Where  only  one tractor  is available  and others  
have to be purchased  then the  minimum  requirement  goes  up to more  than 65 ha 
annually.  For most  dairy  farmers,  the best  advice  is to rely  on a good  contracting
Table  6
Machinery  cost
Survey  ; Machinery  + Contraaors  Charges 2.7p/litre
Silage  costs — 0.8p/lilre
Slurry — 0.1 p/litre
Tractor  (70 IIP) — 0.6p/litre
Total Cost — 1.5p/lilre
72
service.  With  the advent  of easy-feed  silage  and the feeding  of concentrates  as 
straights  there is a proliferation  and elaboration  of expensive  apparatus  and 
machinery  on dairy farms. This may have some  role to play in offsetting  tax 
liability  but in an era of falling  prices  the tax bill will also fall but the machinery  
costs  will be still there.  The  best  advice  is to have  as little  machinery  on the farm 
as possible.
4. Concentrate  feeding
There  are a number  of options  available  to dairy  farmers  whereby  the cost and 
quantity  of concentrates  could  be reduced.  These  will be considered  under  three  
main headings
A. Reduce  the level  of feeding  indoors
The optimum  level of concentrates  to feed this winter  was 7 kg/cow/day  
(Murphy  and Fitzgerald,  1990).  This  is based  on concentrates  costing  £140-160/  
tonne,  at a milk  price  of 18p/litre  where  good  quality  silage  is available.  Reduced  
concentrate  feeding  from  7 to 5 kg will  both  reduce  milk  yield  in the indoor  period  
(77 litres) and subsequently  during  total lactation  (164 litres) with a spring  
calving  dairy  cow. Where  a farmer  is in excess  of quota  reduced  feeding  levels  
are only possible  where  silage  quality  is excellent  and a generous  supply  is 
available.
The results  from our Moorepark  experiments  suggest  caution  is required  in 
regard  to the feeding  of low levels  of high  protein  concentrates.  Further  experi ­
ments  are continuing  on this subject.
B. Feeding  straights
There  is a possible  saving  of £20-£30/tonne  with  feeding  straights  rather  than 
a pelleted  compound  ration. While  undoubtedly  savings  can be made  using  
straights,  a number  of problems  arise  at farm level. Firstly,  there  is the problem  
of achieving  the correct  balance  of m inerals  and vitamins  in the ration.  Secondly,  
the costs involved,  including  machinery  and storage  facilities  can be high on 
certain  farms. For dairy  farmers  with simple  feeding  systems  there  would  be a 
high cost involved  in feeding  straights  as well as a high labour  requirement  at a 
busy time of the year.
C. Eliminate  concentrate  feeding  at pasture
The average  input  of concentrate  to an early  calving  herd is 750-800  kg/cow.  
This suggests  that around  150-200  kg of concentrate  is fed during  the grazing  
season.  The average  milk production  response  from a large  number  of experi ­
ments  at Moorepark  where  concentrates  fed at pasture  was 0.5  litres  of milk/kg  
of concentrate  fed (Stakelum  and Dillon,  1988). If milk  prices  are 19p/litre  in 
1991,  then concentrate  would  have  to cost less than £92/tonne  in order  to get an 
economic  response.  Thus  a response  of 0.8 litres  of milk/litre  of concentrates  fed 
would be required  to achieve  a breakeven  situation. A response  of that 
magnitude  is extremely  unlikely  under the conditions  at which most dairy  
farmers  would  consider  supplementation  with concentrates  necessary.  Molas-  
sed beet  pulp  nuts  and wet  brewers  grains  gave  this  response  at Moorepark  during  
the difficult  grass  growing  period  of 1989  when  compared  to acereal  based  ration  
(Dillon  and Stakelum,  1989).
73
5. Systems  of milk production
At Moorepark  in 1989 a three year project  was set up in Curtins  farm to 
compare  the economic  efficiency  of different  systems  of milk production.  The 
standard  Moorepark  system  of high stocking  rate and early compact  calving  
(M.C.D.  23rd  Jan.)  was compared  to two late  calving  herds  (M.C.D.  15th  March)  
based  on silage  and grass  only. Extending  the lactation  of the late calving  herd 
by supplementation  with  extra  silage  was also examined.  The first  year's  results  
are now completed,  but a further  two years have yet to be completed  before  
definite  results  can be given.
The Herds
Three  herds  were  established  as outlined  in Table  7. The standard  Moorepark  
system  (A) of high  stocking  rate and early  compact  calving  was  compared  to two 
late calving  herds  (B and C). In the first late calving  herd,  the overall  stocking  
rate was the same  as for herd (A) but with much reduced  concentrate  input  (125 
kg jrer cow). In the second  late calving  herd (C) the stocking  rate was reduced  
resulting  in 8.75 tonnes  of silage/cow  being  conserved  compared  to 6.75 tonnes.  
The stocking  rate  in the  grazing  area  was  the same  for the three  herds  in the April-  
June period.
Table  7
Experimental  herds
Herd A
Mean  calving  date 23rd January
Slocking  rate (ha/cow) 0.34
Silage  conserved  (tonne/cow) 6.75
Herd B
Mean  calving  date 15th March
Stocking  rate (ha/cow) 0.34
Silage  conserved  (tonne/cow) 6.75
HerdC
Mean  calving  dale 15th March
Slocking  rate (ha/cow) 0.38
Silage  conserved  (tonne/cow) 8.75
Grazing  Management
Calved  cows  were  moved  to grass  by day on the 12th March  and were  out day 
and night on the 23rd March. Herd C were supplemented  with silage  for 2-3 
hours  per day from the 25th September  to 16th October.  From 16th October  to 
1 St December  they were  supplemented  with  silage  by night.  Herds  A and B were  
supplemented  with silage  by night  from 10th November  to 1st December.  All 
cows  were  housed  both  night  and day from the 1 st December.  The silage  cutting  
dates,  yields  and analyses  are outlined  in Table  8. Total  nitrogen  input  was 390 
kg/ha.
Performance
The milk  yield,  composition,  lactation  length  and  concentrate  inputs  for the three
lA
The Symbol  of Excellence
QUALITY
IRISH  MEAT
CERTIFICATION  TRADEMARK
The CBF Quality  Assurance  Scheme  has now been expanded  
to include  the promotion  of Quality  Irish Meat  
in European  Markets.
This symbol  will be promoted  internationally  
to identify  meat which  complies  with the most rigorous 
standards  of quality  and product  integrity.
CBF Irish  Meat Board
Table  8
Silage  yields,  culling  dates and analysis
DM pH DMD Yield  Silage/  
HectareCutting  Date
1st Cut 25 4 74 27 23rd May
2nd Cut 24 4 71 20 18th July
Table  9
Production  data for the herd
A B C
Litres/cow 5614 5114 5546
% Fat 3.52 3.69 3.83
% Protein 3.20 3.33 3.37
Lactation  length  (days) 313 300 313
Concentrate  (kg/cow) 625 125 85
herds are outlined  in Table 9. The milk yields for Herds A and C were  
significantly  higher  than that for herd B. Milk protein  and fat contents  were  
significantly  higher  for the two late (B and C) calving  herds. Concentrate  inputs  
differed  significantly  between  the herds  due to calving  date. Lactation  length  for 
herd B was 10 days shorter  than for Groups  A and C. The proportion  of inilk 
produced  at periods  during  the year are presented  in Table  10. Supplementing  
Herd C in the autumn  resulted  in prolonging  their lactation  and contributed  
substantially  to milk putput  in the October-December  period  (20%). In ^ 
associated  study  by B. O'Brien  (Moorepark)  the F.F.  A. levels  (free  fatty  acid)  in 
the milk for the three  herds  in the October  to December  period  were  measured  
(Fig.  2). Bulk  milk  with  F.F.  A. levels  greater  than 1.3 (m.moles  per 100 g of fat) 
are deemed  usuitable  for the manufacture  of our range  of short-life  products  and 
cheeses.  The F.F.  A. analysis  of the milk  shows  that the milk  from  the C herd is 
of good  quality  in the October-December  period.  The  milk  of the other  two  herds  
was of lower  quality.
Financial  Implications
Detailed  costings  of the three herds for 1990 were prepared  based  on die 
coefficients  as outlined  in Table 11. The milk production  and compxisition
Table  10
Milk profiles  (%) for the three  herds
January  - March  
April - September  
October  - December29
62
98
76
1610
70
20
76
FFA LEVELS  IN MILK OCT-DEC.  1990
WEEK  No.
Fig. 2 - Free  fatty  acids  (FFA)  levels  in the milk (Oct.-Dec.)  of the cows  In the
three  herds.
Table 11
Coefficients  used for 1990  costings
Calf  price - Male (£) 150
- Female  (£) 250
Cull cow (£) 350
Replacement  heifer  (£) 900
Milk price (p/litre) 20
Beef at years (£) 650
Beef slocking  rate (LU/hectare)* 2.47
Concentrate  to beef (kg/LU) 670
Whole  milk fed to calves  (litres) 227
Concentrate  cost to cows (£Aonne) 150
‘Stocking  rate on surplus  acres
patterns  achieved  in the different  herds  influenced  the costings.  The costings  
were done  with a quota  restriction  of 360,000  litres  (Curtins  Farm  Quota)  with 
2 year  old beef  being  used  as the alternative  enterprise.  For Herd  A to fill Quota,  
67 cows  would  be required.  The  extra  land  would  support  6.5 units  of beef. Herd  
B would  require  73 cows  and the extra  land  would  support  1.6 units  of beef. Herd  
C would  fill the Quota  (Table  12). Each  of the herds were  costed  on a total farm 
operation.  The variable,  fixed, depreciation  and total  costs  per liU'e of quota  are 
presented  in Table 13. The fixed  costs include  a modernisation  and pollution
77
Table 12
Outline  of option  within  quota  situation
A B C
Acres 25.9 25.9 25.9
Cows 67 73 67
Beef 6.5 1.6 _
Stocking  rate (cows/ha) 2.94 2.94 2.63
Quota  (litres) 360,000 360,000 360,000
Table 13
Variable,  fixed  and depreciation  costs  (p/litre  of quota)  for the three  herds
A B C
Variable  costs
Concentrates 2.0 0.5 0.3
Fertiliser  and lime 1.6 1.6 1.6
Replacement 3.3 3.7 3.3
Machinery  and silage 1.0 1.0 1.1
Vet., Med. and A.I. 0.7 0.8 0.7
Total  variable  costs 8.7 7.6 7.1
Fixed  costs 3.9 3.9 3.9
Depreciation 1.1 1.1 1.1
Total costs 13.7 12.6 12.1
control  investment  which  amounted  to a yearly  repayment  of 2.2p/litre.  The 
costs  exclude  labour  and income  tax liabilities.  Concentrate  costs  were much  
lower  for the two  late calving  herds. Replacement  costs  were  higher  for herd C 
due to the higher  cow numbers.  Machinery  hire  and silage  costs  were  higher  for 
Herd  C due to the larger  quantity  of silage  harvested.  Total  costs were  highest  
for Herd A and lowest  for Herd C.
Receipts  and Profit
The receipts  minus  variable,  fixed  and depreciation  costs  are shown  in Table  
14. Interest  earned  on cash flow was also included  to calculate  the net profit  pier
Table 14
Financial  costs and returns  (p/litre)  for the three  herds  1990
A B C
Milk sales 19.7 20.6 21.3
Livestock  sales 5.5 5.3 4.7
Interest  earned 0.8 0.5 0.6
Total receipts 26.1 26.5 26.6
Net profit 12.3 13.9 14.5
Net profit  (similar  milk comp.) 12.3 13.0 12.9
78
litre. The  new  profit  per litre  is also  shown  if there  was no composition  difference  
between  the herds. The price per litre was much  higher  for the two late calving  
herds,  reflecting  their  higher  composition.  The livestock  sales  were  highest  for 
Herd A and lowest  for Herd  C. Interest  earned  was higher  for Herd A reflecting  
the better  cash flow. The net profit  per litre  of quota  was  much  higher  for the two 
late calving  herds  compared  to Herd A. There  was 1.5p/litre  advantage  to Herd  
B and almost  2.2p/litre  to Herd C. If the milk composition  difference  was 
removed,  there  was still an advantage  of O.TpAitre  to each  of the two late calving  
herds. The new profit  per litre was also calculated  for 1991 where  calves,  milk 
and concentrate  prices  were reduced.  However,  relative  profit  difference  per 
litre of quota  remains  the same  as for 1990.
The results  from the first year  of this experiment  would  indicate  the follow-  
ing:-
1. The first priority  of a dairy farmer  is to maximise  his profit  with the dairy  
enterprise  (i.e. milk, calves  and cull cows)  rather  than considering  on an 
alternative  enterprise.
2. In this experiment  (year  one)  later  calving  increased  the net profit  per litre of 
quota by at least 0.7p and if the composition  differences  were taken into 
account  there was a difference  of 1.5-2.2p/litre.
3. A large  proportion  of the advantage  to later  calving  was  associated  with  better  
milk composition.  This has not been shown  previously.  More  information  
is required  to draw definite  conclusions.
4. The two  essential  management  factors  for later  calving  is a compact  calving  
pattern  and good  grassland  management.
5. The  high  level  of milk  production  achieved  from  grass  and silage  (5546  litres/  
cow) indicates  the potential  for cost saving.  The importance  of research  to 
explore  further  methods  of optimizing  production  and utilization  of grass  is 
vital to maintaining  our competitive  edge.
Summary
For dairy  farmers  to maintain  incomes  in the future  they  should  have  a serious  
look  at cutting  cost  and el iminating  any waste  which  is under  their  control.  Every  
0.2p/litre  saved  will result  in £500  increase  in income  for a 227,305  litre quota.  
In this article  we have  looked  only  at where  savings  can be made  in the big cost 
items. There is scope for reducing  cost in many of the smaller  items,  e.g. 
concentrates  for replacement  heifers,  acid,  medicines,  veterinary  costs,  lease  and 
insurance  charges.
References
Dillon,  P. and Slakelum,  G. (1990),  A review of the grass growing  year 1989. Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association.  Vol 24, 83-12.
Forristal,  D. (1990). Personal  Communication.
MacCarthy,  D. (1984). Moorepark  Farmers'  Conference.  Sept. 1984,  p. 113.
Murphy,  J. J. and Fitzgerald,  S. (1990). Feeding  the dairy  cow this winter.  Today's  Farm Vol 1 
No. 4,
Stakelum,  G. and Dillon,  P. (1988). Supplementary  feeding  of grazing  dairy cows. Moorepark  
Dairy Farmers'  Conference,  p. 25-27.
Stakelum,  G. and Dillon,  P. (1988).  The influence of grass  digestibility  on dairy  cow performance  
— its implications  for grazing  management. Irish Grassland and Animal  Production  Association  
Journal,  Vol 23, p. 93-104.
79
An Optimistic  Look  at Sheep  
Production  in the 90's
C. F. R. SLADE
ADAS,  Woodthorne,  Wolverhampton,  U.K.
u believe  the prospects  for sheep  production  look  promising  for
K ^ ^ ^ ‘snore  the fact that the sheep  industry  is in
the middle  of a difficult  period. A number  of factors  have  contributed  to poor  
lamb  prices.  There  are a lot of political  uncertainties  that  seem  likely  to continue  
lor another  18 months  or so before  a more  settled  situation  evolves.
FirsUy  let us examine  the current  position.  The hill breeds  are still the most  
numerus  individual  breeds  and from them  come  the halfbred  females  that make  
up over  40% of the national  sheep  flock. This is typified  by the North  Country  
Mule  which  forms  about  23% of the U.K. flock.
Table 1
Ewe numbers  in the U.K.
1980 1990 1991
14.9m
Av. flock size 
% in LFA20.5m 20.4m
231 ewes  
61.5%
how much the U.K. flock has increased  during  the 
1980  s. The  U.K. flock  reached  its peak  in 1990  and has started  to decline  a little 
txrtamly  a lot of ewe  lambs  were  slaughtered  in the 1990/91  winter.  During  this 
l^riod  the exu-a production  in the U.K. has been absorbed  by reduced  New  
Zealand  supplies  and by increased  exports  especially  to France.
Table  2
U.K. exports  of sheep  carcases  ('000  tonnes)
1975
36.91980
36.91985
48.71989
89.21990
79.7
Table  3
U.K. exports  of live lambs  ('000)
1985
81.41987
370.31989
589.51990
584.3
Tables  2 and 3 show  just how important  the export  trade has become  to the 
industry.
80
Table  4
Seasonal  lamb  slaughteriing  In the UK.
1980s 1990 1991
estimated
Jan.-Mar 21% 22.2% 23.8%
Apr.-June 16% 20.6% 18.1%
Jul.-Sep. 31% 29.2% 28.7%
Oct.-Dec. 32% 27.9% 29.4%
Table  4 shows  the pattern  of lamb  sales  has changed  a bit over  the last 10 years.  
One of the aims  of the Variable  Premium  system  was to encourage  more  iamb  
sales  in the first  half  of the year  and it was  partially  successful  in this. The  market  
itself  has also changed  as shown  in Table  5.
Table  5
Lamb  outlets  in the U.K.
Butchers 33%
S ipermarkets 26.8%
Export 23%
Catering 9%
Co-ops/Grocers 6.1%
Freezer  Centres 2.1%
There  has been  a marked  growth  in the sales  of lamb  through  the supermarket  
and a decline  in sales  through  private  butchers.  This  has concentrated  purchasing  
power  in the hands  of very few buyers  and is a factor  that no-one  can ignore.
After  a profitable  and expanding  period  through  the 80s, the last two seasons  
have  proved  particularly  difficult.  The main  problems  are:-
1. Irish competition  - strength  of £
2. Recession
3. Eastern  Europe
4. Depressed  value  of wool,  hides  and offal
5. MacSharry  and GATT  proposals
Some  of the problems  are very  complex  and  affect  all exporting  industries  and 
not  just  sheep.  One  of the main  taking  points  is to try and assess  just what  impact  
the various  proposals  put forward  by MacSharry  or the GATT  negotiators  will 
have.
Table  6
Possible  effects  on ewe margins  - 1992 lowland
V. Early Feb. bom March  bom
V. Premium -£12.6 -21.12 -£20.7
Ann. Ewe Premium + £1.3 + £1.3 + £1.3
Market  prices + £2.36 +£15.76 + £7.11
GATT  effects 0 0 0
-£8.94/ewe -£4.06/ewe -£12.29/ewe
900 ewe flock. Worst  scenario  MacSharry  and GATT
81
Table  7
Possible  effects  on ewe margins  - mid-90s  lowland
V. Early Feb. bom March  bom
V. Premium -£12.6 -21.12 -£20.7
Ann. Ewe Premium + £2.3 + £2.3 + £2.3
Market  prices + £11.0 +£24.09 + £20.05
GATT -£2.3 -£2.3 -£2.3
-£6.2 -£1.63 -£5.25
900 ewe flock. Worst  scenario  MacSharry  and GATT
I have  tried to take into account  all the factors  in arriving  at the estimates  in 
Tables  6 and 7. In the first place  none  of the proposals  have  been agreed.  The 
final European  scene  may well be very different  after  all the negotiations  have  
taken  place.  Secondly,  I have  only  allowed  a fairly  modest  price  rise to take  place  
after  the removal  of the Variable  Premium.  It is on this point  that I feel that  there  
is room  for optimism.  There  are a number  of factors  that  are very  much  in favour  
of the U.K.  and I feel that eventually  the price  rises will be greater  than those  I 
have used in the calculations  for Tables  6 and 7.
Table  8
U.K. lamb  - the Image
Most systems
97 to 75% of diet is GRASS  fresh or conserved  
3 to 5% of diet is concentrates
Firstly,  the fact that our sheep  systems  are firmly  based  on grassland  gives  us 
two positive  points.  Firstly,  it is a valuable  marketing  point. Secondly,  it means  
we can produce  meat  much  more  cheaply  (apart  from  the Irish)  than all of our 
European  neighbours  who rely much  more  heavily  on compounds.  The U.K.  
scene  with its reliance  on halfbred  ewes  and terminal  sires  can produce  a rather  
better  quality  product.  It is not a factor  we can be complacent  about. There  is 
still much  scope  for further  improvement  in carcase  quality.  However,  once  the 
Variable  Premium  disappears  I feel that our exports  will become  much more  
attractive.  Once  all of Europe  has its calculation  for the Annual  Ewe  Premium  
undertaken  on the same basis, the competitive  advantage  by the Irish may 
disappear.  There  are clear  signs  already  that the expansion  of the Irish flock  is 
slowing  and in a year or so may well have stopped  altogether.
Another  factor  to be considered  is the fact that after  a long  period  of decline,  
consumption  of lamb  has increased  a lot over  the last 5 years  as shown  in Tables  
9 and 10. Not  only in the U.K. has this happened.  The figures  from  France  and 
the rest of Europe  are just as encouraging.
82
Table  9
Lamb  consumption  in U.K.
1985
6.3 kg/head
up to 15.9%1990
7.3 kg/head
Table 10
French  sheep  situation
Production  falling  2%/year  
Consumption  increased  44% 1980-1990  
Average  flock size 60
In Europe  overall  lamb  consumption  up 13% in 5 years
Technical  developments  are likely  to play  a role. The  use ofstraw  feeding  has
b^n  developed  by ADAS  as a result  of much  experimental  ivork. In situations  
where  a Im of money  has to be spent  on silage  making  this may offer a way 
foTOard The use of forage  roots  or fodder  beet in the right  situation  offers  the 
^tenual  for a wry cheap  but high quality  material.  The open topped  shed at 
Rosemaund  EHF has proved  a very effective  and cheap  form of housing  for 
imshing  lambs More  effective  and reliable  feeding  systems  and better  utilisa ­
tion of grassland  are two key areas  that can save money.
K™. Soriginal  strongly  held feeling.  There  are difficulties  at 
Resent  but the medium  and long  term indications  are all very  positive  for sheep.  
There  are technical  developments  already  in place  and others  just around  the 
comer  that offer  scope  for those  concerned  with  good  husbandry,  to get the very  
best out of their flocks  m both quality  and level of production
83
Cutting  Costs  in Spring  Lambing  Flocks
S. FLANAGAN
Teagasc,  Belclare  Research  Centre,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
The general  thrust  of the CAP reform  proposals  points  to lower  incomes  
through  a combination  of lower  lamb  prices  and restrictions  on ewe premium  
payments.  A critical  appraisal  of current  output  and input levels  on farms  
indicates  that the most  realistic  response  by sheep  producers  is to seek  improve ­
ments  in flock  productivity  and to pursue  ways  of reducing  costs,  particularly  
through  better  grass  utilisation.  As one of the three  main producers  of quality  
lamb in Europe,  Ireland  must  develop  further  its main  competitive  advantages,  
i.e. lower  costs  and the ability  to convert  grass  into lamb  at the expense  of the 
higher  cost areas in the EC. This article  summarises  how incomes  can be 
improved  and how  current  costs  in lamb  production  and the components  of those  
costs  can be reduced.
Output  and input  costs
Table  1 shows  the gross  income,  variable  costs  and  gross  margin  per ewe  with 
1.5 lambs  sold at 1991 prices.  The lamb  price  refers  to a 18 kg carcass  of export  
quality,  while  the ewe  premium  is estimated  at £23,  supplemented  in Disadvan ­
taged  Areas  by £3.50  plus  headage.  At a ewe  replacement  rate  of 20%,  culls  sold 
at £8 and replacements  purchased  at £55, the average  cost  of replacement  is £9 
per ewe. Fertiliser  inputs  refer to dry land that is grazed  at the rate of 12.5 
ewes  per ha. Silage  production  costs  about  £13 per tonne  and is budgeted  at the
Table  1
Gross  margin  per ewe (£)
1.5 lambs  @ £34 51
Wool 1
Premium 23
— 75
Less replacement 9
66
Direct  costs per ewe £
1. Fertilisers  for grazing  12.5 ewes/ha
250 kg 0.10.20  @ £127/tonne 2.54
90kgN 3.14
2. Silage  0.5 tonne  (2) £13/tonne 6.50
3. Concentrates  25 kg 4.12
4. Vet/mcdicine 3.60
5. Other 5.00
— 25
GROSS  MARGIN  PER EWE  = £41
84
rate of V2 tonne per ewe for 3 months,  early December  to early March,  
supplemented  with  25 kg meals  per ewe  in the final  6 weeks  pre-lambing.  Other  
costs  include  straw  bedding,  5 bales  per ewe @ 70p each,  and shearing  at £1.
The direct  costs  amount  to £25 per ewe or nearly  £17 per lamb  and the gross  
margin  per ewe  is estimated  at £41. It is seen  that about  half  of the income  from  
lamb  sales  at £34 per head is accounted  for by direct  costs,  before  fixed  charges  
are taken  into account.
Let us now examine  the output  and input  levels  and the components  of the 
various  costs,  to see how income  can be improved.
Extra  lambs
By using  ewes  derived  from the Belclare  or Cambridge  breeds  lamb  output  
per ewe  can be raised  from 1.5 to 1.7 lambs  sold  per ewe  joined,  thus increasing  
lamb  sales  to almost  £58 per ewe at 1991 prices.  Results  by Dr. J. P. Hanrahan  
at Belclare  show  that  there  is about  £3 gain  in income  per  ewe  in response  to each 
0.1 lamb  extra  that is reared.
Many sheep  producers  are reluctant  to change  their breed  of ewe and the 
incentive  to do so has been masked  by EC financial  supports.  But when  ewe 
premia  are restricted,  the objective  of producing  as many  lambs  as possible  from  
the existing  flock  becomes  ever  more  important.  In a flock  of 200 ewes,  raising  
productivity  from 1.3 to 1.5 lambs  per ewe joined  or from 1.5 to 1.7, increases  
income  by £1,360,  i.e. 40 extra  lambs  @ £34. No additional  capital  for extra  land 
or extra  ewes  is required  and the fertiliser,  forage  and feed inputs  remain  about  
the same.
Grass  budgeting  saves  housing  costs
Current  research  results  indicate  that savings  in costs  can be made  under  all 
headings  in Table  1. Since  fertilisers,  feed and forage  comprise  65% of direct  
costs,  these  will be discussed  first. Possible  savings  are listed  in Table  2.
If ewes  can be winter  grazed  on pasture  without  affecting  spring  grass  and if 
housing  can be delayed  until the last 5-6 weeks,  in-lamb  ewes  would  cost  less to 
keep. These  objectives  can be achieved  on all-grass  farms  that are stocked  at 5 
ewes  per acre or less by grass  feed budgeting.
A bank  of grass  is allowed  to accumulate  on the farm in autumn  and is carried
Table  2 
Cutting  costs
Savings
Winter  grazing:  Less silage  £3.25/ewe
Less straw  £ 1.75/ewe
Less work:  Indoor  feeding  period  reduced  to 5-6 weeks
No concentrates  post-lambing  £1.50-£2.50/ewe
Qover  N £3/ewe
P and K: Skip a year  £2.50/ewe
Strategic  dosing  £40/100  lambs
85
forward,  for winter  grazing.  Two years results  at Blindwell  have shown  that 
when  pasture  that is mob  stocked  in August  by weaned  ewes  is rested  from mid- 
September  without  fertiliser  N, grass  supply  in early  December  was 2150  kg DM 
per ha. For ewes  of 62-68  kg liveweight  and in good  condition  (body  score  3), 
this grass  supply  provided  enough  feed  for 37 ewes  per ha for 6 weeks  when  strip 
grazed  on a daily  basis  at the rate of 5.7 sq. metres  per ewe per day from  early  
December  to late January.  The flock was then housed.  Grass  budgeting  can 
reduce  silage  and straw  requirements  for housed  flocks  by 50%,  i.e. by £5 per 
ewe, and the amount  of work  is halved.
Use of back  fence
By using  a back fence  in the process  of strip grazing,  to prevent  access  to the 
ground  already  grazed,  poaching  is prevented  and the grazed  grass  is allowed  to 
recover  immediately  in contrast  to continuous  grazing.  Hence,  grass  supplies  in 
spring  are not reduced  significantly.
No meals  post-lambing
For  spring  lambing  ewes  housed  on silage,  the use of concentrates  is restricted  
to 25 kg per ewe fed at an ascending  rate over the last 6 weeks  pre-lambing.  In 
practice,  however,  concentrates  are often fed on spring  grass post-lambing  
costing  £1.50  to £2.50  per ewe. There  are no biological  or economic  responses  
to these  supplements  unless  grass  is very  scarce,  i.e. less than  4 cm sward  height.  
Research  in Scotland  has shown  that where  sward  height  is 4 cm or over, the 
feeding  of concentrates  results  in ewes  substituting  the concentrates  for grass  so 
that total feed consumption  is unchanged  and lamb  growth  rate is not increased.
For farms  that are stocked  at 12-15  ewes  per ha the choice  of lambing  date to 
coincide  with  grass  growth  in spring  is critical.  Mid-March  is the recommended  
date and at Teagasc  sheep  farms  in Blindwell  and Knockbeg  sward  height  post­
lambing  is normally  4-5 cm so that no meals  are required.  February  lambing  is 
problematic  in terms  of grass  supplies  except  on farms  with low stocking  rates,  
less than 9 ewes  per ha.
Clover  N
The use of white  clover  in sheep  pastures  as a substitute  for fertiliser  N is 
another  way to cut costs,  by exploiting  the ability  of clover  to fix its own N. On 
all-grass  swards  it is necessary  to apply  125 kg N or 185 kg N per ha to maintain  
12 ewes  or 15 ewes per ha costing  £40 to £64 per ha respectively.
Perennial  ryegrass/white  clover  pastures  with a high content  of clover  were  
established  at Knockbeg  in 1985/86  and have been stocked  at 15 ewes  per ha 
annually  for the past 5 years in a low fertiliser  N input system. Botanical  
separations  in July 1991 showed  that clover  contributed  40%  of total  pasture  DM 
and lamb performance  has been excellent  with 11 lambs  sold per acre. For 
grazing  15 ewes  to the ha in this system  the annual  fertiliser  N input  is 79 kg per 
ha, a saving  of 43 kg or £19 per acre compared  with all-grass  swards.
Where  cereals  are being  undersown  or where  pastures  are being  renewed  for 
sheep,  a seeds  mixture  which  favours  clover  development  should  be sown.  Once  
established,  clover  can be manipulated  by management  for high output  at low 
cost.
86
Soil analyses
Results  at Johnstown  Castle  show  that  some  farms  have  high  soil readings  for 
P and K. Depending  on soil analyses,  it may be possible  to skip a year's  
application  of P and K fertilisers  for grazing  sheep.
Cost  of dosing
In the control  of worm  parasites,  dosing  must  be combined  with a grazing  
plan. The standard  recommendations  for March  lambing  flocks  are to dose  
lambs  at5 weeks  and  at weaning.  But  the doseatweaningmustbecombined  with 
a change  to high quality  pasture,  e.g. silage  or hay aftermaths,  for satisfactory  
lamb  growth  rates. A third  dose  is given  to lambs  remaining  unsold  in late July.
Three  doses  cost  about  60p per lamb  or £60 per 100 lambs.  Reports  indicate  
that  lambs  on some  farms  are being  dosed  routinely  at 3-weekly  intervals,  costing  
£1 or more per lamb.  Research  at Belclare  has shown  no response  to routine  
dosing  compared  with strategic  dosing  and £40 per 100 lambs  can be saved  by 
linking  grazing  management  principles  with strategic  dosing.
Fixed  costs
To determine  the farm income,  fixed  costs  must  be deducted  from the gross  
margin  per ewe shown  in Table 1. Fixed  costs vary widely  between  farms.  
Contrasting  examples  are provided  by long established  sheep  farms  on which  
fixed  assets  have been almost  written  off and those  sheep  farms  developed  by 
new entrants  in the late 1980's  on which  depreciation  charges  on facilities  and 
equipment  remain  relatively  high. Fixed  costs  vary  from  £10 per ewe  to £25 per 
ewe on these  two farm categories  respectively.
On some farms labour  and repayments  on borrowings  are important  costs  
which  are not included  here.
With the fall in sheep  incomes,  high fixed  costs  may present  a difficulty  for 
some sheep producers  who developed  intensively  in recent  years. Having  
established  their  sheep  systems,  farm structure  and facilities,  it is diffcult  to cut 
back  and maintain  profit.
Conclusion
Looking  ahead  to post-CAP  reform,  ewes  that are not eligible  for premia  are 
best  retained  in the case  of farm  s that  are highly  stocked.  Overhead  costs  can then 
be spread  over as many  ewes  as possible.
Reform  changes  will not be fully applied  until 1996,  hence  there  is time to 
adjust. Improving  productivity  and cutting  costs  are the priorities.
Lamb  consumption  continues  to increase,  by 13% in the EC and by 16% in 
the U.K. since 1986. There  is a chance  for sheep  numbers  to expand  further  if 
market  prices  and profits  are high  enough;  ewe  numbers  would  increase  to keep  
pace  with this. There  are no proposals  to restrict  the number  of lambs  that can 
be produced  or on how heavily  land can be stocked  with sheep. EC sheep  
producers  would  be unable  to respond  to such possibilities  if they were  trapped  
in the same  situation  as dairy  farmers.
87
Scope  for Decreasing  Feed Costs  in 
Winter  Beef  Production
A. P. MOLONEY
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
In a time of decreasing  profit  from agriculture  in general,  attention  must  be 
directed  to all factors  influencing  the profitability  of any  particular  enterprise.  In 
the case of winter  beef production,  animal  feed represents  a major  cost and 
therefore  a major  determinant  of profitability.  For example,  a 625 kg steer  fed 
silage  with dry matter  digestibility  (DMD)  of 680 g/kg dry matter  (DM)  (12 £/ 
tonne)  and 4 kg barley  (130  £/tonne)  would  grow  at approximately  0.95  kg/day  
and cost  approximately  £146  in feed  (of a total variable  cost  of £170)  over  a 140 
day period  (Anon,  1991). If this figure  could  be decreased  without  impairment  
of animal  performance  overall  profitability  would  be increased.  The objective  
of this paper  is to demonstrate  that there is scope  for decreasing  feed costs by 
paying  closer  attention  to the formulation  of rations  for cattle  to be slaughtered  
during/after  the winter  period.
The most logical  approach  to formulating  cost-effective  rations  is to define  
the requirements  of the animal  fora  particular  level  of performance  and to match  
them with the cheapest  available  feedstuffs.
Nutrient  requirements  of finishing  cattle
The major  requirements  of all living  animals  are a source  of energy,  protein  
(nitrogen),  water, minerals  and vitamins.  Only energy  and protein  will be 
considered  in this paper.
(a) Energy
Since  energy  yielding  nutrients  normally  form  the major  portion  of a diet  and 
since animals  tend to show  a continuous  response  to changes  in the quantities  
supplied,  those  numents  supplying  energy  are usually  given  first consideration  
in designing  rations. Energy  systems  have been develojted  which  attempt  to 
relate  the energy  value  of feeds to the energy  requirements  of animals,  using  
common  units of expression.  The energy  term used in ruminant  nutrition  is 
metabolisable  energy  (ME)  measured  in megajoules  and is the portion  of the total 
energy  of the feed that can be utilised  by the animal.  It is the total  energy  less the 
energy  contained  in the faeces,  urine and  gas produced  in the rumen.  Measure ­
ment of the absolute  ME value  of a feed therefore  requires  an analysis  of the 
energy  content  of the urine,  faeces  and gases  produced  by an animal  when  fed this 
feedstuff.  In vivo measurement  of ME requires  the use of large respiration  
chambers  or calorimeters  and is therefore  cosdy  and time consuming.  This 
approach  has however,  been used in several  locations  in the UK and in vivo ME 
values  forarangeoffeeds  have  been  publi.shed(e.g.,MAFF,  1986).  MEcanalso  
be predicted  from  various  laboratory  analyses.  However,  it should  be noted  that 
as with  all predictive  equations,  their  use  outside  the limits  of the data  from  which
88
Table 1
Daily ME allowance  for growing  and fattening  cattle  (MJ/day)
Liveweight
(kg)Ration  M/D
(MJ/kg  DM)Rate  of gain (kg/day
0 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50
450 8 49 61 75
10 49 59 70 83
12 49 57 67 78 91 108
14 49 56 64 74 85 100 118
500 8 54 67 82
10 54 64 76 91
12 54 63 73 85 99 117
14 54 61 70 80 93 108 128
550 8 59 73 89
10 59 70 83 98
12 59 68 79 91 107 126
14 59 67 76 87 100 116 137
600 8 63 77 94
10 63 75 88 104
12 63 73 84 97 114 134
14 63 71 81 92 106 124 146
(From  MAFF,  1984)
they were derived  is likely  to result  in erroneous  values. The energy  require ­
ments  of an animal  are the sum of the energy  lost during  fasting,  the energy  
expended  in muscular  work,  i.e., standing,  lying,  walking,  etc., and the energy  
retained  by the body as a result  of growth and fattening.  Based  on a wide  range  
of experimental  findings,  equations  have been developed  which  describe  the 
dietary  ME needed  to meet  these different  aspects  of energy  metabolism  in the 
animal. Using  these equations,  tables  have been published  outlining  the ME 
required  by different  classes  of ruminants  for different  levels  of performance  
(MAFF,  1984).  The  energy  requirements  for finishing  cattle  are shown  in Table  
1. It should  be noted in Table 1 that the ME allowance  for beef cattle for a 
partricular  rate of gain varies  according  to the ME concentration  of the ration.  
Thus, the ME of a poorer  feed such as hay (MJ ME/kg  DM=8)  is' used less 
efficiently  for gain than barley  (MJ ME/kg  DM=13).
(b) Protein
Protein  as a major  nutrient  for ruminants  has traditionally  been evaluated  m 
terms  of crude  protein  (CP)  (nitrogen  x 6.25)  or digestible  CP (DCP).  However,  
the concept  of DCP fails to cope adequately  with the complexities  of nitrogen  
metabolism  in the ruminant.  The protein  system  presently  in use (ARC,  1989),  
1984)  recognises  two types  of protein,  one which is degradable  in the rumen  and 
subsequently  incorporated  into microbial  protein  (rumen  degradable  protein  - 
RDP)  and a second  termed  by-pass  protein  which  passes  undegraded  to the small  
intestine  (undegradcd  dietary  protein  - UDP).  The  requirements  for amino  acids  
at tissue  level which  arc not met from microbial  protein  must be supplied  by
89
Daily protein  requirements  (g/day)  for growing  and fattening  (steers  of breeds  of medium  
mature  size and heifers  of breeds  of large  mature  size)Table  2
Liveweight
(kg)Ration  M/D  
(MJ/kg  DM)Form  of
Protein'Rate  of gain (kg/day)
0 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50
400 7 RDP 360 440 540 675
9 RDP 340 405 485 590 720
11 RDP 325 380 450 530 630 750 910
13 RDP 310 360 420 485 565 660 775
500 7 RDP 420 510 625 785
9 RDP 395 475 565 685 835
11 RDP 380 445 525 615 730 870 1005
13 RDP 360 420 490 565 660 765 900
600 7 RDP 475 575 710 885
9 RDP 450 535 640 770 940
11 RDP 430 505 590 695 825 980 1190
13 RDP 410 475 555 640 745 865 1015
(Adapted  from ARC, 1989).
' RDP  = Rumen  degradable  protein.
UDP.  As for energy  requirements,  a series  of equations  have  been  developed  and 
from these tables  of the RDP and UDP requirements  of different  classes  of 
ruminant  have been published,  an example  of which  is given  in Table  2. A 
knowledge  of the degradability  of dietary  proteins  is essential  to the system  since  
this affects  the value  of the protein  as a source  of nitrogen  for the rumen  micro ­
organisms.  This is usually  done by measuring  the rate of disappearance  of 
proteins  sealed  in porous  nylon  bags and suspended  in the rumen  of a fistulated  
animal.
In general,  the protein  requirements  of finishing  cattle  are low and can be 
provided  by good quality  silage  (DMD  7(X) g/kg DM; 120-140  g protein/kg)  
supplemented  with  barley  or its equivalent  in protein.  From  Table  2 it can  be seen 
that  above  400  kg liveweight  the protein  requirements  of a growing  heifer  or steer  
can be provided  by RDP alone  and that it has no requirement  for UDP. The 
protein  system  (ARC  1980; 1984)  recognises  different  types  of animal  (bulls,  
steers  and heifers)  and breeds  (large,  medium  and small  mature  sizes)  and there  
are small  differences  in protein  requirements  at the later  stage  of growth  among  
the different  classes  of animal  considered.  In this context,  Steen  (1989)  recently  
concluded  that "for non-implanted  steers and heifers  offered  well preserved  
silage  of medium  to high digestibility,  increasing  the protein  content  of supple ­
mentary  concentrates  above  110 g (kg DM)"'  is likely  to produce  no resptonse  in 
performance  and may  increase  carcass  fatness.  However,  when  young  bulls  are 
given  similar  diets  during  the finishing  period  increasing  the protein  content  of 
supplementary  concentrates  from 110 to 190 g (kg DM) ' is likely  to produce  a 
worthwhile  response  in the performance  of animals  of high growth  potential  
without  affecting  carcass  fatness".
90
Ration  formulation
The  classification  of raw materials  according  to their  ME and  protein  contents  
is therefore  a first step when formulating  a ration  to contain  a given  level of 
energy  and protein. The combination  of energy  and protein  is that which  is 
necessary  for the animal  to achieve  a desired  level  of performance.  The  chemical  
composition  of concentrate  feedstuffs  is readily  obtained  and from this an 
estimate  of its ME  content.  However,  since  the efficiency  with  which  ME is used 
is determined  by the ME content  of the diet,  supplements  can only  be accurately  
compared  at a particular  level of performance.  Examples  are given  in Table  3 
of the chemical  composition  and relative  economic  values  of a number  of 
alternative  feedstuffs  compared  to barley  and soyabean  meal  for a 500 kg steer  
growing  at 1.0 kg/day. While this approach  assumes  that all nitrogenous  
components  are digested  equally  well (which  is frequently  not the case)  it does 
provide  guidance  to the potential  purchaser  of the relative  monetary  value  of the 
available  feedstuffs.  It must  be also remembered  that  considerable  variation  can 
occur  in the composition  of any feedstuff.  This  is particularly  true  of by-product  
feeds and reflects  variations  in the treatment  processes  from which these  
materials  are produced.  Examples  of this are given  in Table  4 for com  gluten  and 
brewers  grains. Ideally  therefore,  samples  of these  materials  should  be chemi ­
cally analysed  before  purchase  and before  formulating  a ration. The costs of 
feeding  cattle  in two situations,  i.e. when fed grass silage  supplemented  with 
concentrates  or when fed diets  based  on "fodder  concentrates"  will be examined.
Table  3
Values  of feedstuffs  relative  to the value  of barley  and soyabean  for a 500 kg bullock
gaining  1 kg/day
Feed
Ingredient ’Dry
matter
g/kgME
content
(MJ/kgDM)Crude
Protein
(g/kgDM)Relative  Monetary  Value  
(£Aonne  fresh)  Current ’
Enerev'  EnerEV+  price
protein (£Aonne  fresh)
Barley 860 12.9 120 130 130 130
Soyabean 880 13.2 500 137 164 164
Wheat 860 13.3 120 137 137 140-143
Molassed  Beet-Pulp 880 12.0 100 120 119 120
Cane Molasses 740 10.9 45 87 84 82*
Com Gluten  Meal 880 12.4 200 127 132 117*
Brewers  Grains 250 10.0 250 26 30 28*
Distillers  Grains 880 13.0 250 135 143 122*
Citrus  Pulp 880 12.4 66 127 122 118*
Rapeseed  Meal 880 10.5 400 99 121 104*
Pressed  Beet Pulp 200 12.3 120 28 28 20*
Fodder  Beet Roots 180 12.1 80 25 24 18*
•Composition  data from Drennan  and Keane,  1990 
'Using  the variable  Net Energy  System  (MAFF,  1984) 
•Irish Farmers ’ Journal  (16/11/91)
»=curTent  price  less than monetary  value  relative  to barley
91
Table  4
Variation  in chemical  composition  of 2 by-product  feedstuffs
Feed
IngredientNumber  of 
Samples MinimumMeasurements
Maximum Average
ni Com Gluten
Dry Matter  (g/kg) 11 871 901 887
ME (MJ/kgDM) 11 11.4 13.9 12.7
Crude  Protein  (g/kg DM) 11 213 275 232
Crude  Fibre (g/kgDM) 11 67 96 84
(iil Brewers  Grains
Dry Matter  (g/kg) 6 260 304 277
ME (MJ/kgDM) 6 10.9 12.5 11.7
Grade  Protein  (g/kg DM) 6 196 276 245
Crude  Fibre (g/kgDM) 6 143 193 170
(From:  MAFF,  1986)
(1) Grass  silage-based  diets
In Ireland  most  cattle  fed indoors  are fed a diet of silage  supplemented  with  
concentrates.  Supplementation  is necessary  since  even  with  optimum  manage ­
ment,  cattle  are unable  to consume  sufficient  amounts  of a good quality  silage  
(e.g.,  DMD  = 750  g/kg  DM)  to support  an adequate  gain  in liveweight  (minimum  
1 kg/day).  As the quality  (and energy content)  of the silage  increases  however,  
there will be a corresponding  reduction  in the proportion  of the total energy  
required  that must be supplied  in the form of a concentrate  supplement.  The 
studies  of Drennan  and Keane  (1990)  demonstrated  that the same  performance  
of steers  (400  kg initial  liveweight)  given  silage  with  a DMD  of600  g/kg  DM  and 
6 kg concentrates  could  be obtained  from  silage  with  a DMD  of720  g/kg  DM  and 
only  3 kg of concentrates.  In addition  to digestibility,  the quality  of preservation  
of the grass  ensiled  is important  in determining  the value  of the silage.  Clearly,  
if preservation  is sub-optimal  the silage  intake  will be low and the level of 
supplementary  concentrates  required  will increase.  Bad preservation  can be 
prevented  by application  of preservatives  at adequate  rates,  by wilting  prior  to 
ensiling  and by rapid  filling  and sealing  of the silo (O'Kiely,  1989).  In addition,  
management  of silage  at feeding  time  must  be such  as to minimize  losses  and to 
ensure  no deterioration  in the quality  of the silage  consumed.  The question  
therefore  is, "what is the most cost-effective  composition  and quantity  of 
concentrates  required  to correct  an energy  deficit  in the silage-fed  animal?"
In some  cases,  substitution  of one concentrate  with  a cheaper  alternative  (e.g. 
substituting  barley with com gluten at current  prices)  might be adequate.  
However , more  cost-effective  rations  are frequently  best formulated  by consid ­
ering  a blend  of concentrates.  Also,  there  are theoretical  advantages  with  respect  
to cellulose  digestion  to formulating  on a rumen  degradability  basis  and theoreti ­
cal benefits  with respect  to nitrogen  metabolism  from the inclusion  of sugar  in 
the ration.  A variety  of computer  programmes  are available  which  will formulate
92
Performance  of steers  offered  3.5 kg of isoenergetic  (11 MJ MEVkg)  and isonitrogenous  
(126 g protein/kg)  supplements  to grass  silageTable  5
Barley/SoyaSupplement
Citrus  Pulp/  
RapeseedMolasses
RapeseedSignificance
Ingredient
Coninnsitlnn  tp/kpl
Barley 915
Soyabean 70 - -
Cirtus  pulp - 768 -
Rapeseed - 199 293
Molasses - - 626
Tallow - 18 66
Minerals/Vitamins 15 15 15
Animal
Initial  weight  (kg) 504 500 510 NS
Liveweight  gain (g/day) 952 1083 1025 NS
Cold carcass  weight  (kg) 302 311 308 NS
Kill-out  (%) 51.2 52.1 51.1 0.08
Supplement  Cost £/tonne
August  1990 130 101 92
November  1991 136 120 102
NOTE:  Silage  DMD  = 700 g/kg DM)
Source:  Moloney  (1990)
the cheapest  ration of specific  ME and protein  content  by selecting  from a 
database  which  contains  various  feed ingredients,  their chemical  composition  
and their price. An example  of this approach  is given in Table 5 which  
summarises  data  from  a study  carried  out in Grange  in which  the liveweight  gain 
of finishing  Friesian  steers offered  three supplements  at 3.5 kg daily was 
compared.  The supplements  were  formulated  to provide  equal  quantities  of ME 
and protein  but to differ in composition,  i.e., to be based mainly  on starch,  
digestible  fibre  and sugar,  and cost. It can be seen from this study  that similar  
performance  was obtained  from both the least  and most  expensive  supplements  
and from supplements  that differed  markedly  in both rate and end-products  of 
fermentation  in the rumen.  This is the first of a series  of experiments  which will 
examine  this concept,  but illustrates  clearly  the savings  that can be made  by 
judicious  supplement  formulation.  Moreover,  Table  5 illustrates  the fluctuations  
in cost of ingredients  over time, indicating  that the most  cost effective  ration  
formulated  from  a fixed  spectrum  of raw materials  will not always  have  the same  
ingredient  composition.
It should  be noted  however,  that supplements  formulated  to provide  the same  
ME and protein  do not always  result  in the same  performance.  Table  6 shows  
recent  data from a  study  designed  to address  this point. It can be seen that while
93
Performance  of steers  offered  5.8 kg of isoenergetic  (112 MJ ME/kg)  and isonitrogenous  
(129 g protein/kg)  supplements  to grass  silageTable  6
Barley/SoyaSupplement
Distillers  Grains/  
Beet PulpFat/Rice
BranSignificance
Ingredient
Composition  /%)
Barley 803 02
Soyabean 99 - 30
Molasses 52 52 50
Fat Prills 21 31 83
Distillers  Grains _ 250
Beet Pulp - 642 _
Rice Bean - - 721
Megalac - - 83
Urea
Minerals/vitamins 25 2506
25
Animal  performance
Initial  weight  (kg) 587 587 587 NS
Liveweight  gain (g/day) 771 892 513 *
Carcass  weight  (kg) 356 365 346*
Kill-out  (%) 54.0 54.0 53.2 0.07
Supplement  Cost £/tonne
November  1991 138 125 161
NOTE:  SUage  DMD  = 630 g/kg DM)
Source:  Moloney  (1991)
similar  performance  was obtained  from the starch  (barley)  and by product  based  
supplements,  these  were  greater  than the fat-based  supplement.  Because  of its 
detrimental  effect  on fibre  digestion  in the rumen,  it is generally  recommended  
that  rumen  unprotected  fat should  not exceed  50 g^g  of the total  DM  consumed.  
Fat,  protected  from  rumen  digestion  (i.e. Megalac)  was therefore  also  used  in this 
study. The poorer  performance  of the cattle  fed the fat-containing  supplement  
reflects  a decrease  in silage  consumption.  This  must  have  been  caused  by feed­
back inhibition  of intake  by fat absorbed  from  the small  intestine  rather  than an 
impairment  of rumen digestion  per se. This study further  illustrated  that 
supplements  differing  in cost can result  in similar  animal  performance.
Ration  formulations  using  current  prices  and available  ingredients  are given  
in Table  7. When  no restrictions  were placed  on inclusion  of ingredients  the 
cheapest  supplement  (£101/tonne)  consisted  of barley,  molasses  and rapeseed.  
Since  the level of molasses  in this combination  might  be unattractive  from a 
management  perspective  or indeed  might  be higher  on a total diet basis than 
desirable  (see  below),  the supplement  was reformulated  with  molasses  restricted  
to 50 g/kg inclusion  (on a fresh weight  basis). This increased  the price  of the
94
supplement  by £ 19/tonne  and it now consisted  mainly  of beet pulp,  with small  
amounts  of barley  and rapeseed.  Restricting  molasses  and excluding  barley,  
increased  the cost of the ration  by a further  65 p/tonne.
When  formulating  rations  on a least  cost basis  it should  be noted  that wheat  
is more  likely  to cause  digestive  upsets  (i.e., rapid  decrease  in rumen  pH) than 
barley  and that the efficiency  of utilisation  of molasses  appears  to decline  more  
rapidly  than for other  ingredients  as the level  of supplementation  increases  with 
a maximum  inclusion  level of approximately  200 g/kg consumed.
As outlined  earlier,  the quantity  of concentrate  required  will  be determined  by 
its ME content  and the intake  characteristics  and quality  of the silage  on offer.  
The shortfall  in ME and protein  that needs  to be supplied  by concentrates  to
Table  7
Least  cost formulations
Ingredients  used in programme
Cost ff/tonnel
Cottonseed  (expeller)  (50%) 120
Com gluten 117
Sunflower 108
Distillers  grains 122
Citms  pulp 118
Imported  beel pulp 118
Pollard 122
US Soya 50% 164
EC rapeseed 104
Tapioca 136
Barley 129-133
Wheat 140-143
Oats 132
Fishmeal 450
(Source:  Irish Farmers'Journal,  16/11/91)
Rations
1 (no restrictions) 2 (molasses  restricted  
to 50 g/kg)3 (molasses  restricted  
to 50 g/kg,.no  barley
Ingredient
Composition  fg/k 2l
Barley 197 159 -
Molasses 567 50 50
Rapeseed 211 116 27
Minerals/vitamins 25 25 25
Beet pulp - 650 528
Pollard - - 370
ME (MJ/kg) 11.0 11,0 11.0
CP (g/kg) 120 120 120
Cost £/tonne 101.24 120.70 121.35
95
achieve  a particular  level  of animal  performance  can be calculated  using  (i) the 
ME and protein  of the available  silage  (provided  with the results  of chemical  
analysis),  (ii) the requirements  presented  in Table  1 and Table  2, and (iii) an 
estimate  of the likely  intake  of the silage.  If a choice  of silages  is available  they 
can be examined  in the same  least  cost formulation  procedure  using  individual  
costings,  composition,  etc., as described  above for concentrate  ingredients.  
Negative  interactions  between  silage  and concentrate  supplements  have been  
indicated  above. Theoretically,  to maximise  silage  digestion  and intake,  more  
attention  should  be paid  to the composition  of the supplement  than has b^n  the 
case heretofore.  While  there are some  suggestions  that silage  consumption  can 
be increased  by inclusion  of fodder  beet or pulp-type  ingredients  in the ration,  
sufficient  data  are not available  at present  to allow  accurate  definition  of the most  
appropriate  mix of  concentrates  and silage  but work  is progressing  with  that  goal.  
Studies  in progress  in Grange  are examining  the interaction  of silages  that 
underwent  different  patterns  of fermentation  in the silo, with  concentrates  based  
on starch, sugar or digestible  fibre. While there has been a progressive  
recognition  over time that the amount  and composition  of the supplementary  
feeds  given  to cattle  influences  silage  intake  and the milk  yield  of milk fat and 
milk  protein,  it is only  comparatively  recently  that  this has begun  to have  a major  
impact  on ration  design. This will lead to a more  creative  approach  to ration  
formulation  which  rejects  the classical  principle  that  supplementary  feeds  can be 
equated  simply  on the basis of their and (digestible)  protein  contents  and 
emphasise  the importance  of complementary  feeds.
(2) "Fodder  concentrate"-based  diets
The term "fodder  concentrate"  is used in this paper  to describe  whole  crop 
cereals,  whole  crop  fodder  beet  silage  and materials  such  as ensiled  pressed  pulp 
or ensiled  brewers  grains.  Three  potential  problems  arise  when  deciding  if these  
materials  should  be included  in a least-cost  formulation  procedure.  Firstly,  the 
cost of the material  needs  to be defined.  This will be determined  by individual  
operational  costs and for home-grown  crops will vary from farm to farm.  
Secondly,  an estimate  of the ME and protein  must be obtained,  by chemical  
analysis.  Thirdly,  any unusual features  of these materials  which  require  specific  
considerations  to ensure  a balanced  ration  need  to be considered.  This  is an area 
of active  research  activity,  but Grange  studies  indicate  that balancing  for ME, 
protein  and minerals/vitamin  in the conventional  way is adequate.  An example  
of the cost of producing  1 kg carcass  from ensiled  beet  pulp,  whole-crop  fodder  
beet  silage  and whole-crop  barley  silage  in experiments  carried  out in Grange  is 
given in Table 8. The "fodder-concentrate"  costs were estimated  costs of 
production  and were (p/kg  dry matter)  7,13.5,6  and 9 for grass  silage,  ensiled  
pressed  pulp, whole crop fodder  beet silage and whole  crop barley  silage,  
respectively.  The effects  of ration  composition  on profitability  can be clearly  
seen in this table.  While  comparing  rations  on a feed  cost/kg  carcass  gain  basis  
takes  into account  the efficiency  of utilisation  of dietary  DM,  the costs  assigned  
to the "fodder-concenu-ates"  do not fully take into account  the yield of the 
different  crops  under  optimum  growing  conditions.  Thus,  on a DM basis,  1 kg 
of a low yield,  low cost material  could  be costed  the same  as 1 kg of high yield,
96
Cost  of producing  1 kg of carcass  from a variety  of "fodder  concentrate"-based  rationsTable  8
Experiment  1 (Drennan  and Keane,  1990)  
Feed Silage  + 4 kg barley
Initial  liveweight  (kg) 491
Liveweight  gain (kg/day)  1.04
Carcass  gain (kg/day)  0.65
Feed cost of carcass  gain (£/kg)  1.51
Experiment  2 (O'Kiely  and Moloney,  1990)
Feed Silage  + 4 kg barleyEnsiled  pressed  pulp + 0.6 kg soyabean*
491
1.18
0.69
1.80
*+ 2.5 kg grass silage
Whole-crop  fodder  beet silage*
1 kg Barley 1 kg Soyabean
Initial  liveweight  (kg) 468
Liveweight  gain (kg/day)  0.91
Carcass  gain (kg/day)  0.69
Feed cost of carcass  gain (£/kg)  1.33
Experiment  3 (O'Kiely  and Moloney,  1991)470
1.12
0.79
0.93
*+ 6 kg grass silage470
1.10
0.76
0.98
Feed
Initial  liveweight  (kg) 
Liveweight  gain (kg/day)  
Carcass  gain (kg/day)Ensiled  spring  barley
without  concentrate + 2 kg barley
347 347
0.69 0.94
0.36  0.57
Feed cost of carcass  gain (£/kg) 1.96 1.64
high cost material.  Since  more of the latter would  be available  for feeding,  
comparisons  made  on a carcass  yield/unit  area  basis  are probably  more  relevant.  
If various  "fodder  concentrates"  are available  they can be used in a least cost 
programme  to define  the most  cost effective  combination.  Similarly,  the least  
cost  approach  can be used to  design  appropriate  "balancers"  for "fodder  concen ­
trates"  that are fed ad libitum  or form a large  proportion  of the diet.
Conclusions
In conclusion,  considerable  scope  exists  for decreasing  feed costs  in winter  
beef  production.  However,  particular  attention  must  be paid  to the quality  of the 
feed ingredients  purchased  particularly  if they are by-products  and if it is 
intended  that they should  form a large proportion  of the ration. Ideally,  all 
ingredients  should  be chemically  analysed  before  use. Similarly,  accurate  
costing  of home  produced  feeds  whether  grass  silage,  concentrate  or "fodder-  
concentrate"  is important  if they are to be sensibly  included  in least cost 
formulation.  Finally,  it should  be remembered  that there  are limitations  to the 
level of inclusion  of some ingredients  (despite  what the computer  might  
recommend)  and that not all ingredients  are compatible  in the rumen.
97
References
Agricultural  Research  Council  (1989). The Nutrient  Requirements  of Ruminant  Livestock.  
Famham  Royal,  Commonwealth  Agricultural  Bureaux.
Agricultural  Research  Council  (1984). The Nutrient  Requirements  of Ruminant  livestock.  
Supplement  No. 1. Famham  Royal,  Commonwealth  Agricultural  Bureaux.
Anonymous  (1991).  Management  Data for Farm Planning  1991. Teagasc,  Sandymount  Avenue,  
Dublin,  123 p.
Drennan,  M. J. and Keane,  M. G. (1990).  Winter  Beef  Production.  In: Cattle  Production  Seminar,  
pp. 210-226,  Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre.
Ministry  of Agriculture,  Fisheries  and Food (1984).  Energy  Allowances  and Feeding  Systems  for 
Ruminants.  HMSO,  London.
Ministry  of Agriculture,  Fisheries  and Food (1986). Feed Composition.  U.K. Tables  of Feed  
Composition  and Nutritive  Value  for Ruminants,  Chalcombe  Publicaticxis,  Bucks.
Moloney,  A. P. (1990). Unpublished.
Moloney,  A. P. (1991). Unpublished.
O'Kiely,  P. (1989).  Review  of factors  affecting silage  fermentation.  In: Irish  Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal,  23, 60-92.
O'Kiely,  P. and Moloney,  A. P. (1990).  Whole-crop  fodder-beet  silage:  Research  results.  In: Irish  
Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association  Journal,  24, 6121-125.
O’Kiely,  P. and Moloney,  A. P. (1991).  Live and carcass  weight  gains  of cattle  offered  whole-crop  
barley  silage  haivested  at an immature  growth  stage. In: Proceedings Winter  Meeting,  British  
Society  of Animal  Production,  paper  149.
Steen,  R. W. J. (1989). Recent  research  on protein  supplementation  of silage-based  diets for 
growing  and finishing  beef cattle. 62nd Ann. Rep. Agricultural  Res. Inst. N. Ireland.  12-20.
Cheveley  Johnston  & Company
Agricultural  Consultants  and Land  Agents
Farm  Reports  and Feasibility  Studies  
Management  Accounts  and Enterprise  Costings  
Farm  and Estate  Management  
Staff  Selection
Budgetary  Control  and Cash  How  Forecasts  
Land  and Stock  Valuations  - Farm  Sales  and Purchases
26/27  WELLINGTON  ROAD,  CORK  
(Cork  501109)
98
Economic  Returns  from Beef  
Production  and Future  Prospects
M. J. DRENNAN  and M. G. KEANE  
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
The Commission  of the European  Communities  recently  (Brussels  July 7, 
1991)  published  reform  proposals  for the Common  Agricultural  Policy.
The main effects  of these  proposals  on cattle  producers  are:
* Intervention  price  reduction  15%
* Sheep  quotas
* Continued  milk quotas
* Suckler  cow  premium  increased
* Special  beef  premium  increased
* Extensification  requirements  to qualify  for premia
* Cheaper  cereals
* Less  dairy  cows  and greater  retention  of calves  on dairy  farms
While  the proposed  premia  may have  limitations,  beef  producers  will find it 
necessary  to adjust  as Iheir economic  viability  will depend  on receiving  these  
premia. While  it is not proposed  to examine  the effects  of these proposals  
nationally,  recent  calculations  by Teagasc  and other  organisations  have shown  
that incomes  from beef production  will be most adversely  affected  when 
compared  to the other  farm enterprises.  Examination  of present  Family  Farm  
Incomes  show that beef producers  cannot  withstand  a further  reduction  in 
income  if they are to remain  economically  viable  (Table  1). While  many  beef 
producers  are also involved  in dairying  or sheep  production  which  will obtain  
greater  benefit  from  the proposals,  at least  3 5 percent  of total  cattle  producers  are 
involved  only in beef  production.  It is this latter  group  that will have greatest  
difficulty  remaining  economically  viable  in the long term and this pajter is 
primarily  concerned  with these.
Table 1
Family  farm incomes  on full-time  farms
Dairying Beef Sheep
Family  Farm Income  per farm (£) 18,030 7,809 9,294
Contributions  from subsidies  (£) 475 2,396 5,653
Acreage  (hectares) 29.5 45.9 60,7
Family  Farm  Income  (£) per acre (hectare) 247(611) 69 (170) 62 (153)
Source;  National  Farm Survey  1989
99
Premia
The existing  and proposed  premia  per animal  (£) are as follows:
Premium Present Proposed Protxrsed  Maximum/farm  
Suckler  cow 52 83' £7,471
Special  beef 35 52 £4,719
'Proposed  £87.38  (100 ECU)  Ireland  £83,01  (95 ECU)
The number  of eligible  animals  for both the suckler  cow and special  beef  
premia  is 90. Both premia  will be increased  gradually  over  three  years  and the 
figures  presented  are for year 3. Payments  under  the special  b^f premium  
applies  only to males  (heifer  excluded)  and are on the following  three  occasions  
during  the animals  life, 6 to 9 months,  14 to 22 months  and 28 to 34 months.  As 
both premia  can make substantial  contributions  to overall  beef incomes  it is 
important  to consider  the extensification  requirements  needed  to avail of the 
premia.
Extensification  criteria
The extensification  criteria  which  must  be met in order  to avail  of the premia  
are as follows:
Disadvantaged  areas  (DA) 0J7  livestock  units  per acre (1.4  per hectare)  
Non-Disadvantaged  areas  (NDA)  0.81 livestock  units  per  acre  (2.0  per  hectare)
Dairy  cows,  suckler  cows,  male bovines  and ewes will be included  in the 
calculation  of stocking  rates.  Heifers  are excluded  from  the calculations.  Further  
clarification  on livestock  equivalents  is necessary  in order  to calculate  stocking  
rate requirements.  The proposed  livestock  unit equivalents  are as follows:
Cows  (and  steers  over  2 years) 1.0
Steers  - 6 months  to 2 years 0.6
If livestock  units are applied  on each occasion  the special  beef  premium  is 
collected,  then  in a calf  to two-year-old  beef  system  the number  of livestock  units  
would  be 1.2 (severe  interpretation).  However,  as calves  from 0-6 months  are 
excluded  when  calculating  LU then  the animal  is only  considered  over 18 months  
and should  thus have  a livestock  unit equivalent  of 0.9. Estimation  of livestock  
unit equivalents  per acre for some  moderately  intensive  beef  systems  (Grange)  
are shown  in table  2.
Table  2
Livestock  unit equivalents  (LUE)  per acre
System
Suckling Calf to 2 year beeP Winter  finishing^
Interpretation  
of L.U.E. Severe Ixss severe Severe Less severe Severe Less severe
Acres/animal  sold 1.9' 1.9' 1.2 1.2 0.32 0.32
Livestock  uruts 1.6 1.45 1.2 0.9 0.6 0.3
Livestock  units/acre 0.84 0.76 1.0 0.75 1.9 0.94
'Cow  and progeny  (50 per cent heifers) ^Continental  breeds
100
Assuming  the severe  interpretation  of livestock  unit equivalent  none  of the 
systems  would  be eligible  even in the non-disadvantaged  areas. With the less 
severe  interpretation  both  the suckling  and calf  to beef  systems  would  be eligible  
in these areas. However,  substantial  reductions  in stocking  rate would  be 
necessary  to ensure  eligibility  in the disadvantaged  areas. Winter  finishing  
would  not meet  extensification  requirements  in any area. Further  clarification  
of the proposals  is necessary  to allow  proper  evaluation  of the implications  of 
extensification.  However,  the above  data  would  indicate  that adjustments  to the 
extensification  requirements  are necessary  in order  that those  in disadvantaged  
areas  and those  specialising  in winter  finishing  can avail  of the premia.
Economic  returns
Economic  returns  were calculated  for a number  of beef systems  in non- 
disadvantaged  areas,  using  Grange  standards.  High animal  performance  was 
assumed  and continental  crosses  were used in all systems. Incomes  were  
estimated  using  present  prices  and following  full application  of the proposals.  
The following  conditions  were applied:
Steer  purchase  prices  (£/100  kg)Present
118Following  proposals  
100
Calf  price  (£) 250 213
Sale prices  (p/kg  carcass)  Steers 227.1 193.0
Heifers 198.4 168.6
Concentrates  (£/tonne) 130 100
Overhead  costs (£/acre) 70 70
A. Grassland!cow  unit = 1.9 acres
B. Grassland/cow  unit = 1.9 acres
C. Grassland/cow  unit = 2.2 acresInterest  was  charged  on all working  capital  at 14 percent.  No charge  for housing  
or labour  was included  in the calculations.
Single  suckling  systems
Continental  sires were  used and the progeny  taken  to slaughter  at 20 (heifers  
290 kg carcass)  and 24 (steers  390 kg carcass)  months  of age. The following  
three sets of circumstances  were  examined:
Present  prices  
Prices  following  proposals  
Grazing  area (nitrogen  for early  
grass  only)
Prices  following  proposals
The incomes  per cow unit and per acre are shown  in Table  3
Assuming  the existing  system  qualified  for the premia  following  application  
of the proposals  then  receipts  are reduced  but so also  are viable  costs  and interest  
on working  capital. Gross margin  per cow is reduced  from £430 to £407.  
Overall,  income  per  cow is reduced  from  £ 131 to £ 117 (from  £69 to £62 per acre)  
indicating  that the premia  are insufficient  to offset  the 15%  price  reduction.  This 
does not include,  however,  any compensation  for reduction  in the value  of the 
cow herd. If a reduction  in stocking  rate is necessary  to meet  the extensification  
requirements  (and avail of the premia),  then  one option  (Option  C) is to restrict
101
Table  3
Incomes  (£) from single  suckling  systems
Per cow (£) Per acre (£)
System A B C A B C
Variable  costs 370 349 335 195 184 152
Receipts  - Animals 731 621 621 385 327 282
Cow premium 52 83 83 27 44 38
Beef  premium 12 52 52 2 27 24
Total receipts 800 756 756 421 398 344
Gross  margin 430 407 422 226 214 192
'Overhead  costs 133 133 133 70 70 60
Margin  less overhead  costs 297 274 289 156 144 131
Interest  on working  capital 167 157 156 88 82 71
Income 131 117 133 69 62 60
'Where  stocking  rate was reduced  (C) overhead  costs per animal  remained  the same.
nitrogen  on the grazing  area to usage  for early  grass  only (saving  the equivalent  
of 200 kg of calcium  ammonium  nitrate  per acre on the grazing  area). While  
receipts  are reduced  so also are costs. The reduction  in income  per acre  is small  
(reduced  from  £62 to £60  per  acre).  This  indicates  thatreductions  in stocking  can 
be made  without  detrimental  effects  on income.  It should  however,  be pointed  
out that this applies  to conditions  of heavy  borrowing  (all livestock  and other  
variable  and overhead  costs)  with  interest  payments  on working  capital  varying  
from £71 to £88 per acre.
Artificial  rearing  calf to beef  systems
Continental  calves  are purchased  in March,  artificially  reared  and sold at 25 
months  of age (carcass  weights  380 kg). The following  three  sets of circum ­
stances  are examined:
Al. Grassland  per animal  = 1.2 acres Present  prices
Bl. Grassland  per animal  = 1.2 acres  Prices  following  proposals,  i.e. 15%
reduction
Cl. Grassland  per animal  = 1.2 acres  (nitrogenfor  early  grass  only  on grazing
area)
Prices  following  proposals
The incomes  per animal  and per acre are shown  in Table  4. Assuming  the 
present  system  meets  extensification  requirements  then due to increases  in the 
special  beef  premium  incomes  are improved  following  application  of proposals.  
If reductions  in stocking  rate are required  in order  to avail of the special  beef 
premium,  and this could  be achieved  by reducing  nitrogen  usage  on the grazing  
area then there  is a relatively  small  reduction  in income  per acre (£77 to £73). It 
is again  important  to point  out the major  effect  of borrowing  on incomes  which  
varied  from  £84 to£l 14 per acre. The full special  beef  premium  is obtained  with 
45 animals  slaughtered  yearly  (i.e., 45 weanlings  and 45 finishing  animals).
102
Table  4
Incomes  (£) from artificially  reared  calf to beef  systems
Per animal Per acre
System Al Bl Cl Al ai Cl
Variable  costs 613 543 534 511 453 381
Receipts  - Animals 863 733 733 719 611 524
Beef  premium 35 105 105 29 87 75
Total receipts 898 838 838 748 698 599
Gross  margin 285 295 304 238 246 217
Overhead  costs 84 84 84 70 70 60
Margin  less overhead  costs 201 211 220 168 176 157
Interest  on working  capital 137 119 117 114 99 84
Income 64 92 102 53 77 73
C2Winter  and winter/summer  finishing  systems
Continental  cross  animals  are purchased  in autumn  at 500 kg liveweight  and 
sold in spring  (six months  feeding  period  and 380 kg carcass)  or the following  
autumn  (11 months  feeding  period  315 kg carcass).  The following  three  sets of 
circumstances  were  examined:
A2. Grassland  (for silage)  per animal = 0.32 acres Present
prices
B2. Grassland  (for silage)  per animal)  = 0.32 acres Prices
following  proposals
Grassland  (silage  and grazing)  per animal  = 0.90 acres Prices
following  proposals
In A2 and B2 animals  are fed silage  plus  4.5 kg of concentrate  daily,  whereas  
in C2 (grazed)  silage  only is fed in winter. It is assumed  that no special  beef 
premium  is available  to those  involved  in winter  finishing  and the payment  made  
at 28 to 34 months  (£52-43)  is available  to those  finishing  off grass. At any rate 
those  involved  in winter  finishing  would  find it  difficult  to meet  the extensifica ­
tion requirements  and because  of the restriction  to 90 animals,  even  if they  were  
eligible  they would  only receive  payments  for the equivalent  of 29 acres of 
grassland  in the example  used.
The incomes  per animal  and per acre  are shown  in Table  5. In the absence  of 
the special  beef  premium,  incomes  from winter  finishing  before  and following  
reform  are -£50 and -£77 per acre, respectively.  Finishing  off grass (C2) 
following  a winter  period  on silage  alone  provides  an income  of £53 per acre 
which  is somewhat  lower  than the suckling  and calf to beef  systems.  It should  
be pointed  out that interest  on working  capital  (no repayments  on buildings  and 
no labour) amounts  to £155  to £180  per acre in winter  finishing,  thus indicating  
the substantial  effect  of borrowing  on incomes  in this system  of production.
Importance  of premia
To indicate  the importance  of premia  the effect  of availability  of the special
10^
Table  5
Incomes  (£) from winter  and winter/summer  finishing  systems
Per animal Per acre
System A2 B2 C2 A2 B2 C2
Variable  costs 209 185 150 653 577 167
Purchase  price 590 502 502 1844 1567 557
Total 799 687 652 2497 2144 724
Receipts  - Sale price 863 733 801 2696 2292 890
Beef  premium - - 53 - - 59
Total receipts 863 733 854 2696 2292 949
Gross  margin 64 47 202 200 148 225
Overhead  costs 22 22 63 70 70 70
Margin  less overhead  costs 42 25 139 130 78 155
Interest  on working  capital 57 50 92 180 155 102
Income -16 -25 48 -50 -77 53
beef  premium  on financial  retruns  from the calf to 2-year  beef  system  is shown  
in Table  6. Non availability  of the premium  would  reduce  gross  margins  from 
£246  to £158 per acre and incomes  from £77 to -£1 1 per acre. In the example  
used the full special  premium  is obtained  on 54 acres  (i.e., 45 animals  finished  
yearly)  which  provides  inadequate  income  for a beef producer  with no other  
livestock  (dairying  or sheep)  enterprises.  It is thus essential  that the number  of 
eligible  animals  for the special  beef  premium  be increased  for those  producers  
confined  to beef  production.  Because  of the importance  of heifer  production  and 
the indirect  effect  of the reduction  in intervention  prices  on heifer  price,  inclusion  
of heifers  for the special  beef  premium  merits  consideration.
Table  6
EfTcct  of special  beef premium  on incomes  from calf to 2-year-old  beef system
Special  Beef  Premium
Gross  margin  
IncomeAvailable
Per animal  (Per acre)
295 (246)
92 (77)Not available
Per animal  (Per acre)
190 (158)
-13 (-11)
IMPORTANT  CONSIDERATIONS  FOR BEEF  PRODUCTION
Two major  considerations  are:
1. The increased  importance  of suckler  cows as a source  of calves  for those  
involved  in beef  production  only and,
2. Distribution  of cattle  slaughterings  throughout  the year.
104
1. Importance  of suckler  herd
Since the introduction  of milk quotas,  we have advocated  at Grange  the 
increased  importance  of the suckler  cow herd as a source  of calves  for those  
involved  in beef  production.  Suckler  cow numbers  have increased  from 0.42 
million  in 1984  to 0.69 million  in 1991 and now  account  for almost  one-third  of 
the total cow population.  During  the same  period,  dairy  cow numbers  declined  
from 1.65 to 1.45 million  and this decline  is likely to continue  with further  milk  
quota  reductions.  Thus,  the suckler  herd is now more  important  than previously  
and we must  consider  the possibility  of future  quota  restrictions  on suckler  cow 
numbers.  It is therefore,  important  that  beef  producers  give  greater  consideration  
to suckling  systems.  In addition  to an improved  suckler  cow  premium  economi ­
cally  viable  systems  involves  efficient  low cost  production  of quality  beef; e.g.,  
Limousin  x Friesian  cows  crossed  as mature  cows with the larger  continental  
breeds  of bull (Charolais,  Simmental,  Blonde  D'Aquitane).
2. Distribution  of slaughterings  throughout  the year
If there  is to be less reliance  on intervention  then for orderly  marketing  it is 
essential  to have an even distribution  of disposals  throughout  the year. The 
present  uneven  distribution  of slaughterings  with a large  proportion  in autumn  
is undesirable;  one-third  of total steers slaughterings  were in the October/  
December  period  in the seventies,  this has increased  to one-half  in recent  years.  
In a predominantly  spring  calving  herd  payment  of the final  moiety  of the special  
beef premium  from 22 months  of age (as opposed  to the suggested  28 to 34 
months)  would  improve  the economic  returns  from  winter  finishing  and thereby  
increase  disposals  in spring.  It is thus  essential  that those  specialising  in winter  
finishing  are eligible  for the special  beef  premia.
Conclusions
Where  animal  performance  is high (not attainable  by all producers),  accept ­
able incomes  can be achieved  following reform  provided  premia  are available.  
The important  indicators  are:
* Premia  essential  for viability
* The proposed  suckler  cow premium  needs  to be increased
* Special  beef  premium  - increase  number  of eligible  animals  on beef  only 
farms
* Extensification  requirements  are excessively  severe  particularly  in the 
disadvantaged  areas
* Extensification  - implications  re stock  relief
* In absence  of a premium  winterfinishing  (and  heifer  beef  systems  are not 
viable
* To improve  seasonality  of disposals-final  moiety  of  special  beef premium  
should  be from  22 months  of age (will increase  disposals  in spring).
It is important  to point  out that  due to the decline  in catUe  prices  in recent  years  
the incomes  calculated  using  present  prices  are already  lower  than  previously.  In 
addition,  there is no compensation  for decrease  in value  of livestock  (e.g., a 
suckler  herd)  and no allowance  for inflation.
105
Hygienic  Nature  of Grass  Produced  
Beef
P. O. BROPHY
Faculty  of  Agriculture,  University  College,  Dublin.
Introduction
Hygienic  beef  is beef  that is produced  from  healthy  animals,  uncontaminated  
by harmful  bacteria,  wholesome  and free from residues.  The consumer  expects  
a product  that is safe (i.e. does  not adversely,  affect  the health  of the consumer),  
is free from infectious  agents,  free from toxins  and chemical  residues.  The 
consumer  also expects  the product  to be free from  bacterial  contamination,  free 
from disease  defects  and to have the characteristics  the consumer  requires.
The purpose  of this paper  is to show  that beef  produced  from  catUe  that spend  
the majority  of their life on pasture  can more readily  meet the consumer's  
demands  for a wholesome  product  than beef  produced  from cattle  raised  under  
more  intensive  systems  of production.
With the exception  of parasitic  disease,  cattle  produced  at grass  suffer  from  
fewer  infectious  diseases  than  housed  animals.  The fact that  animals  at grass  are 
in their natural  environment,  are less stressed  and are stocked  at much lower  
density  means  that their  resistance  to infection  is at a maximum  and that under  
normal  conditions  they  are unlikely  to be exposed  to high  levels  of infection.  The 
consequences  of this for meat  hygiene  is twofold-(a)  cattle  coming  from  pasture  
are less likely  to be infected  with  potentially  harmful  micro  organisms  and (b) the 
use of chemotherapeutic  substances  will be less in these  animals  with less risk 
of residues  in the meat.
The use of antibiotics  in meat  producing  animals  has been of concern  for a 
number  of years. In particular,  concern  has been expressed  regarding  the 
possibi  1 ity of residues  entering  the food  chain  and the risk  of antibiotic  resistance  
being  transferred  to the human  population  from treated  animals  either  directly  
through  the transfer  of resistant  strains  of pathogenic  bacteria  or through  
transferable  drug resistance.  Traditionally  antibiotics  have been used in beef 
production  either  as a means  of preventing  disease  during  a critical  period  or as 
growth  promoters.
Research  findings  
(1) Antibiotics
Two  experiments  have  been carried  out at Lyons  to investigate  the effect  of 
feeding  antibiotics  to beef  calves  on the pattern  of resistance  of bacteria  isolated  
from the digestive  U'act  of the treated  calves.
In the first  experiment  250 mgms  of chlorotetracycline  (Aureomycin;  Cyan-  
amid)  was fed daily  in liquid  feed for eight  days  after  purchase  to 30 autumn  bom 
and 36 spring  born beef  calves.  The sensitivity  pattern  of E. coli isolated  from  
the digestive  tract of these animals  was monitored  regularly.  The sensitivity  
pattern  to chlorotetracycline  is shown  in Figure  1 and the sensitivity  pattern  to
106
a number  of common  antibiotics  is shown  in Tables  1 and 2. The results  of this 
experiment  show  that while  the calves  harboured  E. coli showing  a high  level  of 
resistance  to a number  of antibiotics  and an exceptionally  high  level  of resistance  
to chlorotetracycline  during  the initial  housing  period  the bacterial  population  of
Fig. 1 — Season  pattern  of in vitro sensitivity  to tetracycline  of E. coli isolated  
from March  and September born calves
Table 1
In vitro  sensitivity  (%) of E. coii isoiated  from 30 autumn  born calves
C.' Amp.' Ne.' Fr.' Nf.' Ps.'
September  (after  treatment) 60 60 47 87 100 97
April (turnout) 80 83 80 100 97 97
August  (grazing) 100 100 97 90 97 100
October  (housing) 100 93 77 100 67 100
March  (slaughter) 100 97 97 100 97 97
Table  2
In vitro sensitivity  (%) of E.coli isolated  from 36 spring  born calves
C. Amp. Ne. Fr. Nf. Ps.
March  (after  treatment) 3 3 33 36 94 100
April (turnout) 67 69 78 86 97 100
August  (grazing) 97 100 100 100 100 100
November  (housing) 100 94 89 100 94 97
April (turnout) 100 89 100 100 97 100
'(C-Chloramphenicol,  Amp-AmpicUlin,  Ne-Neonycin,  Fr-Framycetin,  Nf-Nitrofurazone, 
Ps-Potenliatcd  sulphonamide)
107
-on flavomycm-
DAYS
Fig. 2
these  animals  lost this resistance  very  rapidly  after  turnout  to pasture  and a high  
level of sensitivity  persisted  throughout  the remainder  of the experiment.
The second  experiment  invesUgated  the effect  of feeding  a feed additive  
antibiotic  Flavomycin  (Hoechst)  to beef  calves  on the pattern  of resistance  of £. 
coli isolated  from  these  calves.  In this experiment  half  of the group  of calves  (36) 
received  Flavomycin  both in the milk for 28 days  and in the meal for a further  
35 days after turnout. Rectal  swabs  were taken on nine occasions  over the 
experimental  period  of 150 days. The sensitivity  pattern  and incidence  of R 
p^smids (transferable  resistance  factors)  in the£.  coli isolated  was monitored.  
The results  of this experiment  are shown in Figure  2. These  results  show  that the 
fading  of Flavomycin  resulted  in a significant  increase  in the incidence  of R 
plasm  ids in isolates  from  the treated  calves  and that the incidence  of the plasmids  
fell off dramatically  after the cessation  of feeding  outdoors.
However  this  experiment  would  also  suggest  that  the feeding  of non therapeu ­
tic feed additive  type antibiotics  to housed  finishing  cattle  might  present  a risk 
of increased  incidence  of R plasmids  in intestinal  bacteria  at slaughter  and this 
warrants  further  research.
These  experiments  suggest  that any antibiotic  resistance  that may develop  as
108
a consequence  of feeding  antibiotics  will be lost when  cattle  are turned  out to 
pasture  and that  beef  from grazing  animals  is unlikely  to be a source  of antibiotic  
resistance  to the human  population.
(2) Parasites
The most  common  diseases  of grazing  cattle  are caused  by internal  parasites  
viz. parasitic gastrointeritis,  parasite  pneumonia  and fluke. These  are primarily  
diseases  of young  cattle  and do not present  a problem  to the human  population.  
However  most control  procedures  are based on the use of chemicals  i.e. 
anthelmintics  - a fact that could  lead to concern  about  residues.  The  availability  
of highly  effective  anthelmintics  has resulted  in a more  or less complete  reliance  
on chemicals  as a means  of control  of parasite  disease  at the present  time.
However,  efficient  parasite  control  can be achieved  by combination  of 
grazing  management  and strategic  dosing  which  will significantly  reduce  the 
amount  of anthelmintics  used during  the finishing  period.
Work at Lyons  over the years  has repeatedly  shown  that effective  control  of 
parasite  gastroenteritis  and hoose  can be achieved  in a beef  production  system  
with a dosing  regime  that requires  oiily two doses,  one at mid season  move  and 
one at housing  for first season grazers  combined  with a  leader/follower  grazing  
system  and a  conversion  programme  that provides  clean  pasture  in mid season.  
This management  system  also eliminates  the necessity  to dose the finishing  
animals  thereby  minimizing  the use of anthelmintic  and eliminating  the risk of 
residues  in the meat.
The control  of fluke grazing  cattle  can also be achieved  without  the wide ­
spread use of chemicals.  The  elimination  of snail  habitats  from  grazing  land  by 
drainage,  the control  of flooding  and the  prevention  of access  to permanent  snail  
habitats  by fencing  and judicious  pasture  management  at high risk periods  will 
achieve  an effective  level of fluke  control.  Efficient  fluke  control  will result  in 
more healthy  livers,  a product  that is a rich source  of nutrients  and should  be 
highly  attractive  to the consumer.  It is important  to realise  that the liver is the 
organ  which stores  many  of the substances  absorbed  from  the digestive  tract  and 
because  of this can be a potent  source  of harmful  residues.
Beef  can be produced  from  grass  with  minimal  use of anthelmintics  and if the 
need  arose  it could  be possible  to devise  a management  system  that would  conu-ol  
internal  parasites  of grazing  cattle  without  the use of anthelmintics.
Another  condition  of concern  to the beef  producer  is infestation  with  external  
parasites  particularly  lice. Grazing  cattle  do not normally  suffer  from lice and 
beef  animals  finished  from grass  do not need treatment.  This means  that these  
animals  should  be free from contact  with organophosphates  for a long period  
before  slaughter,  a situation  that must  be attractive  to the consumer.
Comments
A potential  source  of concern  to the consumer  is the risk of contamination  of 
the carcase  at slaughter  particularly  when the hide is being  removed.  Modem  
methods  of pulling  hides  have  reduced  this risk, nevertheless  contamination  of 
the carcase  can be perceived  as a problem.  In this  respect  the much  cleaner  hides
109
of cattle  coming  from grass would  suggest  a much  reduced  risk from grazing  
animals  than from animals  finished  indoors.
Welfare  considerations  can influence  the consumers  opinion  of animal  
products.  Beef produced  from grass gives a very favourable  impression  of 
animals  living  in their  natural  environment.
Beef  is an expensive  product  to produce  and must be marketed  as a prime  
product.  Consumer  confidence  in the product  is most important  in achieving  
premium  prices. The producer  has a major  role to play in maintaining  this 
confidence.  The producer  of the finished  animal  can only be in control  of the 
product  for the length  of time  the animal  is under  his control.  Ideally  a calf to 
b^f system  is the system  of choice  to give complete  control  of the product.  
Unfortunately  this system  is not really  practical  in most Irish farm situations,  
however  the beef  producer  can improve  his control  over the final product  by a 
more  judicious  purchasing  policy  and by ensuring  he knows  the origin  of his 
purchases.  To achieve  this beef  producers  should  be encouraging  the develop ­
ment  of a computerized  system  to monitor  the movement  of cattle  - a system that 
IS being proposed  for another  reason  but which  could be very beneficial  in 
improving  the hygienic  standard  of the beef  we produce.
References
Brophy.  P. O.. Caffrey,  P. J. and CoUins.  J. D. (1977). Sensitivity  patterns  of Escherichia  coli 
133 340 346 following  prophylactic  chlorotetracycline  therapy.  Br. Vet. J.
Nagle,  E, J., Brophy,  P. O., Caffrey,  P. J. and ONuallain,  T. (1980). Control  of ostertagiasis  in 
young  cattle  under  intensive  grazing.  Vet. Par. 7, 143-152.
110
External  Parasites  of Cattle
P. O. BROPHY
Faculty  of Agriculture,  University  College,  Dublin.
The incidence  of external  parasites  in housed  cattle  has been  of considerable  
concern  to cattle  farmers  over  the years.  Their  major  concern  has been  in relation  
to the effect  these  parasites  may have  had on animal  performance  and to a lesser  
extent  the consequential  damage  to skin and hides  that  may result  from scratch ­
ing. The  main  external  parasite  of housed  cattle  is lice,  followed  to a lesser  extent  
by mange  mites  and warbles.  However,  no discussion  on this topic would  be 
complete  without  including  ringworm,  although  as it is caused  by a fungus  it 
cannot  strictly  be classified  as an ectoparasite.
Basically  two types  of lice occur  on cattle  in this country,  biting  and sucking  
lice, sucking  lice being the more  common  type. Both  cause  irritation  of the skin 
resulting  in resUessness,  scratching,  excessive  licking  and hair loss. If the 
infestation  is severe  considerable  damage  can be done to the skin causing  
abrasions  and  cuts. In young  animals  excessive  licking  can lead  to hairballs.  The 
constant  scratching  and uneasiness  can also  cause  damage  to partitions,  barriers,  
etc. The skin damage  can result  in reduced  value  for the hide which  may be of 
significance.  Sucking  lice have  been  implicated  in causing  anaemia  particularly  
in younger  animals  although  the level of infestation  required  to cause  clinical  
anaemia  would  need to be very high.
Lice  infestation  is primarily  a problem  during  the winter  months  reaching  its 
maximum  intensity  during  late winter  and early spring,  as the reproductive  
performance  of lice increases  in cold weather.  Other  factors  which  influence  
levels  are density  of hair  coat,  condition  of  coat,  nutritional  status,  environmental  
conditions,  temperature,  crowding  and other stress factors. Levels  start to 
decrease  in early summer  as a result  of shedding  of winter  coat, increase  in 
temperature,  improving  nutritional  status and reduction  of contact  between  
animals.  A form of "self  cure"  phenomenon  has been  reported  for lice in cattle  
in early  winter.  This  is probably  an immune  response  and may  contribute  to the 
fact that well fed animals  are less likely to have high infestation  levels.  
Outbreaks  develop  in late autumn from  very low  levels  carried  over  the summer  
on a few carrier  animals.  These  carrier  animals  infest  clean  in-contact  animals  
and levels  increase  rapidly  under  favourable  conditions  due to the short  life cycle  
of the louse. The introduction  of infected  animals  into a clean  group  can also 
result  in a dramatic  increase  in the level of infestation.
In general  the available  evidence  from this part of the world  would  suggest  
that in well fed healthy  adult  cattle  low to moderate  levels  of infestation  have  
litde if any measurable  effect  on performance.  A report  from the U.S.A.  has 
mentioned  an improvement  in performance  of a small number  of cattle  after  
treatment  for lice while  another  report  from that country  suggests  losses  of up to 
$126  million  per annum  due to lice in cattle.  I suspect  that in these  cases  the level 
of infestation  was high and there  may have been other  contributing  factors.
Ill
In younger  cattle,  particularly  if they are under-nourished,  the effects  of lice 
infestation  may be more obvious  and heavy infestations  may contribute  to 
reduced  performance  and even  anaemia  in poorly  managed  growing  cattle.  It has 
been suggested  that a sudden  increase  in lice levels  in young  cattle  might  be 
suggestive  of the presence  of subclinical  disease,  e.g. internal  parasitism.
Prevention  of the seasonal  build up of levels  in housed  cattle is the most  
efficient  way of dealing  with lice. This is best achieved  by treating  all cattle  at 
the start of the winter  housing  period. All animals  must  te treated  at the same  
time  and care must  be taken  to ensure  all new animals  are treated  before  mixing.  
There  are many  different  drugs  and types  of preparations  available  for delousing  
cattle. These  include  powders,  sprays,  washes,  pour-ons  and injectables.  All 
work  effectively  but 'in contact'  products  such  as powders  and sprays,  although  
cheaper,  require  considerable  attention  during  application  as direct  contact  must  
beachieved  for maximum  results.  The  systemic  drugs  such  as organophosphates,  
used  as pour-ons,  and ivermectin,  by injection  or recently  available  as a pour-on,  
are both very  effective  and easy to use. However,  one must  be conscious  of the 
toxicity  risk with  organophosphates  to both  man  and animals.  These  products  all 
have significant  withdrawal  times  particularly  for meat  and ivermectin  should  
not be used  in lactating  dairy  cows. The fact that ivermectin  is effective  against  
other parasites  is also a consideration.  Choice  of drug should  be based on 
suitability  to the particular  enterprise  and cost. At Lyons  we have  always  found  
one treatment  with an organophosphate  pour-on  to be effective  in keeping  lice 
under  control.
Mange
There  are four types of mange  that may affect  cattle;  sarcoptic,  psoroptic,  
chorioptic  and demodectic.  Sarcoptic  and psoroptic  mange  are both scheduled  
and notifiable  diseases  in this country  but not in the United  Kingdom.  All forms  
of mange  are spread  by contact  although  grooming  utensils  can also transmit  
infection  from animal  to animal. Like lice, mange  mites are host specific  
although  there have been reports  of humans  becoming  infected  with sarcoptic  
mange  in America.
Neither  sarcoptic  nor psoroptic  mange  have  been reported  in this country  for 
many years.  Sarcoptic  mange  has occurred  sporadically  in the United  Kingdom  
while  psoroptic  mange  has not been seen for many years save for one recent  
isolated  outbreak.  There  is always  a risk of imported  cattle  bringing  mange  into 
this country  and any suspicious  skin lesions  should  be investigated  thoroughly.  
Both types  of mite  can cause  widespread  lesions  with intense  itchiness,  thicken ­
ing of the skin and crust  formation.  Chorioptic  and demodectic  mange  are very  
mild conditions  with slight  if any clinical  signs. Chorioptic  mange  which  is the 
commonest  type of cattle  mange  usually  causes  scab like lesions  on the udder,  
scrotum  and at the base  of the tail,  areas  free of hair. Demodectic  mange  has been  
implicated  as a cause  of nodules  in hides.
Mange responds  well to treatment  with common  insecticides  although  
infestations  of sarcoptic  mange  may require  a number  of treatments  to achieve  
satisfactory  results.
112
Ringworm
Ringworm  is of course  a widespread  disease  of cattle particularly  young  
stock. The following  points  are worthy  of attention:
a) Young  poorly  nourished  animals  are more  susceptible  than well-fed  stock.  
Infection  in the form of spores  can live off the animal,  in sheds,  for years  
resulting  in the transfer  of infection  from year to year.
Clinical  infection in a group  suggests  that in contact  animals  maybe  incubat ­
ing the disease.
Local  topical  treatment  may give disappointing  results  as new lesions  may 
develop  elsewhere  on the same  animal.
Crusty  scales  may protect  the fungus.
Ringworm  is zoonotic,  i.e. it can  infect  humans.
Ringworm  can occur  outdoors  particularly  in wet weather.
Treatment:  Indoors  - griseofulvin  in feed.
Outdoors  - contact  fungicides.b)
c)
d)
e) 
0
g)
h)
Warbles
Warbles  are rarely  seen in cattle  nowadays.  However,  any suspected  case  of 
warbles  must  be reported  to the local District  Veterinary  Office.
In conclusion  lice are the most  common  ectoparasite  of cattle  and while  their 
effect  on performance  may be insignificant,  humane  and welfare  considerations  
dictate  that they  should  be controlled  by routine  treatment.  Any abnormal  skin 
lesions  in housed cattle  should be investigated  thoroughly  and any suspicion  of 
sarcoptic  mange,  psoroptic  mange  or warbles  must  be reported  to the authorities.
113
The Prevalence  and Control  of 
Leptospirosis  in cattle
N. LEONARD
Teagasc  Moorepark  Research  Centre.  Fermoy.  Co. Cork  and  Department  of 
Veterinary  Microbiology  & Pathology,  University  College.  Dublin.
Serological  prevalence
'Widespread  in the Irish cattle  population  with  most  
h-ivp  serovar  hardjo. Approximately  34% of sera from cows that
nf antibodies  to hardjo  (Egan  & Yearsley,  1987) A survey
TOsIdve  f^r^^A  at Moorepark  revealed  that 25% of seraiested  were
S-ovars  TheSiP  positive  for infection  by other
ob“ ned bv^ann  i Y r diat the prevalence  is less than that
that 87% n^f finding  of this survey  was the fact
^ °f i’^'^ds tested  had at least one animal  positive  for Aarrl/ci. This is
similar  to the results  of a study  in Britain  in which  85% of herds  and 24% of 
nimals  were positive  for hardjo  antibodies  (Allsup,  1989). A survey  of beef herds only has not been conducted  in Ireland  but in the U.K. a survey  fo^d  
antibody  to hardjo  in 72% of beef  herds. Therefore,  serovar in?iuon1  
wide.spread  m beef  and dairy  cattle  populations.  inreciion  is
Foetal  infection
Abortions  due lo hardjo  infection  in cattle  are confirmed  by demonstration  of
and Hanna  t ^’^rien.  Fergusona^ Hanna,  1992). Leptospires  were identified  using the FAT in 13% of 362
Fc  wJ 1990  rn-Rp 1 ^ fetuses  examined  during  the months  of January  and
S^^Tdem m a ri Ph h *"f«^don  has
oeen identilicd  in a much higher  percentage  of foetuses  in Northern  IrelandUptospires  were  demonstrated  in 57% of foetuses  aborted  by dairy cows  and t
39%  of foetuses  aborted  by beef  cows  (Ellis,  O’Brien,  Bryson  Ind Macfa^  1985 )
Ther^son  <or the greaternumberofabortions  in dairy  cows  than in beefaniS
may be management  related. In beef herds, unlike  dairy herds calves  and 
replacement  animals  are usually  not reared separately  from the’ main herd 
ounger  animals  are therefore  exposed  to infecuon  before  breeding  and become  
mmune.  Later  exposure  to leptospires  when the  animals  are pregrint  causes  no 
.nical  signs because  Oicy are prelected  by dieir  prior  immu'liS  TOs
was noted  in terdstudies  carried  out by Ellis and Michna  (1976)  and is the probable  reason  why
(Had,way,T98ir
114
Serological  tests are not of great  value  in the diagnosis  of hardjo  abortions  
because  cows  with infected  foetuses  may have  no titres  to hardjo.  Twenty-three  
per cent of cows that aborted  hardjo-inkcted  foetuses  had no detectable  
antibody  to hardjo in one study (Ellis, O'Brien,  Neill and Hanna,  1982).  
However,  if no foetus  is available,  a blood  sample  from  the dam can help  provide  
evidence  of infection  as the same  authors  found  that 80% of aborting  cows  that 
had a titre of >1 : 1000  also had hardjo-infected  foetuses.
Clinical  signs
Abortion  is the principal  sequel  to hardjo  infection,  particularly  in beef  herds  
where  milk drop syndrome  may pass unnoticed.  Abortion  usually  occurs  from  
the sixth month  of gestation  onwards  though  it may occur  as early  as the third  
month  (Ellis  eta/.,  1985).  Serovar/lard/'o  is also  an important  cause  of stillbirths  
and weak  calves  and has been associated  with infertility.  Hanson,  Tripathy  and 
Killinger  (1972)  observed  a decrease  in repeat  breedings  in cattle following  
vaccination  with a hardjo  bacterin  and increased  returns  to service  have been  
reported  in herds experiencing  outbreaks  of milk drop syndrome  (Ellis  et al., 
1985).
Spread  of infection
The most important  method  of spread  of hardjo  infection  is through  the 
shedding  of organisms  in the urine carrier  animals.  Work  in Moorepark  has 
shown  that some  animals  can shed leptospires  in urine  for up to a year and this 
finding  is in agreement  with  those  of other  authors  (Hellstrom,  1987;  Thiermann,  
1982). There  are conflicting  views  on whether  leptospires  are shed intermit ­
tently  and whether  shedding  is influenced  by season  of the year (Hellstrom,  
1978;  Hathaway  and Little,  1983).  The  results  of trials  carried  out at Moorepark  
indicated  that shedding  is not intermittent,  that animals  shed continuously  for 
variable  lengths  of time  and then stop,  apparently  due to increased  levels  of local 
antibody  in the urine. There  is evidence,  however,  that greater  transmission  of 
hardjo  infection  takes  place  during  the summer  months  (Ellis  et al., 1985)  and 
this may be important  in the control  of leptrospirosis.
Control
Control  of hardjo  infection  in cattle is through  the use of antibiotics  and 
vaccination.  The most  commonly  recommended  antibiotic  for use in leptospire-  
infected animals  is dihydrostreptomycin.  This  drug  greatly  reduces  the number  
of organisms  persisting  in the genital  and urinary  tract  of carrier  animals  though  
it does not eliminate  them  completely  (Ellis,  Montgomery  and Cassells,  1985).  
It may be used in combination  with vaccination  in herds  experiencing  abortion  
storms. Other antibiotics  such as amoxycillin  may be more efficient  than 
dihydrostreptomycin  in the control  of leptospirosis  in animals  because  of cost.
There  are two vaccines  available  for the control  of leptospirosis  in cattle  in 
Ireland. Both contain  killed leptospires  as is usual for leptospiral  vaccines  
worldwide.  Vaccination  of the entire  herd including  bulls and replacement  
heifers  greater  than six months  of age is the best method  of controlling  hardjo  
infection.  Where  endemic  infection  is present  in a herd, protection  of the 
younger  animals  which are at a greater  risk of aborting,  can be achieved  by
115
vaccinating  these  animals  only. All females  and breeding  bulls  between  the ages 
of six months  and two and a h^f  years  must  be vaccinated  at least  annually.  This 
is still an acceptable  method  of control  in beef herds  where  the risk of human  
infection  is less than in dairy  herds.  In dairy  herds,  where  milkers  run a high  risk 
of infection  vaccination  of the entire  herd should  always  be carried  out in order  
to eventually  eliminate  hardjo-'mkction  from the herd and prevent  human  
infection  (Marshall,  1987).
The frequency  of booster  vaccinations  necessary  to ensure  protection  has not 
been definitely  determined.  General  recommendations  are for annual  boosters  
to be given in spring to provide  protection  before  the period  of maximum  
transmission  in summer.  Recent  work  on pentavalent  vaccines  carried  out in the 
U.S. showed  that these  vaccines  did not give  protection  six months  after  the last 
vaccination  (Bolin,  Thiermann,  Handsaker  and Foley, 1989). Though  the 
monovalent  vaccines  available  in this country  probably  provided  better  protec ­
tion, further  trials  are necessary  to evaluate  the longterm  protection  provided  by 
these vaccines.  Boosters  at more frequent  intervals  than every year may be 
needed,  particularly  in problem  herds.
References
AUsup,  T. N. (1989). Analysis  of risk factors  for infection  of cattle herds with Leptospira  
interrogans  serovar  hardjo:  4 case histories.  In Proc.  2nd Mtg. Dutch Soc.  Vet. Epidemiology  
and Economics,  Utrecht,  13th Dec. 1989. Ed. Nielen,  M. and Dobbelaar,  P. p. 19-30.
Anon.  (1990).  Bi-monthly  report from  Regional  Laboratories,  Jan.-Feb.  1990. Irish Vet. J.  43, 88- 
90.
Bolin,  C. A., Ihiermann,  A. B., Handsaker,  A. L. and Foley,  J. W. (1989). Effect  of vaccination 
with a pentavalent  leptospiral  vaccine  on Leptospira  interrogans  serovar  hardjo  type hardjo-  
bovis infection  of pregnant  cattle. Am. J. Vet, Res. 50, No. 1, 161-165.
Egan,  J. and Yearsley,  D. (1987).  Serological  survey  of leptospiral  antibodies  in cattle,  sheep,  pigs 
in the Republic  of Ireland. Irish Vet. J. 41, 213-214.
Ellis, W. A. and Michna,  S. W. (1976). Bovine  leptospirosis:  Infection  by the Ilebdomadis 
Serogroup  and abortion  - a herd study. Vet. Record.  99, 409-412.
Ellis,  W. A., O'Brien,  J. J., Neill, S. D.,Ferguson,H.W.  and Hanna,  J. (1982).  Bovine  leptospirosis;
Microbiological  and serological  findings  in aborted  foetuses.  Vet. Record  110, 147-150.  
Ellis,  W. A , O'Brien,  J. J., Neill,  S. D., Ferguson,H.W.  and Hanna,  J. (1982).  Bovine  leptospirosis:
Serological  findings  in aborting  cows.  Vet. Record  110, 178-180.
Ellis, W. A., O'Brien,  J. J., Bryson,  D. G. and Mackie,  D. P. (1985). Bovine  leptospirosis:  Some 
clinical  features  of serovar  hardjo  infection.  Vet. Record  117, 101-104.
Elhs, W. A., Montgomery,  J. and Cassells,  J. A. (1985).  Dihydrostreptomycin  treatment  of bovine  
carriers  of Leptospira  interrogans  serovar  hardjo. Res. in Vet. Sci. 39, No. 3, 292-295.  
Hanson,  L. E., Tripathy,  D. N., Killinger,  A. H. (1972).  Current  status  of leptospirus  immunization  
in swine  and cattle. JAVMA161,No.  11,1235-1243.
Hathaway,  S. C. (1981).  Ixptospirus  in New  Zealand:  an ecological  view. Vet. Record  110, 1789-  
180.
Hathaway,  S. C. and Little, T. W. A. (1983).  Epidemiological  study  of Leptospira  hardjo  infection  
in second  calf dairy cows. Vet. Record  112, 215-218.
Hellstrom,  J. S. (1978). Studies  on some aspects  of the epidemiology  of bovine  leptospirosis.
Unpub.  Ph D. thesis,  Massey,  University,  Palmerston  North.
Marshall,  R. (1987).  A nationwide  experiment  to control  human leptospirosis  by vaccinating  dairy  
cattle. Israel J. Vet. Med. 43, No. 4, 371-276.
O'Reilly,  P. J. and Egan,  J. (1988). Ixjptospiral  and Salmonella  abortions  and stillbirths  in cattle-a  
survey. Irish Grassland  and Animal  Prod. Assoc.  Journal,  22, 155.
Thiermann,  A. B. (1982).  Experimental  leptospiral  infections  in pregnant  cattle  with organisms  of 
the Ilebdomadis  serogroup.  Am. J. Vet. Res. 43, No. 5, 780-784.
Waitkins,  S. A. (1987). Leptospirosis  - lives ok. BCVA  proceedings  1986-87,  p. 195-201.
116
Copper  and Iodine  Deficiency  in Cattle
P. A. M. ROGERS
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Cattle,  except  those  on high-concentrate  or root  diets,  obtain  90-95%  of their  
feed  dry matter  from  herbage,  fresh  or conserved.  In the absence  of supplements,  
90-95%  of their  mineral  supply  is influenced  directly  by forage  composition  and 
intake.
Deficiencies  of copper  (Cu)  and/or  iodine  (I) are common  in Irish  cattle.  They  
often  occur  in dairy  cattle  (cows,  replacement  heifers  and calves).  Beef  cattle  
(suckler  cows,  calves  and growers)  usually  receive  less mineral  supplements  
than dairy  cattle  and are more  likely  to have  these  deficiencies.  Deficiencies  of 
trace-elements  may arise  singly  or in combination.  For instance,  cattle  on peat-  
land farms  may  have  combined  deficiency  of Selenium  (Se),  Iodine  and Cobalt  
(Co), plus Molybdenum  (Mo) induced  copper  deficiency.  These are the 
important  U-ace  element  deficiencies  in Ireland.
This  paper  outlines  the requirements  of cattle  for trace  elements.  It discusses  
the effects  of Cu and I deficiency  and productivity  and methods  of diagnosis  and 
control
COPPER  DEFICIENCY
Feed copper: Cu is needed  for animal  amine  oxidase  and super-oxide  
dismutase  enzyme  systems.  Cattle  diets need  at least 10 mg Cu/kg  feed DM to 
maintain  normal  Cu status  in the animal.  If Cu antagonists  are present,  dietary  
Cu may need to be 20-35 mg/kg DM to maintain  normal  Cu status. Cu 
antagonists  reduce  the absorption  of Cu and increase  the loss of Cu from the 
body. Soil ingestion,  high dietary  Mo, S, iron (Fe) and lush grass  (high  N, high 
K) are Cu antagonists.  Even  in the absence  of Cu antagonists,  net absorption  of 
dietary  Cu by cattle  at pasture  is a very low (3-5% of Cu intake)  and antagonists  
can reduce  net absorption  to 1-3%  of Cu intake.
Average  Irish herbage  is sub-optimal  in Cu (9 mg//kg  DM)  and is high in Mo 
(5 mg/kg DM),  N (3.1 % DM) and  K (3.1 % D^^. While  mean herbage  sulphur  
(S) is 0.25%  DM, many samples  are high in S (>0.3 % DM). Also,  cattle  at 
pasture  or on soil-contaminated  silage  or roots,  may ingest  up to 5-15%  of their  
feed DM as soil. Thus,  Cu intake  from average  Irish  forage  is sub-optimal  and 
Cu antagonists  (Mo, high intake  of soil/Fe,  S and lush grass)  are present  to a 
moderate  or high degree.
Symptoms:  10-60%  Calf  mortality  (non-specific  abortion,  still-birth,  neo­
natal calf deaths);  infertility  (repeat-breeders  and sub-oestrous);  illthrift  in 
calves,  yearlings  and fattening  cattle;  faded  rough  coats;  straight  and swollen  
fetlocks  in suckler  calves;  scoumg  (especially  in Mo-induced  Cu deficiency);
(1) Sheep  are poisoned  easily  by Cu. Methods  of Cu supplementation  in cattle  should not be used  
in sheep  without  professional  advice.
117
reduced  milk  yield;  low immunity  to infections;  sometimes  illthrift,  emaciation  
and death  in adult  cattle.
Diagnosis  is based  on the history,  clinical  signs  and sometimes,  post-mortem  
findings.  It is confirmed  by blood,  liver  and feed  tests  and  by a dramatic  response  
to Cu supplementation.  Cu absorbed  in excess  of current  requirement  is stored  
in the liver  which  releases  Cu back  into the blood  in periods  of Cu shortage.  At 
blood  Cu in the normal  range,  liver  Cu may  range  from  30-300  ug/g  DM  or more.  
Blood  Cu levels  remain  between  0.71-1.20  ug/ml  until the liver reserves  fall 
below 30 ug/g DM. Then blood Cu levels begin to fall below  0.7 ug/ml.  
Therefore,  a normal  blood  Cu level in cattle  is defined  as 0.71-1.20  ug/ml  of 
whole  blood. Blood  Cu levels  less than 0.40 ug/ml  are defined  as very low.
Blood  Cu: From the late-1960s  to date, samples  from many  thousands  of 
cattle  herds  in Ireland  have  been  tested  for blood  Cu. In the early 1980s,  40-80%  
of herds  showed  mean  blood  Cu at 0.7 ug/ml  or less. Today,  the incidence  of low 
blood  Cu is less, as many feed compounders  and mineral  mix suppliers  have  
increased  the Cu level in their products.  However,  in the absence  of Cu 
supplements  at pasture,  it can be expected  that 40-80%  of herds will have  
subnormal  blood  Cu in autumn.  The incidence  in spring  is lower,  especially  in 
dairy cows,  normal  Cu status  is partially  or fully restored  by adeqate  mineral  
supplementation  (in ration  or mineral  mixes)  in winter.
Control  and prevention  of Cu deficiency:  An oral supplement  of 150-450 
mg Cu/day  (equivalent  to 10-30  mg/kg  total feed  DM) should  ensure  normal  Cu 
status  in adult  cows. The lower  amounts  suffice  in marginal  Cu deficiency  but 
the higher  amounts  may  be needed  on high-challenge  farms,  i.e. those  with  very 
high levels  of Mo in herbage/silage.  For example,  100 g/cow/day  of a mineral  
mix containing  3000  mg Cu/kg  would  supply  300 mg Cu/cow/day.  Doses  for 
other  stock  are as in Table  1. Alternatively,  trough  water  could  be medicated  with 
chelated  Cu (guaranteed  to stay in solution)  to provide  150-450  mg Cu/cow/day.  
Doses  for other  stock  are shown  in Table  1.
Veterinary  Cu supplements:  Include  injections,  boluses  and bullets  con­
taining  Cu compounds.  Because  Mo challenge  is high in Ireland,  the annual  Cu 
dose  needed  to control  diagnosed  Cu deficiency  is greater  than is the case in the 
U.K.
(a) Cu injections:  there  are many  Cu compounds  for injection.  Intramuscu ­
lar injections  arc not recommended  as they may damage  meat. Cu injections  
should  not be given within  4-6 weeks  before  mating,  as the pain  or swellings  may 
reduce  conception  rates. (Cu bullets,  boluses  or oral Cu supplements  are 
preferable  during  the mating  period).
Cu-EDTA(sub-culancous)  is very  effective.  The  dose  for cattle  is KXlmgCu  
repeated  as required.  In Irish  cattle,  one infection  lasts  6-12  weeks  depending  on 
the challenge  to Cu status. On high-Mo  farms  young-stock  and yearlings  may 
need 34 injections  per year. In marginal  deficiency,  2 injections/year  may 
suffice.  The number  of injections  per cow depends  on the clinical  problems  in 
the cows. If abortions,  stillbirths  and infertility  are due to Cu deficiency,  at least  
three infections  are needed:  one in mid pregnancy,  one about  5 wee^  before
118
calving  and one very soon after  calving.
(b) Cu boluses:  These  gelatin  capsules,  containing  Cu oxide  particles,  are 
given  orally  with a special  bulleting  gun. Optimum  doses  for Irish cattle in 
moderately  to severely  deficient  herds  are 10-15  g Cu oxide/100  kg liveweight  
annually.  Longer  protection  can be achieved  by 2-3 doses  per year  at 5 g/100  kg 
liveweight  each time than from the whole  dose  given  at one time.
(c) Cu bullets:  Glass  bullets  which  supply  Cu are available  (COSECURE;  
ALLTRACE).  The bullets'^ ’ are given  orally  by a special  bulleting  gun. The 
special glass  matrix  is slowly  soluble  in the retieulo-rumen  and releases  its sup­
plement  over a period  of about  6-10 months.  COSECURE  (2 bullets  to calves  
to 108 kg at the start  of the trial) gave  satisfactory  Cu levels  in cattle  on an Irish  
high-Mo  farm  for at least  6 months.  The  daily  release  of Cu from  2 ALLTRACE  
bullets  (160 mg Cu/day  compared  with 149 mg Cu/day  from 2 COSECURE  
bullets)  should  also be adequate  for calves  in severely  Cu deficient  herds  and for 
stores in marginally  deficient  herds. Cows or adult cattle in severely  Cu- 
deficient  herds may need  4-5 COSECURE  or4-5 ALLTRACE  bullets  per year.
IODINE  DEFICIENCY
Feed iodine:  I is needed  for synthesis  of thyroid  hormones.  Goitrogens  (I- 
antagonists)  reduce  the uptake  of I by the thyroid  and synthesis  of thyroid  
hormones  is disturbed.  Cattle  diets  need  at least  0.4-0.8  mg I/kg  DM to maintain  
normal  I status  in the animal  but if goitrogens  are present,  dietary  I may  need  to 
be 2-4  mg/kg  DM to maintain  normal  I status. Average  Irish herbage  is low in 
I (<0.2 mg/kg  DM) and goitrogenic  feeds (rape, kale, linseed,  turnips,  beet 
products,  etc.) are often used.
Symptoms:  10-60%  Calf  mortality  (non-specific  abortion,  still-birth,  neo­
natal calf  deaths);  thyroid  enlargement  (also  in Se deficiency)  in calves;  greater  
than 10%  retained  placenta;  infertility  (especially  sub-oestrus);  lower  milk  yield,  
illthrift  in calves  and yearlings;  lowered  herd immunity  to infections.
Diagnosis  is based  on the history,  clinical  signs  and post-mortem  findings.  It 
is confirmed  by blood,  milk and feed tests and by a dramatic  response  to I 
supplementation.
During  the period 1978-1988,  many different  tests in cattle blood were  
attempted:  Total I, plasma-bound  I (PBI)  and thyroid  hormones  (T3,  T4). These  
tests were  abandoned  because  they were too difficult  to interpret.  Now  the tests 
are for Milk I (MI) or Plasma  Inorganic  I (PII).
Mineral  mixes  high in I can control  or mask  I deficiency.  Most  calved  cows  
on commercial  rations  or high I mineral  mixes  receive  some  supplementary  I. 
For example,  calved  cows  on commercial  mineral  mixes  may get 12-90  mg 1/ 
cow/day  from the mix. The I status  of pregnant  cows,  which  often receive  no 
mineral  supplement,  may  differ  from  that of calved  cows. Therefore,  PII values  
in calved  dairy cows  on winter  rations  usually  are higher  than in pregnant  dry 
cows  or cattle  on maintenance  rations.  PII values  in calved  cows  may be higher
(2) COSECURE:  Cooper  Pilman-Moore,  contains  13.4%  Cu by weight,  average  weight  100 g/
bullet. ALLTRACE:  Agrimin,  contains  22.6%  Cu w/w, average  weight  85 g/buUet.
119
than in supplemcmted  dry cows. Therefore,  in investigating  problems  of late 
abortion/stillbirth/neonatal  mortality/retained  placenta,  samples  from dry cows  
are required.  In investigating  infertility  or illthrift,  samples  should  be taken from 
^e at risk ' group  during  the problem  period.  Delay  in sampling  may cause  an 
increase  or decrease  in I level,  depending  on I intakes  in the days  before  sampling.  
PII levels  vary between  samples  from the same  group  of animals.  Thus,  it is 
preferable  to test 10 plasmas  for a good  assessment  of herd I status.
Milk I (MI): Milk  samples  from the bulk tank are used. This is a good  test 
if the farmer  can guarantee  that no I containing  teat dips or disinfectants  have  
contaminated  the milk. (It is safer  to remove  I disinfectants  from the dairy  for 
3-4 days before  bulk milk is sampled  for the MI test).
Normal  values  are greater  than 50-500  ng/ml.  Values  less than 20 ng/ml  are 
classed  as very  low. However,  normal  NI values  in supplemented  cows  (such  as 
those  on balanced  rations)  may not reflect  a much lower  I status  in unsupnle-  
mented  dry cows  or other  stock.
Plasma  Inorganic  I: PII is very reliable  and repeatable.  However,  it is a 
slow,  tedious  test, requiring  2 full days  of skilled  technician  time to complete  4- 
5 herd tests (40-50  blood  tests). Normal  values  are 100-300  ng/ml. Values  less 
than  20 ng/ml  are classed  as very  low.  PII is very  sensitive  to recent  I intake.  After  
oral supplementation  PII levels  rise within  24 hours. After  removal  of supple ­
ment,  levels  fall to less than 25% of peak value  within  3 days and fall back to 
control  levels  inside  15 days.
In the past 2 years, PII in cattle from many counties  has been analysed  
including  Carlow,  Cavan,  Clare,  Kerry,  Kilkenny,  Meath,  Sligo, Tipperary,  
Waterford,  Wexford,  Wicklow.  In the absence  of I supplements,  33-70%  of 
cattle  herds  had low to very low PII.
Control  and prevention  of I deficiency:  Anoralsupplementof8-12mg/day  
(equivalent  to 0.53-0.80  mg 1/kg total  feed DM)  should  ensure  normal  I status in 
adult cows in the absence  of goitrogens.  For cows on goitrogenic  feeds, I 
supplements  may need to be increased  to 30-60  mg I/day  (equivalent  to 2-4 mg 
I/kg total  feed DM).  For example,  100 g/cow/day  of a mineral  mix with 500  mg 
lAg would supply  50 mg I/cow/day.  Alternatively,  trough  water could be 
medicated  with  0.5-1.0  ml of 5% tincture  of iodine/cow/day  (7 ml/cow/week)  or 
with chelated  1 (guaranteed  to stay in solution).  This would  provide  25-50  mg 
I/cow/day.  Doses  for other  stock  are shown  in Table  1.
Oral supplements  as stated  above  or 4-7 ml of 5% tincture  of I painted  or 
sprayed  onto the thin skin of the pocket  of the flank fold once per week  for 5 
weeks  before  calving  or breeding  in cows,  are the preferred  options.
Veterinary  I supplements  include  I bullets  and I injections.  These  are not 
recommended  for cows  for the following  reasons:
I bullets:  Special  glass  bullets  are available  commercially'^ ’. The bullets  are 
given  orally  by a special  bulleting  gun. The special  matrix  is slowly  soluble  in
(3) ALLTRACE:  Agrimin,  contains  0.3%  I by weight,  average  weight  85 g/bullet.  The latter
also contains  16.7%  Zn, 10.4%  Mn and vitamins  A, D3 and E.
120
the reticulo-rumen  and releases  its supplement  over a period  of about  6-10  
months.  The daily  release  (2.2 mg I/day)  from  2 ALLTRACE  bullets  would  not 
be adequate  for stores  or adult  cattle  under  Irish  conditions.  To provide  25 mg 
I/cow/day,  about  22 ALLTRACE  bullets  would  be needed.  Addition  of 0.5 ml 
of 5% tincture  of iodine/cow/day  to the trough  water  would  supply  25 mg I/cow/  
day.
I injections:  The injection  of oil-based  I compounds  in ewes in early  
pregnancy  has reduced  the incidence  of goitrous  lambs  in some  trials abroad.  
The product  is slow-acting  and there  is little  published  evidence  that it prevents  
neonatal  problems  in cows.
OPTIMUM  SUPPLEMENTATION  LEVELS  OF 
TRACE-ELEMENTS
Levels  of mineral  supplements  advised  by different  National  Advisory  
Groups  (such as ADAS,  Scottish  Agricultural  Colleges,  DANI,  NRC (USA),  
etc.) vary considerably.  These  have been adapted  to Irish conditions.
Because  of the higher  requirements  of Irish cattle  for Cu and Se suggested  
levels  of these  are higher  than  "international  standards".  The rates  given  below  
are guidelines  for Irish  conditions.  The  higher  levels  are advised  in groups  at risk 
of severe  deficiency.  The lower  levels  are for routine  use if supplements  are 
thought  to be needed,  with the following  exceptions:
* lonophores  (monensin,  etc.) increase  the retention  rate of Cu and Se by 
ruminants.  If ionophores  are fed, avoid the higher levels of Cu and Se 
supplements  unless  blood  test suggests  that higher  levels  are needed.  Within  5 
miles  of known  Se toxic farms,  the Se supplement  should  be reduced  to about  
50% of the lower  level unless  blood  test confirms  Se deficiency  in the group.
**ZN  supplement  of up to maximum  is advised  if high Ca diets are fed.
Table 1
Suggc.sted  optimum  supplementation  levels  of trace elements  for stock
Type  of animal(mg suppUed/head/day)
CU* Se* I Co Mn Zn** Fe
Dry cows 150-450 3.6-7.2 12-60 5-10 335-415 335-750 0-300
Suckler  cows 150-450 3,6-7.2 12-60 5-10 335-415 335-750 0-300
Cows  in milk 650 kg150-450 3.6-7.2 12-60 5-10 335-415 335-750 0-300
Cattle  550 kg 150-400 3.6-7.2 6-60 5-10 225-415 335-750 0-300
Cattle  400 kg 109-291 2.6-5.2 4-44 4-  7 240-300 240-545 0-220
Cattle  250 kg 68-182 1.6-3.3 2-28 2- 4 150-188 150-341 0-138
In the absence  of other mineral  sources,  such as in compound  ration  or as 
veterinary  medication,  supplements  for long-term  routine  use which  provide  less 
than the minimum  amounts  of trace-elements  in the daily intake  are inferior.
121
SUMMARY  OF CONTROL  OF Cu AND  I DEHCffiNCY  IN CATTLE
Increase  amount  in total dietCu I
DM by the following  amount 10-30  ppm 1-4 ppm Dm
Water  medication  (*) + +
Cu oxide  Bolus + -
Cosecure/Alltrace  bullets + -
Injection CuEDTA -(?)
Skin application  (flank-fold  pocket) - +
Soil fertiliser - -
(*) Chelated  minerals  in solution
The main  methods  of supplementation  are : (1) veterinary  products;  (2) oral 
supplements.
(1) Veterinary  products:  If the correct  doses  are used, most veterinary  
products  give fast control  of existing  clinical  or subclinical  problems.  They  are 
reliable  supplements  for animals  fed no concentrates  at grass. Cu injections  or 
CuO boluses  can be economically  cost-effective  if only one deficiency  exists  
(say Cu only)  but the cost of using  combinations  of veterinary  products  would  
be expensive  for routine  prevention  of multiple  trace  element  deficiency.  Once  
the problem  is stabilised,  dietary  supplements  (in the feed, water  or mineral  
mixes)  can be used especially  in winter  or in animals  fed some  concentrates  at 
grass.
As a means  of treating  an existing  clinical  or sub-clinical  I deficiency,  oil- 
based  I injections  are controversial . They  can be slow  to act. I-glass  bullets  could  
be effective  orally if they could release  25-60 mg I/day in cows but 22-54  
ALLTRACE  bullets  would  be needed  to supply  that amount/cow/day.  Oral I 
compounds  are the most practical  and effective  means  of treatment  and long­
term prevention  of I deficiency.
(2) Oral supplements:  Inclusion  of adequate  amounts  of minerals  in the 
ration  or sprinkled  on the feed is the cheapest  method  but this may  not suit some  
clients.  Free  access  to (but fixed-rate  nrovi.sion  of) well  balanced  mineral  mixes  
is the next cheapest  method. Oral minerals  can be supplied  in the diet (in 
concentrates,  in carriers,  in the silage),  in the water (if formulations  can be 
designed  to remain  in soluble  form),  or in mixes,  blocks  or licks. Supplementa ­
tion of concentrates  is the best method  but farmers  may not want to feed 
concentrates  and it presents  problems  for compounders.  It is impossible  to 
formulate  one ration  which  will meet  different  feeding  levels.
To cater  for varvina  feeding  rates,  compounders  would  need to stock  at least
two rations  for cows: one ration  with twice  the mineral  and vitamin  levels  of the 
other.  For example,dairy  RationAcouldcontain75ppmCuandl3ppm  I. Dairy  
Ration  B could  contain  half  of those  levels  (37.5  ppm  Cu and  6.5 ppm  I). Farmers  
feeding  3-5 ka/cow/dav  could  opt for Ration  A. supplying  225-375  mg Cu and 
39-65  mg 1/cow/day.  Farmers  feeding  7-9 kg/cow/dav  could  opt for Ration  B.
122
supplying  263-338  mg Cu and 45-59  mg I/cow/day.  Notice  that at the middle  
feeding  level of each ration  (4 kg of Ration  A; 8 kg of Ration  B), the Cu and I 
supplies/cow/day  are identical,  300 mg Cu and 52 mg I/cow/day  respectively.
Farmers  feeding  a 6 kg ration  could  buy a  50:50  mix  of Ration  A and B. This 
50:50  mix would  contain  56.3  ppm  Cu and  9.75  ppm  I and  6 kg would  supply  338 
mg of Cu and 59 mg I/cow/day.
The "double  strength  principle"  can be applied  to all mineral-vitamin  supple ­
mentation  rates,  i.e. one ration  (to be fed at 3-5 kg/day)  could  contain  twice  the 
mineral-vitamin  levels  of the other  ration  (to be fed at 7-9 kg/day)  and farmers  
feeding  6 kg could  feed  50/50  of each. In this way,  the actual  amounts  of mineral-  
vitam  in fed per head  per day can be brought  much  closer  to the desired  amounts.  
Double  strength  rations  should  be clearly  marked:  "High in minerals  and 
vitamins.  Feed  only to ... (specific  animal  type). Feed  only at... to ... kg/head/  
day (the recommended  feeding  rate)".
FREE  CHOICE  (ad libitum)  INTAKE  OF MINERAL-VITAMIN  
SUPPLEMENTS
Self-service  from  a range  of mineral mixes  or ad-libitum  intake  of one mix or 
block is undesirable.  Free choice  intake is in the interest  of suppliers  and 
manufacturers  rather  than of farmers.  It greatly  increases  intake  and intake  by 
some  animals  can be too high.
A high mean intake  figure  can mask wide cow-to  cow variation  in intake.  
Mean  intake  of a molassed  high-Cu  (2(X)0  ppm)  block  may be 150 g, supplying  
a mean  of300  mg Cu/cow/day.  This  looks  ideal  for  control  of copper  deficiency.  
However,  individual  cow-to-cow  intakes  may vary from 0-4(X)  g/cow/day,  with 
no plateau  or clumping  around  150g.  Even  allowing  cut-offpoints  for maximum  
variation  of 20-380  g, cow-to-cow  variation  in intake  can be up to 19-fold.  As 
the ratios  of all components  in a given  block  are fixed,  a 19-fold  variation  in block  
intake  means  a 19-fold  variation  in intake  of each mineral  and vitamin  compo ­
nent. For instance,  in cows  eating  20-380  g of block/day , the range  of Cu intakes  
by individual  cows  would  be 40-760  mg/cow/day.  Those  getting  less than 150 
mg Cu/day  would  be under-supplied  with Cu (not fully protected)  and those  
getting  > 450 mg Cu/day  would  be over-supplied  with Cu (at risk of chronic  Cu 
poisoning  after some  months).
Unless  cow-to-cow  variation  in intake  can be held in a 2-4 fold range,  free 
choice  intake of licks, blocks,  mixes  or other  oral sources  is against  the farmer's  
best interest  on the basis  of cost and on the basis  of precision  of control  on min/  
vit intake.
The role of mineral  blocks:  The main role of blocks  is to act as carriers  of 
minerals,  etc. to cattle  at pasture . Unrestricted  access  to blocks  can lead to very  
high intakes  in spite of very wide  cow-to-cow  variation  in intake. The use of 
blocks  is not the best way to supplement  housed/yarded  animals.  More  even  
intake of minerals  can be ensured  by incorporating  mineral  mixtures  into 
concentrates,  sprinkling  a half day's  allowance  twice  daily  on easy-feed  silage,  
or using a small amount  of palatable  carrier. The fixed rate int^e  system  of 
mineral  mixes  is cheaper  than  blocks  and can give more  precision  in the control  
of intake  of supplement.
123
FIXED  RATE  INTAKE  OF MINERAL  SUPPLEMENTS
In this system,  the supplement  is prepared  so that the desired  amount  of each  
individual  is present  in a pre-determined  amount  of mix. The  correct  amount  of 
mix is fed to individual  animals  (or on a group  basis to the herd)  each day.
Carriers  for mineral/vitamin  supplements:  If concentrate  rations  are not 
fed to ruminants  at grass,  min/vit  supplements  may be fed in small  amounts  of 
a palatable  carrier,  for example,  molassed  rolled  or crushed  barley,  grassmeal,  
b^5)ulp  or pollard.  Cows,  adult  cattle  and yearlings  could  be fed 458 g/head/  
day of medicated  carrier.  Weanling  cattle  could  be fed 229 g, ewes  and yearling  
sheep  140 g and weaned  lambs  70 g.
I wish  to acknowledge  the valuable  help  and  guidance  from  Dr. D. B. R. Poole  
and the help of the technical  staff  at Grange,  Dunsinea  and Johnstown  Castle.
TIMOTHY  J. HERBERT
AGRICULTURAL  CONSULTANT  
ACCOUNTS  & TAXATION
We specialise  in a personal  service,  dealing  as painlessly  as 
possible  with your  SOLE  TRADER  FARM  ACCOUNTS  and TAX 
AFFAIRS,  showing  you how each  crop  and livestock  enterprise  is 
doing  compared  with the previous  year and with other  farmers.  
With  this insight , we help  you to make  decisions  affecting  farm  and 
farm business  in these  times  of falling  product  prices.
We also have expertise  in the disposal  on agricultural  land of 
suitable  industrial/biochemical  wastes  and are available  to assist  
in development  projects  in Africa  and Eastern  Europe  (including  
the former  S.U.) with appropriate  language  capabilities.
THE MILLS,  MAIN  STREET,  CARRIGALINE,  CO. CORK  
Tel. (021) 371951
124
Understanding  Probiotics
R. J. FALLON
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
The importance  of maintaining  and regulating  the balance  of intestinal  micro ­
organisms  in young  calves  has been recognised  for many years. There  are 
approximately  1000  million  bacteria  per gram  of intestinal  contents  in a healthy  
calf. Research  has shown  that nutritional  or environmental  stresses  can create  
an imbalance  in the population  of micro-organisms  present  in the intestine  
allowing  pathogenic  bacteria  such as coliforms  to multiply  and overwhelm  
beneficial  bacteria  such as lactobacilli.  When  this occurs  disease  and/or  poor  
jjerformance  may result.  Over  the past  number  of decades  the common  practice  
has been to minimise  the causes  of stress  and at the same time use antibiotic  
preparations  to suppress  non-desirable  micro-organisms.  In recent  years  con­
cern over antibiotic  residues  in milk and meat and bacterial  resistance  to 
antibiotics  has led to interest  in using probiotics  to maintain  or regulate  the 
balance  of intestinal  micro-organisms.
The probiotic  concept
The  term  probiotic  was first  used  in 1974  and is derived  from  two  Greek  words  
meaning  "for life". Probiotics  encourage  beneficial  bacteria  to grow and 
multiply.  In conffast  the aim of antibiotics  are to kill the pathogenic  bacteria.  It 
has b^n proposed  that probiotics  will increase  the population  of "desirable"  
micro-organism  in the gut. Most probiotic  preparations  are based  on viable  
micro-organism  of Lactobacillus  and/or  Streptococcus  faecium.  Both of these  
are referred  to as the lactic  acid producing  bacteria.  Probiotic  preparation  may 
also be based  on spore  forming  Bacillus  subtilus.
Finding  a successful  probiotic
The EC is currently  preparing  regulations  conu-olling  the use of probiotics  in 
calf  and  other  young  animals.  It is expected  that  only  probiotics  showing  positive  
effects  on animal  performance  will be allowed.  For  a probiotic  to exert  a positive  
response  it must successfully  grow and colonise  the intestine.  A successful  
probiotic  must  have  the bacteria  with  the ability  to adhere  to cells  which  form  the 
lining  of the stomach  and small intestine  thereby  preventing  coliforms  inhabi-  
tating  the same  site. The probiotics  must have the ability  to secrete  adequate  
quantities  of lactic  acid. For successful  colonisation  of the intestine  the micro ­
organism  present  in the probiotic  must  have  the ability  to tolerate  low pH in the 
stomach  and high contractions  of bile in the upper  small  intestine  and multiply  
rapidly  in the intestinal  environment.  It is essential  that the probiotic  contains  
sufficient  numbers  (approximately  10 billion  per gram of product)  of viable  
bacteria  capable  of consistently  demonstrating  a positive  response  when  given  
to young  calves.
Following  colostrum  feeding  in the new bom  calf  a successful  probiotic  given  
orally  should  be capable  of populating  the calf  stomach  and intestinal  tract  with
125
the beneficial  lactic acid producing  bacteria  such that the coliform  bacteria  
capacity  to grow is retarded.
Probiotics  and calf performance
Currently  there  is a wealth  of commecial  literature  which  claims  that feeding  
probiotics  to calves  and  other  young  mammals  will  overcome  digestive  disorders  
due to stress  and improve  fe^ efficiency  or growth  rate. In contrast  scientific  
trials  using  probiotic  organisms  have  often  failed  to demonstrate  their  beneficial  
effects  by controlling  diarrhoea  or by enhancing  growth. Studies  at Grange  
Research  Centre  have  evaluated  probiotic  use in skim  based  milk  replacers  over  
the past number  of years,  the results  of which  are summarised  in Table  1.
Table 1
Effect  of the inclusion  of probiotics  based  on lactic  acid producing  bacteria  in calf milk  
replacer  on growth  rate (kg/day)
Product  YearFeeding
MethodNo. of 
Calves Control Probiotic% Response  
to Probiotic
A 1984 Ad Ub 36 0.71 0.67 -5.6
A 1984 Bucket 20 0.62 0.65 + 4.1
B 1985 Bucket 30 0.53 0.56 + 5.1
C 1988 bucket 40 0.71 0.72 + 1.4
D 1988 Bucket 60 0.55 0.59 + 7.3
E 1989 Bucket 20 0.49 0.54 + 10.2
It is evident  from the above  results  that the responses  obtained  from the 
inclusion  of probiotic  preparation  based  on lactic  acid bacteria  in milk  replacer  
diets offered  to calves  have been inconsistent  and failed  to live up to expecta ­
tions.
Why probiotics  may not show  benefits
There  are several  reasons  why probiotics  may not show  clear  benefits.
1. Some  contain  inadequate  numbers  of viable  bacteria  or non-ideal  strains  
of bacteria.  A survey  in the United  States  in the early  80's found  that only 2 
of the 15 commercially  available  probiotic  preparations  examined  had the 
expected  numbers  of viable  bacteria  per gram. More  recently  a report  stated  
that "some  probiotics  are supposed  to be full of organisms  but in reality  
contain  none, many examined  were virtually  sterile,  others have micro ­
organisms  in them but are of the wrong  type".
2. Inability  to survive  in the stomach  and small  intestine.  The presence  of 
viable  micro-organisms  in a probiotic  is not in itself  an indicator  of probiotic  
effectiveness  The viable  bacteria  may be killed  by acid conditions  in the 
stomach  or by bile excreted  in the smil  intestine.
3. Failure  to competitively  exclude  harmful  bacteria.  In order  to exert this 
effect  it is necessary  that the micro-organisms  present  in a probiotic  prepara-
126
tion can adhere  to the intestine  thereby  preventing  coliforms  from  adhering  
at the same  site. Acidification  of the milk  diet  offered  to calves  will normally  
p)Otentiate  the activity  of lactic acid bacteria  as it creates  conditions  more  
favourable  for their growth.  Coliforms  do not grow  favourably  at a low pH.  
Alternatively  the probiotic  micro-organisms  could achieve  competitive  
exclusions  if they have  the ability  to multiply  rapidly  in the intestine.
4. Resjxtnses  to probiotics  are not expected  in animals  which  already  have  a 
correct  microbial  balance  between  the lactobacilli  and coliforms  in the 
intestine  tract. In the upper  regions  of the small  intestine  of a healthy  calf  the 
proportion  of lactobacills  to coliforms  is in the order of 1000 to 1. The 
corresponding  values  for a calf suffering  from diarrhoea  is less than 10 to 1.
127
CBF  Beef  Quality  Assurance  Scheme  - 
A Marketing  Opportunity
J. B. KEANE  
CBF,  Dublin.
The immediate  problems  facing  the beef  industry  can be summarised  under  
the following  main headings-  Production,  Consumption,  Stocks,  and Policy.  In 
addition  to discussing  these problems,  I wish to comment  on the changing  
consumer  values  in Europe  and the implications  of this for the beef export  
industry,  and to discuss  the CBF Beef  Quality  Assurance  Scheme  which  was 
launched  earlier  this year.
Production
Beef  production  in Europe  is high  and is likely  to remain  so for  several  years  
to come. This is due to a combination  of factors  including  imports  from Eastern  
Europe,  heavier  finishing  weights,  a progressive  switch  from veal and beef 
production  and of course  dairy  quotas. The EC is now 107%  self sufficient  in 
beef. This can be best illustrated  if we take  Germany  which  20 years  ago had a 
deficit  of 10% and now has a surplus  of 15%. It is clear  that trying  to sell beef 
commercially  in these  conditions  is not easy.
Consumption
Demand  for beef  in Europe  is static  or declining.  Beef  is being  challenged  by 
white meats,  fish and other protein  sources. This is due in part to changing  
consumer  lifestyles  and well hyped  health  issues  but more  recently  it is due to 
genuine  consumer  concerns  about  the safety  of what  they eat.
Stocks
There are huge stocks of beef overhanging  the EC market. Stocks  are 
currently  around  800,000  tonnes  and are likely  to reach  1 million  tonnes  by the 
end of the year. Clearly  an industry  with 1 million  tonnes  in stock  for which  there  
is no ready  market  cannot  be in a healthy  state.
Policy
One of the main effects  of the proposed  CAP reforms  in the beef sector  is 
likely  to be reduced  Intervention  support  on which  the Irish beef industry  has 
been  so dependent.  It is becoming  clear  that the era of large  scale  selling  of beef 
into  Intervention  is over  and that  the future  viability  of the Irish  beef  industry  will 
increasingly  depend  on its ability  to sell more  beef  in Europe.  We are not saying  
that we are going  to be able to sell all our beef in Europe.  There  will continue  
to be a role for Intervention  and Third  Country  trade  for some  time  to come. But 
we must  make  an effort  to sell more  in Europe.  In this regard  CBF  recently  set 
a target  that  the Irish  beef  industry  should  aim to sell at least  60%  of its production  
in Europe  and reduce  dependence  on Intervention  and Third  Countries  to 40%
128
by 1995. The achievement  of this target  against  the background  I have just 
described  will not be easy. It will be especially  difficult  to attain,  given  that  only 
20% of steer  production  is sold in Europe.
Regarding  consumer  values,  there is ample  evidence  that the consumer  in 
Europe  is changing.  The market  environment  in which  we are now operating  is 
radically  different  from that of even  a few years  ago. Price,  although  important,  
is not necessarily  at the top of the list of consumer  priorities.  What  matters  more  
today  are the naturalness  of the product,  its eating  quality,  safety  and the method  
of rearing  and treatment  of the animals.  Supermarkets  are leading  the way in this, 
and not  just  abroad  but in Ireland  as well. They  want  to reassure  their  customers  
about  the wholesomeness  of the product  and  about  how  or where  it was  produced.
The importance  of this aspect  was emphasised  to me in Germany  by an 
advertisement  on TV for Herta  which  is the biggest  sausage  and processed  meat  
manufacturer  in Europe.  The AD might  well  have  been  set in the West  of Ireland  
- indeed  it probably  was set in the West  of Ireland.  The AD said a lot more  about  
the quality  of the production  environment  than it did about  the sausage.  This is 
what  could  be cal led Quality  by association.  These  are the kind  of developments  
that are taking  place  in Europe  and if we want to sell more  beef  there  we must  
take them into account.
The CBF  Beef  Quality  Scheme  is our strategic  response  to the issues  I have  
raised. The main purpose  of the scheme  is to give Irish beef exporters  a 
marketing  edge  in Europe.  We hope  to do this  by offering  a product  that  has come  
through a  quality  assurance  proc^ure  and by promoting  it vigorously  using the  
positive  imagery  which  Ireland  and Irish beef  still enjoys  abroad.  The scheme  
is based  on the belief  that the clean green image  of Ireland  can be a powerful  
selling  point  provided  we put in place  quality  systems  to demonstrate  that  we live 
up to and honour  the image  that we portray.  I want  to highlight  some  of the main  
areas  of the scheme  particularly  those  that are of direct  concern  to farmers.
THE  SCHEME
Membership
Membership  of the scheme  is voluntary  and is open to all beef processing  
companies  operating  E.C. approved  plants  and their  overseas  customers.  Proc ­
essing  plants must  pass a pre-admission  inspection  in order  to be eligible  for the 
scheme.
Product
Eligibility  for the scheme  is confined  to steers  and heifers  only within  the 
classification  range  EURO/234L.  Animals  must  be less than 30 months  old, free 
from disease  and sourced  in the Republic  of Ireland.
Who  can supply?
Any farmer  can supply  cattle to the scheme  provided  he/she signs the 
Producer  Register  in any participating  meat plant and observes  a Code of 
Practice  that  has been  specially  drawn  up for the scheme  (see  over).  It is designed  
so as to reassure  the customer  as to the origin  and integrity  of the product.
129
I would  like to refer  in particular  to two aspects  of the producer  register  form ,
i.e. Code  of Practice  and Testing  in Meat  Plants.
- Code  of Practice
Farmers  who sign the supplier  register  form in their meat plant should  
normally  receive  a copy of the Code  of Practice.  If this is not done  they  will 
get a copy  at a later  stage  from Teagasc.  Every farmer  who signs  the register  
will in due course  have hisAier  farm  inspected  by the local  Teagasc  advisor.  
The  advisor  will follow  a standard  procedure/questionnaire  covering  the main  
aspects  of the Code of Practice  i.e. stockmanship,  pasture  management,  
housing,  water  and diet,  animal  welfare,  lighting,  veterinary  care,  farm  safety  
and records.  The Code  of Practice  is not difficult  and is no more  than what  
any good  farmer  should  be doing. If a farmer  fails  an inspection  he/she  may 
be re-inspected  a second  time.
- Testing  in Meat  Plants
When a  farmer  signs  the supplier  register  form  he/she  is undertaking  not only 
to observe  the Code  of Practice  but is also acknowledging  that  he/she  may be 
subject  to increased  levels  of residue  testing  in meat  plants.  The testing  that 
is earned  out as part of the CBF Scheme  is in addition  to that being  done  
routinely  by the Department  of Agriculture.  If a sample  fails  a residue  test the 
supplier  in question  is removed  from  the producer  register.  The Department  
of Agriculture  will be informed  and appropriate  action  will  be taken. Analy ­
ses of animal  tissue  are being  carried  out on behalf  of CBF  by the National  
Food  Centre.
Both the farm inspections  and the residue  testing  are vital to the credibility  of 
the scheme  as we want  to be able  to reassure  the customer  that the product  we 
are promoting  has come  from a producer  who has opened  his/her  farm and 
livestock  to independent  inspection  and testing.
These  are the main  aspects  of the scheme  that  concern  the farmer.  I would  like 
to refer  briefly  to what  happens  in the meat  factory  and beyond.
- Meat  Plant
In the meat  plant  carcases  from registered  suppliers  are specially  identified.  
The factory  must follow  strict  procedures  especially  in regard  to handling,  
chilling,  boning,  packing,  and labelling.  In particular  carcases  for the scheme  
must  be chilled  slowly  to avoid  cold shortening  and so ensure  that the meat  
is tender . In the boning  hall (whether  in Ireland  or with  a customer  abroad)  
carcase  numbers  are code  recorded  and special  code  numbers  are assigned  to 
each  batch. These  code  numbers  are recorded  on the boneless  cuts by means  
of a special  label that goes inside  the vacuum  packed  bag.
In this way boneless  cuts can be related  to the carcass  from  which  they were  
derived  and in turn right back to the farm. This aspect  of traceability  of the 
product  is an essential  element  of the scheme  as retailers  are beginning  to 
demand  that the product  can be traced  back to its source  if necessary.  The 
product  must be stored  and transported  subject  to rules laid down in the 
scheme.
130
- Retailer
Retailers  who  are part  of the scheme  must,  like factories  and farmers  undergo  
inspections  to make sure their outlets  reach a certain  standard.  They are 
required  to dedicate  a special  section  of the meat  counter  to Quality  assured  
Irish  product.  They  must  identify  the product  at the point  of sale  with  our new 
Quality  Irish logo which  has been  registered  in all target  markets.
- Promotion
Quality  assured  beef from Ireland  will be vigorously  promoted  (is already  
being  promoted  in those  chains  that  are members  of the scheme)  highlighting  
the standards  the product  has achieved.  A comprehensive  promotional  
package  has been  assembled  to create  an awareness  of Quality  Irish  beef  and 
hopefully  boost  sales.
The main elements  of this promotional  package  include
- In-store  sampling  and consumer  competitions;
- Intensive  public  relations  compaign  to promote  Quality  Irish Beef  amongst  
key trade  publications,  food writers,  and other  relevant  correspondents;
- Butcher  training  on better  and more  attractive  meat  presentation  and  specially  
designed  high quality  P.O.S.
- Monitoring  and Control
The Beef  Quality  Assurance  Scheme  is administered  by the Quality  Assur ­
ance Division  within  CBF. All the critical  control  points  are policed  by the 
CBF  Inspectorate.  If a meat  plant  or a retailer  breach  any of the rules  they  may 
forfeit  membership  of the Scheme  and the use of the Quality  Mark  will be 
withdrawn.
Conclusion
The CBF Beef Quality  Assurance  Scheme  is a partnership  between  the 
farmer,  the meat  factories  and the  retailer.  We want  it to be a relationship  where  
the partners  will  be loyal  to each  other  and  build  their  business  together  over  time.  
The farmer  however  is the key to the success  of the scheme  as he controls  the 
quality  of the livestock  and the environment  in which  they are reared.
The scheme  presents  us with  an opportunity  to turn adversity  into  advantage.  
We  all know  that  our island  location  removed  as it is from  the European  mainland  
results  in extra transport  and other costs. The challenge  now is to turn this 
commercial  obstacle  into a monetary  advantage  by demonstrating  that  our clmm 
to be a clean island  producing  natural  wholesome  food is not just a subjective  
claim  but an objective  reality.
131
NOTES
132
Outstandbig  Performance  hi
The Field
★ “The star  ^
performer ”
★ “A power tn the
land”
★“Net Nitrate  Is 
ootstndtoghi  
IheFIdd ”
★‘IViwerM  acHon>  
thrfflng  results^
★“Not to be missed ”FEAiame
WIFI
NITRATE
.air SOkt!  rAnt.0.t«  kji
27.5%N★ “Don ’t soil your
hands  with 
anything  less”
★“Best  performance  
In a long-running  
career ”
★“Big success  from  
the studios  of i|H”
★ “This one will run
9nd run”
Net Nitrate  Is the one that has performed  for more  
Irish farmers,  more  successfully,  over more  years.,  
than  any other  fertilizer  in the land.f^IFI
IRISH FERTILIZER  INDUSTRIESFor further  information  contact  your local IFI 
fertilizer  supplier  or Irish Fertilizer  Industries  Ltd., 
Warrington  Place,  Dublin  2. Tel (01) 764081.
