Irish Grassland  
Association  Journal
2004  VOLUME  38
IRISH  GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION
CORPORATE  MEMBERS  2004
ACC Bank  
AIB Bank  
Alltech
Bank  of Ireland  
Bord Bia 
Connacht  Gold  
Dairygold
Dairymaster  Limited  
Dawn  Group  
Devenish  Nutrition  
FBD Insurances  
Germinal  Ireland  Ltd 
Glanbia
Goldcrop  Limited  
Grassland  Fertilizers  Limited  
Greenvale  Animal  Feeds  
I.A.W.S  Group  pic
Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation  Society  Limited  
Irish Country  Meats/Slaney  Meats  Ltd 
I FAC Accountants  
Irish Farmers  Journal  
Janssen  Animal  Health  
Richard  Keenan  & Co. Ltd 
Kerry  Agribusiness  
Lakeland  Dairies  
LELY  Ireland  Limited  
McQuinn  Consulting  
Monsanto  Ireland  Ltd 
Mullinahone  Co-op  
Osmonds
New Zealand  Genetics  (Ireland)  Limited  
Premier  Molasses  Company  Limited  
SWS Farm Services  Ltd 
Timac  Limited  
Wexford  Milk Producers
TEAGASC  EDUCATION  and ADVISORY  SERVICES
Ballyhaise  Agricultural  College  
Cork East  
Cork West  
Laois  
Limerick
Regional  Advisory  & Training  Services,  Kildalton  
Regional  Office,  North,  Grange  
Tipperary  North  
Tipperary  South
Irish Grassland  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 38 2004
Edited  by 
David McGilloway
ISSN 0332-0588
Printed  by Walsh,  Printer,  Roscrea
CONTENTS
J. Brooks  &
F. Young
J.R Hanrahan
A. Kehoe  &
B. Kehoe
D.J. O’Brien
M. Walsh  
J. Hannon  
J. Hinchy
J. Humphreys,
K. O'Connell,
A. Lawless  &
K. McNamara
J. Kennedy
L. Shalloo,  P. Dillon  
T. O’Dwyer,
D. McCarthy  &
W. Fingleton
P. Kelly, M.Gottstein  
& J. CrossePAGE
Life after Fischler  1
A new era for lowland  Sheep  production.
Flock  performance  and issues  from on-farm  studies 3
A Family  Plan for Sheep  farming  2005-2013  11
Parasite  resistance  to anthelmintics  in livestock
in Ireland  15
The main export  markets  for Irish lamb  19
Moving  from 50 to 100 Cows  22
Is there  a future  for Irish milk?  27
Strategic  use of Nitrogen  in a new environment  35
Grass  Watch  - Tools  for profitable  dairying  49
Quota  purchasing  - what can Dairy Farmers
afford  to pay 54
Post Fischler  options  analysis  for the farm of
Tim & Shauna  Meagher  64
COUNCIL  2004  - 2005
President  
Vice-President  
Past-President  
General  SecretaryBrendan  Barnes  
Jan Frederiks  
Tony Pettit 
Grainne  Dwyer
Kevin Commins,  Noel Culleton,  Michael  Doran,  Jim Dwyer,  John Donworth,  
Sean Flanagan,  Jan Frederiks,  Padraig  French,  Brendan  Horan,  Pearse  Kelly,  
Jack Kennedy,  William  Kingston,  Tim O’Leary,  Pat McFeely,  Mark McGee,  
Nicholas  McGill,  David McGilloway,  Andrew  Moloney,  John O’Brien,  
Robin  Talbot,  Peter  Young.
Irish Grassland  Association,  Moneymore,  Borris  in Ossory,  Co. Laois  
Phone/Fax  0505 41025 Email: arainne@irisharassland.com
Life after Fischler
John Brooks' ’ and Frank  Young^  
Taughmaconnell,  Ballinasloe  
^Teagasc,  Athlone
Introduction
Tablet.  Forage  area
ha
Land owned 53
Land rented 20
Total 73*
*Land is fragmented  over six separate  parcels
Soils
Limestone  and well drained  brown  earths  (with the exception  of 2 ha subject  to prolonged  
winter  flooding  (Turlough).
Machinery
Basic  range  of own farm machinery.  Contractor  for silage  harvesting  and slurry  spreading.
Buildings
Four slatted sheds - two with accommodation  for 144 adult cattle, and two with 
accommodation  for 800 ewes (one of the latter units can also be converted  to hold a 
further  84 adult cattle). There  is sufficient  slurry  storage  capacity.
Grazing  system
Controlled  mixed  grazing
Cattle Forty  eight suckler cows  - females  slaughtered  under  12 months  old - males  sold 
as weanlings/yearlings  in April. 60 weanling  heifers bought for slaughter  under 12 
months.  (In previous  years  calves  and bought  in stores  were finished  at 20-26  months)
Sheep  Pedigree  Suffolk  & Texel  ewes 85
Pedigree  ewe lamb replacements 40
Commercial  ewes 550
Ewe lamb replacements 140
Rams  (Suffock,  Texel, Beclare,  Charolais) 15
Mid season  system
Commercial  flock  - litter size 1 98 - 2.02, lambs  reared/ewe  to ram 1 70 - 1 75 and lambs  
reared/ewe  lamb to ram 1.0
Impact  on Fischler  reforms
Decoupling  - no constraints  on sale dates;
Flexibility  to change  systems;
Bigger  differential  in price for quality  stock;
Production  - market  led;
Need for more farmer/factory/partnership  for lucrative  markets;  
Entitlement  payments  not index linked;
Will entitlements  have mid-term  review?
Income?
WTO implications.
Table  2.Net entitlement  payments  (€)
Year € €/ha
2005 34,283 459
2006 33,970 455
2007 33,657 450
Note if National  ceiling  is exceeded  then entitlements  will be reduced  accordingly.  
Area based  compensatory  allowance  = €4,000
Options  post Fischler
• Reduce  significantly  total livestock  numbers  (sofa farming);
• Continue  same  farming  system;
• Maintain  current  livestock  units, but increase/reduce  either  cattle or sheep;
• Post  2005 - lease  farm - trade  entitlements  - get job!
• Participate  in REPS  - comply  with 170 kg organic  N Limit.
Decision
Reduce  organic  N from current  level of 204 kg/ha  to less than 170 kg/ha;  
Reduce  ewe numbers  to 50 pedigree  and 500 commercial;
Increase  suckler  cows  to 60, and rear progeny  for slaughter  at 12 months;  
Discontinue  purchase  of 60 weanling  heifers  for slaughter  at 12 months.  
Join REPS.
Benefits
• Significant  reduction  in workload  - better  life quality;
• Lower  input costs;
• REPS  payment  of €8,800  to cushion  any income  drop;
• Scheme  payments  €46,456.
A new era for lowland  sheep  production?  Flock  
performance  and issues  from on-farm  studies
Seamus  P. Hanrahan
Sheep  Production  Department,  Teagasc,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Introduction
The implementation  of the Fischler  reform of CAP, which will decouple  ewe premium 
payments  from the actual  production  on the farm, is generally  expected  to usher  in a new 
era in the lowland  sheep sector. This new era will see much greater  emphasis  on 
individual  animal  productivity  at farm level. Some  commentators  have described  this new 
dispensation  as “market-driven ” rather  than “subsidy  driven ” farming.  The decoupling  of 
support  payments  is widely  considered  to mean that producers  will focus  much more on 
the profitability  of the enterprises  on the farm, and the animal performance  traits and 
associated  management  factors  that determine  variation  in the productivity  of the sheep 
enterprise.  It should  also be noted  that stocking  rate limits in the context  of the Nitrates 
Directive  and REPS  are also pertinent  drivers  of the role of increased  animal  productivity  
and its impact  on income.
In this presentation  I will review  some of the main animal  performance  factors  that are 
important  determinants  of flock productivity  and product  quality  against the background  of 
information  that has been accumulated  in Teagasc  over the last 3 years from on-farm 
studies,  in collaboration  with a widespread  network  of about 40 sheep fanners. This 
network  has been the basis for a Technology  Evaluation  and Transfer  (TET) project  that 
was initiated  just before  the foot and mouth  emergency  in spring  of 2001.
The main issues  examined  will be ewe productivity,  lamb growth  and drafting  patterns, 
and carcass  quality. The variation  among  farms  in lamb growth  and drafting  pattern  will 
be examined  in relation  to general  measures  of grassland  management  and flock 
management  including  the issue of parasite  control. I will try and put this information  in 
the context  of our on-going  research  programme  in Teagasc  and the lessons  and 
implications  for the future.
The general  characteristics  of the set of TET flocks  are summarised  in Table 1. It is clear  
that the set of farms  involved  were well above  the average  for lowland  farms  in National 
Farm Survey  (e g. Connolly  1997). The lamb growth  achieved  is essentially  equal  to the 
targets  set out in Teagasc  advisory  programmes  and the performance  levels  reported  for 
Teagasc  research  flocks (Hanrahan,  1999). On these farms  the predominant  ewe-type  
was Suffolk-cross  and Suffolk  and Texel rams predominated  as the sires of the lambs.
Table  1. General  characteristics  of Technology  Evaluation  and Transfer  flocks
Feature Mean Range
Area farmed  (ha) 69 23 to 48
Stocking  rate (LU/ha) 1.8 1 to 2 6
Ewes  put to ram (no.) 340 100 to 1000
Lambing  date 23 March 1 Mar to 14 Apr
Lambs  per ewe to the ram
lambs  born 1.61 1.10 to 2.03
lambs  weaned 1 48 1.10  to 1.96
Carcass  weight  (kg) 19.5 18.1 to 21.3
Growth  rate (g/day)  of twin lambs  (birth to weaning) 275 220 to 320
Lamb mortality  (%) 7 1.5 to 19
Flock  productivity
The number  of lambs  reared  per ewe put to the ram is the most important  measure  of ewe 
performance  and hence flock productivity,  since costs associated  with annual  
maintenance  of the ewe dominate  the cost of keeping  the flock. Results  for lowland  
sheep  flocks  in the National  Farm Survey  show  that the number  of lambs  reared  per ewe 
joined  has a very significant  impact  on both gross  margins  per ewe and per hectare. In 
the present  context  the concern  is with gross  margin  per ewe. Thus,  the evidence  shows  
that increasing  the number  of lambs  reared  per ewe to the ram from 1.4 to 1.6 is expected  
to increase  gross margin  per ewe by 20% (Hanrahan  and Connolly,  1997). In present  day 
terms  this is equivalent  to about  an extra €12/ewe.  Improved  feeding  and management 
of current  ewe flocks  is unlikely  to yield an increase  of 0.2 in lambs  reared  per ewe - but 
some improvements  are possible  through  this route. Teagasc  research  has consistently  
shown  that improvements  of this order can be achieved  through  implementation  of an 
appropriate  breeding  policy for flock replacements.  The impact  of Belclare-cross  ewes  
on ewe productivity  has been clearly  demonstrated  at Blindwell  and Knockbeg  over many  
years. The performance  data from the TET flocks over the last 3 years have been  
examined  to see what further evidence  there is on this issue. The TET flocks  have been  
classified  according  to the predominant  ewe breed.
The classes  were:-
Suf_X  ; Suffolk  cross only
Bel_X  ; Belclare  crosses  (among  others)
Low_X  : Mixture  of lowland  types  but not Belclare  
Mule ; Hill cross types (e g. Mules)
The average  performance  of the flocks in each of these categories  is summarised  in 
Figure 1. The results show that flocks with Belclare-cross  ewe types significantly  
outperformed  all of the other  categories  by an extra 0.1 to 0.2 lambs  reared  per ewe This 
finding  is remarkably  consistent  with the various  research  station  studies  over the years  
and confirms  the ability of a breeding  programme  based on using Belclare  genetic  
material,  to significantly  increase  flock productivity  The data from the TET flocks show  
the importance  of litter size in determining  the number  of lambs reared  per ewe joined 
(Figure  2). This clearly highlights  the need to pursue  a breeding  policy designed  to 
increase  litter size.
Figure  1. Effect  of ewe breed  on the number  of lambs  born (LBej)  and reared  (LWej)  
per ewe joined  with rams in TET flocks  (2001 to 2003)
Low_X 
■ LBejMute
Figure  2. Relationship  between  iambs  born per ewe joined  and lambs  reared
Lambs  borfi per ewe joined
Another  factor  that is a source  of variation  in flock productivity  is the proportion  of ewes 
put to the ram that actually  produce  lambs. With good management  around  mating  time 
and no unusual  ewe mortality  or abortion,  at least 94% of ewes put to the ram should 
lamb The variation  among  TET flocks  in this regard  is in Figure  3.
Ewe fertility,  which is the proportion  of ewes  joined  that actually  lamb should  be equal to 
or better than 94%. If lower, causes  need to be sought  (e g. mating management  
condition  of the ewe flock at mating  etc ). Most TET flocks  achieved  fertility  levels at or 
above 94%, so this aspect  of flock performance  appeared  to be generally  satisfactory  - 
as one would expect  in well managed  flocks  where joining  is in October
The third factor  determining  the number  of lambs  reared  per ewe is lamb mortality.  The 
average  value  from the TET flocks  was 7.2% but the variation  among  flocks  was relatively 
large. It is also likely that the true figure is greater  as often only live-born  lambs are 
counted  - rather  than all lambs  born.
Figure  3. Average  values  for the proportion  of ew/es  joined  that actually  lambed  in 
TET flock  (Fertility:  2001 to 2003)
t:
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \
Lamb  growth
In the initial consultations  on the performance  factors  that concerned  sheep  producers,  
“poor lamb thrive ” emerged  as one of the central  issues. Consequently,  a considerable  
effort has been devoted  to establishing  the lamb growth  rate and drafting  patterns  in TET 
flocks. It appears  that "poor thrive ” is usually  recognised  in terms of slowness  to get 
lambs  fit for sale. Most of the growth  of lambs  towards  slaughter  weight  is achieved  by 
weaning  at around  14 weeks  of age. Due to generally  much lower  growth  on pasture  in 
the July-September  period  the weight  of lambs  at weaning  is a major detenninant  of age 
at drafting. Thus, each extra 1 kg in average  weaning  weight  will reduce  the age of 
slaughter  by 1 week. The pattern  of lamb drafting  is in fact, an excellent  indicator  of the 
growth  rate of the flock and three different  patterns  are depicted  in Figure  4. This figure  
shows  the cumulative  percentage  of lambs  drafted  as the season  progresses  for flocks  
where  growth  rate is equal to the targets  that represent  an average  performance  for a 
lowland  system  without  concentrates  being offered  to the lambs.
Figure  4. Examples  of cumulative  drafting  patterns  for mid season  flocks
Combined  ADG Pre & Post
May Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Sep Sep Oct Oct 
‘Good “““A—Poor “ o - Average
Also shown is the pattern  for a flock where  growth  rate is below  this target  (15% less).  
The shape  of the drafting  curve is very different  for these two scenarios.  In the case of 
poor lamb growth  rate the curve is “saucer"  shaped  whereas  the ‘average ’ lamb-growth 
flock is clearly  convex  and with a fairly steady  increase  in the cumulative  percentage  
drafted  from when the first lambs  are drafted.
Table 2. Growth  performance  for twin lambs  in TET flocks  and Teagasc  targets
Growth  traitTET
averageTeagasc
target
Daily gain from birth to weaning  (g) 277 276
Weight  at 14 weeks  (kg) 32.4 32.0
Post-weaning  daily gain (g) (July period) 187 205
The growth  rate in TET flocks  was about  equivalent  to Teagasc  target  figures  as shown  in 
Table 2. Compared  with the Teagasc  target values  the average  for TET flocks was 
comparable  up to weaning,  but was lower  than the target  in the early  post-weaning  period.  
There is no farm data for later periods  of the summer/autumn  season. However  the 
generally  satisfactory  average  values  hide an enormous variability  among  flocks  as shown  
for growth rate to 14 weeks  in Figure  4. If the most extreme  values  are ignored,  it is 
evident  that growth  varied  from around  230 g/day  up to around  330 g/day. This means  a 
difference  of 10 kg in weight  of twins at 14 weeks. The reasons  for this enormous  range  
need to be understood  and it will be reflected  in profound  differences  in lambs  drafting 
pattern with undoubted  knock-on  effects on all aspects  of flock performance  and 
management.  Information  on drafting  patterns  for the TET flocks  is summarised  in Table  
3 as the percentage  of lambs  drafted  by 20 weeks  of age. The results  show  that the vast 
majority  of flocks  have no more  than 10% of lambs  drafted  at 20 weeks. This reflects  the 
wide range  in lamb  growth  and probably  a rapid fall off in lamb performance post-weaning.  
It also reflects  the relatively  large carcass  weight  at drafting  - about 1 kg greater  than 
research  would indicate  as appropriate  weight  for the export  market. This practice  is 
presumably  a reflection  of the monetary  returns  from extra weight  despite  the risk of and 
penalties  for the over fatness  that is inevitable  with increased  average  carcass  weight.
Table 3. Lambs  drafted  by 20 weeks  of age in TET flocks
Flocks  with
At least 50% drafted  
Less than 25% drafted  
10% or less drafted18% of flocks 
49% of flocks 
82% of flocks
The possible  reasons  for the wide flock-to-flock  variation  in lamb growth  rate was the 
subject  of a study by John Faughnan,  using information  on TET flocks for the 2002 
production  year. In this study  a whole  range  of aspects  that might impact  on gro\wth  rate 
were considered.  These  included  detailed  assessment  for evaluation  of the grassland  
(herbage  supply,  height,  digestibility),  grazing  management system  (rotational grazing,  set 
stocking,  mixed grazing),  grass supply  at turnout  and parasite  control  status  throughout  
the grazing  season  based  on regular  assessments  of worm eggs in the faeces  of lambs  
and ewes. In addition  to these  straightforward  measurements  an assessment was made 
of the overall  level of the flock management  system.  This essentially  revolved  around  the 
grassland  management  planning  and included
- closing  date for paddocks  to be grazed  by the flock at turnout  in spring  
the state of these paddocks  in Dec/Jan  including  poaching  etc.
- plans  for hay/silage  conservation  (where/when)
standard  facilities  for flock handling  and the fencing  on the grazing  area 
timing  of spring  N application
Based  on information  on the above  aspects,  each farm was given a score of 1 (= OK) or 
0 (not OK). Likewise  infonnation  on parasite  control  was assessed  and flocks were  
classified  as either  being parasites  under  Control  (= 1) or not (= 0). These  two variables,  
overall  flock management  system  and parasite  status  of flocks,  were clearly  associated  
with differences  among  flocks in lamb growth  rate, and together  with average  lambing  
date and grazing  system  accounted  for about  70% of flock-to-flock  differences.
Conclusions  from this work are that while specific  measurements  like grass quality,  
herbage  supply  or stocking  rate will impact  on lamb growth  rate, there is a more  complex  
set of factors  operating  that need attention  in order  to improve  the level and consistency  
of flock growth  rate. Effective  control  of roundworm  parasites  is also important,  as are 
facilities  for flock handling  and management.  All of the above issues  have been well 
tested  and validated  in research  studies  over many  years. No one element  on its own is 
adequate  - what is required  is a planned/conscious  approach  to the annual  cycle  of grass  
supply  for the flock. This must be practised  at farm level and not just “listened  about ” at 
open days and farm walks.
The need to improve  flock management  facilities  on many farms is evident  from an 
assessment  that was made of handling  facilities  on TET farms,  where  over 50% were  
classified  as having  either  poor  facilities  (35%)  or none (22%). Similar results  were  found  
with regard  to fencing. The opportunity  for better  grassland  management  is shown  by 
information  on the grass  supply  on the grazing  area at flock turnout  in relation  to closing  
date (Figure  4) and the date of application  of N fertiliser  in spring  (Figure  5). As stated  
previously,  most of the flocks involved  had a mean lambing  date in March  yet on many  
farms  the first N application  was not until March lor later. This was clearly  associated  
with whether  grass  supply  during  the year was in "shortage ” or not (Faughnan  2003).
Figure  4. Sward  height  (cm) at fiock turnout  after iambing  and ciosing  date the 
previous  autumn/winter
Figure  5. Date of Nitrogen  application  in spring  and state of grass supply  during  
the grazing  season
6
5
4
15r 3 o
o2
2
1
0[| IO'TsfQeiftitpply"  lurm*
• ‘Supply  «horl«8«*  farms
J.l I
'-Vv
Carcass  weight
There  are two aspects  of carcass  weight  that need to be considered  - the average weight  
and the variability  of weight  about  this average.  The overall  mean weight  of carcasses  
from TET flocks  was 19.8 kg, ranging  from 18.1 kg to 21.3 kg. The variation  in carcass  
weight  within  the group  of lambs  drafted  on any given date (from an individual  flock)  was 
estimated  to be at lest twice  what  it should  be! This aspect  needs  to be addressed  by both 
farmers  and factories  to ensure  that the sector  makes  the most of market  opportunities  
and retains market  share. The issue of carcass  classification,  market  demands  and 
meaningful  price differentials  in terms  of weight,  fatness  and price need to be discussed 
and longterm  needs  identified  by all concerned
Parasites
The detailed  study of parasite  control  status of flocks  
apparent  failures  of control  from anthelmintic  treatment,  
undertaken  two distinct  causes  were clear.in the TET project  highlighted 
Where  follow-up  studies  were
- inappropriate  dose due to faulty  equipment  or improper  use;
- resistance  to anthelmintics  was confirmed  on a number  of farms.  (Good  et at., 2003)
The latter  finding  was to some  extent surprising  as previous  on-farm  investigations  of this 
issue highlighted  the role of inadequate  dosing procedures.  The clear evidence  for 
resistance  to anthelmintics  on farms such as those involved  in the TET project  should 
senre as a clear  reminder  to all sheep  producers  that anthelmintics  cannot  be relied  on as 
the sole component  of parasite  control  strategies,  and that care must be taken to ensure 
that they are used wisely so as to postpone  and hopefully  avoid the emergence  of 
anthelmintic  resistance.
Concluding  remarks
The experience  and evidence  from the TET project  over the last 3 years has Increased  
our appreciation  of the features  of sheep  production  at farm level. Results  clearly  show 
that on-farm  lamb growth  rates  are similar  to those  from research  flocks  and systems  such 
as those at Knockbeg.  Furthermore  the consistency  of the ewe breed differences  in 
prolificacy  observed  at farm level and those  from Teagasc  research  are very encouraging,
and clearly  pinpoint  that potential  and need for a definite  breeding  plan at farm level for 
the production  of productive  flocks replacements.  While I have not presented  the 
evidence  today there is a wide variation  among  flocks in the level of concentrate  inputs  
and in many cases  annual  inputs  of concentrates  per ewe is in excess  of 50 kg. There  
was little evident  relationship  between  the input level and flock performance.  The level of 
use of concentrates  needs to be considered  by individual  farmers  as to whether  it 
represents  value  for money.
Another  more  general  comment that  seems  justified  is that there is considerable  room for 
improvement  in the application  of well established  research  findings  to farm practice.  
Evidence  is presented  on the genetic  differences  in ewe productivity  and the continuing  
dominance  of Suffolk-cross  ewes, in the face of clear evidence  for superior  alternatives;  
the high divergence  between  practice  on N application  date in spring and the long 
standing  recommendations;  the effect of autumn  closing  date on grass supply  at flock 
turnout;  the often quite inadequate  on-farm  facilities  for the flock management.  There  is 
clearly  much scope  for improvement  and the areas  for attention  are evident.  The gains  
from better grazing  management  planning  was clearly indicated  by John Faughnan ’s 
results  for TET  farms  but this is not a simple  “one element"  fix but rather  a more holistic  
integration  of a variety  of elements  specific to individual  farms  and farmers  (!). I suspect  
that there is often too much  reliance  upon,  and expectations  that research  can identify  the 
one key factor  that will transform  the situation  on a given farm. Rather  what is needed  is 
determined  application  of what is known and well established  to the management  
practices  at farm level by the individual  flock manager.
References
Faughnan,  J.R, Nolan,  T, Hanrahan,  J.P and Crosby,  TF. (2003). Pasture  production  
and quality  on sheep farms. Proceedings  of the Agricultural  Research  Forum 2003 
(ISBN 1 8417 4016). Pp 77
Faughnan,  J.P. (2003). Investigation  of management  factors  responsible  for farm-to-farm  
variation  in lamb growth. M Agr. Sc Thesis,  NUI.
Connolly,  L. (1997). Sheep  production  1997. Teagasc  Information  Update  Senes  No 1 
(ISBN 1 901138  20 8). 46 pages.
Good, B., Hanrahan,  J.P. and Kinsella,  A. (2003). Anthelmintic  resistance  in sheep  
roundworms  - preliminary  observations.  Proc. Agricultural Research  Forum  2003 (ISBN  
1 8417 401 6) page 78.
Hanrahan,  J.P. and Connolly,  L. (1997). Lowland  sheep  systems:-  factors  contributing  to 
variation  in margins  Farm and Food, Sept 1997, pp11-18.  Teagasc  (ISSN  0791-6477)
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1999). Genetic  and non-genetic  factors affecting  lamb growth and 
carcass  quality End of Project  Reports:  Sheep  Series  No. 8 Teagasc  35 pages.
10
A family  plan for sheep  farming:  2005 - 2013
Ann and Brian Kehoe
Ballydine,  Kilsheelan,  Clonmel,  Co. Tipperary
Introduction
Sheep  farmers  will face major challenges  over the next decade.  Decoupling  will certainly 
change  the approach  to sheep  farming,  and for many  will determine  if they stay in sheep 
farming  in the long term. For a sheep  only farm, this paper will briefly  review;
the farming  system  and flock performance  details;  
comment  on decoupling  implications  for the farm;  
set out our plans  for the future.
The fanning  system
Background
The farm is situated  in the Suir Valley near Kilsheelan,  Co. Tipperary.  It is in a non- 
disadvantaged  area. The farm details  are as follows.
Total Area Farmed:  
Grassland:
Maize:78 ha 
69 ha 
9 ha
The farm is divided  into three parcels. The main block of 38 ha is located  around  the 
farmyard.  A further  two parcels  of 22 and 20 ha respectively  are located  within  one mile 
of the main block.
Prior to 1997, the farm comprised  60 suckler  cows, 80 acres of tillage and a 250-ewe 
flock. In I997 fundamental  changes  to the farming  operation  were implemented,  and a 
sheep only enterprise  was pursued.  The suckler  cows were sold, and the quota leased 
for three years, before finally being sold in the spring of 2001. There are no cattle 
currently  on the farm.
By 2001 ewe flock numbers  had increased  to 900. Most of the tillage ground  was 
reseeded,  and fencing  upgraded.  New sheep handling  units were built and the winter  
housing  for the expanded  ewe flock was renovated  and extended.
Discussion  group
Membership  of the South Tipperary  Sheep  Discussion  Group has been of immense  
benefit  over the last five years.
Labour  and flock management details
The owners  carry out the majority  of the farm work, with hired labour  kept to a minimum.
• agricultural  contractors  are hired for all maize  work and dung spreading;
• some casual  labour  is used during  lambing.
Management  details
• ewes are housed  in January,
• the flock lambs  as one group  in March;
11
• ewes  go straight  out to  grass  within  48 hours  of lambing;
• lambs  are sold directly to factories  and to butchers  from early July to early December;
• lambs  are finished  off grass  with meals  fed.
Flock  breeding  policy
Crossbreeding  is an essential  element  of the current  breeding  policy. The ewe types  are 
Belclare  x Suffolk,  Texel  x Suffolk  and He de France  x Suffolk.  The He de France  are being  
phased  out. The breeding  programme  for the last two years is given below  (Table.  1). 
There  are no major  plans  to change  the breeding  programme  into the future.
Table  1. Breeding  programme
Flock Ewe Nos. Ewe type Ram used Progeny
Finishing  Flock 650Texel X Suffolk  
Belclare  x Suffolk
He de France  x SuffolkCharolais
Texel
SuffolkAll sold
Replacement
Flock*250Suffolk  X Texel  
SuffolkBelclareMale lambs:
all sold 
Ewe lambs;
kept for 
breeding
*40 to 50 hoggets  are purchased  each year as replacements  for the 250-ewe  flock.  
Flock  performance
Current flock  performance  is considered  to be average.  At present  an average  1.4 lambs  
are reared  per ewe to ram. Flock  output  problems  are related  to two issues.
• Past emphasis  on expansion. During the period 1997 to 2001 efforts were  
concentrated  on increasing  ewe numbers  from 250 to 900 ewes. Insufficient  attention  
was paid to flock breeding  and prolificacy  during  the expansion  phase.
• Ongoing  Toxoplasmosis  problem.  There  is a Toxoplasmosis  problem  within  the flock.  
This leads to lamb losses during pregnancy,  especially  at lambing  time. All 
replacements are now vaccinated with Toxovax  before  mating.  This has improved  the 
situation  but not eliminated  the problem  fully.
Financial  Performance
Output  per ewe and average  lamb price realised  have a major  impact  on gross margin  
figures  (Table 2). It is believed  there is scope to increase  gross margin  (excluding  
premium)  if output  per ewe can be lifted.
Table  2. Gross  Margin  per ewe
Lambs  sold per ewe to the ram 1.4
Average  lamb price (€) 73.50
Gross  Margin  per ewe excl. premium  (€) 43.00
Ewe premium  (€) 22.26
Gross  Margin  per ewe incl. premium  (€) 65.26
12
Decoupling  implications
All sheep  farmers  we will have to come  to grips with the implications  of decoupling.  On 
this farm, it is estimated  that EU entitlements  will approximate  to just under  €25,000  per 
annum  (see Table 3).
Table 3. Estimate  of ‘decoupled  entitlements ’
EU Scheme 2000* 2001* 2002* AverageRate
(€)Total Claim  
(€)
Ewe Premium 900 900 900 900 22.26 20,034
Maize  Aid (ha) 9.15 11.99 9.15 8.33** 365 3,030
Cereal Aid (ha) 9.15 3.05 383 1,168
Peas  Aid (ha) 2.84 0.95 383 364
Setaside  (ha) 2.06 0.69 383 264
Total 24,780
•Reference  years  for establishing  EU entitlements.
•'Maize  area eligible  for entitlements  is 42% of the area claimed  in 2002.
However  entitlements  are likely to be further  eroded  on two counts;
• Clawbacks  for national  reserve  and modulation;
• Future  price inflation.
National  reserve  and modulation  cuts
Entitlements  before deductions  for national  reserve  and modulation,  are estimated  at 
approximately  €318.85  per ha (or €129.03  per ac). It is not possible  at this juncture  to 
be precise  about the actual entitlement  cuts that will apply, but given the following 
assumptions,  an estimate  of the impact  can be made.
• Deductions  for the national  reserve  are likely to be in the region  of 1-3 percent;
• Modulation  cuts are expected  to be in the region  of 5 percent from  2007, however  the 
first € 5000 will be exempt.
It Is estimated  that the modulation  and national  reserve  deductions  could exceed  €1700  
on this farm, reducing  overall  entitlements  to approximately  €23,200  per annum.
Future  price inflation
Entitlement  income  is fixed for the foreseeable  future. However,  there are concerns  that 
overall  price inflation  will also erode  the real value  of the entitlements.  Again  one can only 
speculate  on the future rate of inflation. However,  if an inflation  rate of 3 percent  per 
annum  from 2004  to 2013  were  assumed,  this rate would  reduce  the value  of entitlements  
by about  24% in real terms. Put another  way current  entitlements  of €24,870  would  need  
to increase  by around  €6,000  by 2013 to offset  an annual  rate of inflation  in the order  of 
3 percent.
Consequences
Teagasc  farm income figures indicate  that EU payments  account  for a substantial 
proportion  of actual  farm income  on a typical  sheep  or cattle farm. Taking  the cuts and 
inflation  into account,  it can be seen that entitlements  will meet less and less of income 
requirements  as time goes on. This will put a lot more pressure  on the sheep  farming 
business  itself  to generate  more income.
13
Planning  a future  strategy  for the sheep  farm
In trying  to plan for the future,  it is necessary  to take account  of family  circumstances  and 
dependence  on sheep  farming.  Those  areas  that are likely  to have the biggest  impact  on 
farming  income  must be identified  and prioritised.
Family  Circumstances
Family  circumstances are a major  consideration  when  deciding  what income  is necessary  
for a decent  standard  of living into the future. There  are two children.  The eldest has 
completed  her education  and is now financially  independent,  but the youngest  is still in 
primary  school.
Other  income
At the moment  there is an additional  source  of income,  but this is not guaranteed  to last. 
If/when  this ceases,  there would  have to be a major  adjustment  to the current  strategy.
Farming priorities
The following  areas are viewed  as a priority  to improving  farm profit in a decoupled  
environment.
Increase  output  per ewe
1. A major  priority  is to increase  ewe output  from 1.4 lambs  reared  to 1.6. Achieving  this 
target should increase  gross margin  per ewe by approximately  €12. This can be 
achieved  by increasing  the Belclare  influence  in the replacement  flock, and ensuring  
a good supply  of grass  at flushing
2. Draft  lambs  earlier
The sale of lambs  must begin earlier,  possibly  mid-June.  To have 50% of lambs  sold 
at twenty  weeks  is the target. This can be achieved  by feeding  meals  at an earlier 
stage. This change  should  also provide  the extra  grass  needed  for flushing.  (Looking  
at lamb price patterns  for 2003; earlier  drafting  should  also yield a higher  average  
price).
3. Join REPS
Joining  the new REP Scheme  is essential  to increase  farm income.
4. Extending  the grazing  season
Extending  the grazing  season  is a very important  strategy  on a dry farm. This means  
keeping  the ewes on grass until February  1 and lambing  on March 1.
For the future?
The above  strategy  assumes  continuation  in sheep  farming  up to 2013, but this is by no 
means  certain. In a decoupled  situation  there is no longer  a need to keep sheep  to draw  
down  all entitlements.  All of the above  targets  for the sheep  enterprise  will take hard work 
and commitment.  This commitment  will only continue  be given if there is a good return  
from the market  place. What  is produced  must be of value  - lamb price will eventually  be 
the deciding  factor  as to whether  or not sheep  farming  is continued.
Conclusions
Decoupling  is now a done deal, but there are concerns  going  forward.  It is likely that the 
value of entitlements  will be seriously  eroded  over time. Only time will tell if the market  
place will return the lamb price necessary  to offset reduced  entitlement  income  and 
ongoing  price inflation.
14
Parasite  resistance  to anthelmintics  in livestock  in Ireland
Dermot  J. O’Brien  
CVRL,  Abbotstown,  Dublin  15
Introduction.
Grazing  animals  carry parasites,  picked  up from the pastures.  These  can cause  serious, 
often fatal diseases  or induce  chronic  conditions,  which hinder  economic  husbandry  and 
allow other pathogens  exert their influence  for disease. Under natural conditions  a 
balance  evolves  between  the parasite  and the host, which allows  both exist without  too 
much disruption.  Younger  animals  are less resistant  to these parasites,  but as they grow  
so too does their immunity.  A group  of parasites,  gastro-intestinal  nematodes  or stomach 
and bowel worms,  live in the intestinal  tract, breed and lay eggs, which pass on to the 
pastures  and hatch  there into larvae  that develop  and re-infect their hosts. This cycle can 
become  extremely  rapid in mild moist  conditions  where  animals are in a relatively confined 
area; larvae  build up and cause  parasitic  gastroenteritis,  with severe diarrhoea.  To control 
this, anthelmintics  are given to the animals.  However  as the pasture  larvae  re-infect  the 
animals,  treatment  is repeated  over and over again. The introduction  of new effective 
anthelmintics  in the early sixties  made  treatment  an attractive  efficient  way of producing 
healthy animals in intensive  systems However,  suppressive  treatment  systems, 
especially  in young animals,  may not allow natural immunity  to develop,  leading  to 
problems  later.
In the decade following  the introduction  of the benzimidazole  anthelmintics  (white 
drenches),  resistance  was first recognized  (Le Jambre,  1976; Coles, 1977) and quickly  
spread,  becoming  common  worldwide  (Boersma,  1982; Cawthorne,  1983). Resistance 
soon became  apparent  in Ireland  (O'Brien  and Geraghty,  1990; O'Brien,  1992, O’Brien et 
al., 1994) and now is common  throughout  the country  in sheep,  horses,  pigs and goats 
Although  serious  and widespread  elsewhere,  it has not yet become  a problem  in cattle.  
Recently  resistance  to acaricides  for Dermanyssus  gallinae  (the red mite) of poultry  has 
been detected  in Ireland  (Murphy  et al., 2002).
There are three main groups  of anthelmintics  used against  nematode  worms  (round  
worms), the benzimidazoles,  the imidathiazoles  and tetrahydropyrimidines,  and the 
macrocyclic  lactones. The problem  is not confined  to the benzimidazoles,  the other  
groups have also been affected,  indeed multiple  resistance,  to all three, occurs and 
recently  has been identified,  in sheep,  in Britain  (Yue et al., 2003).
Result  of husbandry
This problem  is caused  by husbandry  practices.  Generally,  animals  kept in extensive  
systems  do not have major  problems  from nematode  worms  and treatments  are seldom 
required,  so no pressure  is exerted  on the anthelmintics.  In this natural  situation,  the 
parasite  population  is almost  entirely  susceptible  to anthelmintics,  however  there may be 
a few individual  nematodes  carrying  the gene for anthelmintic  resistance.  Where 
intensive  systems  are practised  there is a build up of nematode  eggs and larvae  on the 
pastures  with consequent  heavy  infection  rates in grazing  animals,  this leads to lack of 
thrive, disease  and economic  losses, without  anthelmintic  treatment Treatment  is 
successful  but animals  soon become  re-infected  and require  treatment  once more.  
These  repeated  treatments  lead to resistance  as the proportion  of susceptible to resistant
15
worms  increases.  Dosing  with an anthelmintic,  to which  the strain  is resistant,  effectively  
gets rid of the competition  for space  and breeding,  by killing the susceptible  parasites  
and helps the resistant  strain to develop  until eventually  only it remains.  While these  
resistant  worms  are just a few in a population,  there is no problem.  However,  the rate of 
dosing determines  the speed and extent of resistance  development.  The problem  
occurs  more readily  in sheep,  horses,  pigs and goats, as their methods  of husbandry  
involve  frequent  treatment  of whole  populations  of animals  at the same  time; this leads  
to a an overall  drop in-the number  of susceptible  larvae  on the pastures  and a relative  
increase  in the resistant  ones. Nematodes  in goats are particularly  inclined  to develop  
resistance  and if these are nematode  species,  which affect sheep  or cattle, obviously  
there are implications,  Prichard  (1990),  reviewed  the extent  of anthelmintic  resistance,  
its mode  of action  in different  anthelmintic groups  and how it develops  (the problem  can 
also be introduced  with replacement  animals).  Although  under-dosing  can also cause  
the problem,  it is worth  noting  that poor responses  to anthelmintic  therapy  are frequently  
attributable  to inadequate  dosing  arising  from underestimating  the weights  of animals  or 
to the use of faulty dosing equipment.  It is important  to distinguish  between  the 
development  of anthelmintic  resistance  and partially  treated  or re-infected  animals,  
especially  in intensive  systems  where  parasitic  problems  are most likely to occur.
Anthelmintic  resistance  testing
Johansen  (1989),  made  an evaluation  of the in vivo and in vitro techniques  used for the 
detection  of anthelmintic  resistance  in domestic  livestock.  He stated  that the faecal  egg 
count  reduction  test (FECR)  was the most suitable  for field screening  of resistance  and 
that the larval development  assay was likely to prove a valuable  adjunct  in such 
investigations.
Egg hatch assay (Le Jambre,  1976) is a suitable  back up to FECR and provides  an 
accurate  evaluation  of the problem  when benzimidazoles  (BZ) are involved.  There  are 
other  laboratory  tests available  including  the larval motility  assay,  tubulin  binding  assay,  
and various  biochemical  tests, described  by Sutherland  (1988).
Although  newer  assays  are being  developed,  it is logical  that, as the FECR  involves  the 
live animal,  and measures  the effectiveness  of the treatment,  and applies  to all groups  
of anthelmintics,  it is still the most valuable  in-field  test. FECR  requires  examination  of 
faecal  samples  taken from a representative  number  of the animals  under  investigation,  
immediately  before  and twelve  to fourteen  days after dosing  with the anthelmintic  under  
test. It is necessary  for this sampling  interval  to be observed,  since post treatment  egg 
laying  suppression  may persist  for ten days and because  longer  sampling  intervals  may 
allow for re-infection  and egg laying. A reduction  of less than 90% in faecal  egg counts  
warrants an assumption  of a resistance  problem.  Confirmatory  retesting  by FECR  or egg 
hatch assay  is then indicated.
Measures  to limit the probiem
Efforts  to control  a problem,  which is potentially  disastrous  and could leave  farmers  and 
veterinarians  with few or no weapons  with which to fight parasitic  gastroenteritis  in 
livestock,  must be aimed  at keeping  the percentage  of susceptible  parasites  in the host 
and on the pastures  as high as possible  relative  to resistant  ones. The methods  of doing  
this include  good husbandry  as the first principle.  This should  be based on a system  
which allows  rest time for pastures  between  grazing  periods,  so some of the larvae  will 
perish  and so less will be present  to cause  disease,  whilst  leaving  enough  to stimulate
16
immunity  and keep the ratio of susceptible  to resistant  as high as possible.  This can be 
facilitated  further,  by avoiding  suppressive  regimens,  managing  pastures  wisely  and by 
using the older resistant  animals  or other species  to pick up and waste the larvae.  
Fortunately,  for many years in Ireland,  farmers  have been urged to treat animals  for 
parasites  as infrequently  as possible,  consistent  with health,  and to allow animals  build up 
immunity  by contact  with them in controllable  situation.  It has also been stressed  that 
correct  diagnosis  is necessary  before  treatment.  For this reason  the spread  of resistance 
in the country  has not been as rapid as in other countries  and it is vital that farmers  
continue  with that strategy. It is often possible  to dose those animals  with symptoms  
rather  than the entire herd or flock.
As mentioned  previously,  there are three main groups  of anthelmintics  and changing  of 
anthelmintic  group  should  be done  yearly,  rather  than more  frequently.  This slows  the rate 
of build up of resistance  by eliminating  strains  with resistance  to the previous year ’s group; 
it should  be noted  that the change  should  be done on group  rather  than brand basis, for 
the resistance  applies  to all products  within the group. There has been a move, in 
countries  where  widespread  multiple  resistance  occurs,  to combine  drugs from several 
groups,  to cross eliminate  resistant  strains  to each group. However,  this strategy  is not 
recommended  Ireland,  at least not yet. Again the seriousness  of the threat must be 
emphasised  and farmers  must  work  hard at keeping  it at bay.
Goats should not be kept with sheep, as they require  special  attention  in relation  to 
parasite  control  and helminths  more quickly  develop  resistance  in them.
Other  conditions  such as coccidiosis,  bacterial  or viral infections,  toxins  or even over lush 
pastures  can cause similar  symptoms,  so inexpensive  faecal examination  for parasite 
worm eggs is strongly  urged before  expensive  treatments  are contemplated.
The danger  of introducing  the problem  must be borne  in mind when  bringing  new animals 
on to the farm. To ensure  that no resistant  parasites  enter, these animals  should  be 
treated  with a macrocyclic  lactone,  to which  no resistance  has been found in Ireland,  and 
kept away  form the rest of the animals  and pastures  for 24 hours  afterwards.  This strategy 
is important  in the case of liver fluke. Triclabendazole  resistant  strains  of fluke have been  
found in the west of Ireland  for a number  of years now. Liver fluke disease  is a serious 
disease,  which causes  heavy  losses  in cattle and sheep  in Ireland. Resistant  fluke can 
infect all species  therefore  pose a most serious  threat. Suspected  fluke infected 
introduced  animals  should  be treated  with closantel  or some other non-triclabendazole  
based  flukecide  twice at three a three week interval,  before  introducing  to the herd/flock.
Due to enormous  cost, few new products  are being developed,  so we must guard  what 
is available.  In-feed  nematophagous  fungi have been shown  to be a biological  control 
method  with promise,  and for some  time work on breeding  parasite  resistance  strains  of 
animals  has been proceeding  (Windon,  1990). Work on vaccines  against  helminth 
parasites  has also been in train for many  years  (O’Donnell  et al., 1989;  but we must  wait 
some time for any hope of these  being readily  available.
17
References
Boersma,  J.H. and Lewing-Van  der Wiel, P.J. (1982). Benzimidazole  resistance  in a field 
strain of Haemonchus  contortus  in the Netherlands.  Veterinary  Record  110: 203-204.
Cawthorne,  R.J.G. and Whitehead,  J.D. (1983). Isolation  of benzimidazole-resistant 
strains  of Ostertagia  circumcincta  from British  sheep. Veterinary  Record  112: 274-277.
Coles, G.C. and Simpkin,  K.G. (1977). Resistance  of nematode  eggs to the ovicidal  
activity  of benzimidazoles.  Research  in Veterinary  Science  22: 386-387.
Jackson,  F., Coop, R.L., Jackson,  E., Scott, E.W. and Russel,  A.J F. (1992). Multiple  
anthelmintic  resistant  nematodes  in goats. Veterinary  Record  130: p.210.
Johansen,  M.V. (1989). An evaluation  of techniques  used for the detection  of 
anthelmintic  resistance  in nematode  parasites  in domestic  livestock. Veterinary  
Research  Communications  13: 455-466.
Le Jambre,  L.F. (1976). Egg hatch as an in vitro assay  of thiabendazole  resistance  in 
nematodes.  Veterinary  Parasitology  2: 385-391.
Murphy,  T.M , Me Auliffe, A., Clegg, T. and O’Brien, D.J. (2002). Resistance  of 
Dermanyssus  gallinae,  the poultry  red mite, to insecticides  on Irish farms. Proceedings  
of EU COST  Action  833 Conference,  Bari, Italy. September 2002. (EUR 20647)  44.
O’Brien, D.J. and Geraghty,  V. (1990). Possible  benzimidazole  resistance  in horses  in 
Ireland. Irish Veterinary  Journal  43: 104-107.
O’Brien, D.J. (1992).  
PP25-26.Anthelmintic  resistance  in sheep. Irish Veterinary  News 14 (4)
O’Brien, D.J., Strickland,  K.L., ParrS.L.,  Gray, J.S., O’Reilly, PR, Clements,  L., Dwyer,  
P.J., and O’Reilly, L.M. (1994). Anthelmintic  resistant  nematodes  in farm animals  in 
Ireland. E.U. Publication  VI/4125/94-EN  pp101-106.
O’Donnell,  I.J., Dineen,  J.K., Wagland,  B.M., Letho, S., Werkmeister,  J.A. and Ward,  
C.W. (1989). A novel host protective  antigen  from Trichostrongylus  colubriformis.  
International Journal  for Parasitology  19(3) pp327-335.
Prichard,  R.K. (1990). Anthelmintic  resistance  in nematodes:  Extent, recent  
understanding  and future directions  for control  and research.  International  Journal  for 
Parasitology  20(4) pp515-523.
Sutherland,  L.A., Lee, D L. and Lewis,  D. (1988). Detection  of benzimidazole  resistance  
in trichostrongyloid  nematodes.  Parasitology  Today 4: 22- 24.
Windon,  R.G. (1990). Selective  breeding  for the control  of nematodiriasis  in sheep.  
Rev. Scl. Tech. Off. Int. Epiz 9 (2) pp555-576.
Yue, C., Coles,  G., and Blake, N. (2003). Multiresistant  nematodes  on a Devon  farm.  
Veterinary  Record  153(19)  p.604.
18
The main export  markets  for Irish lamb
Michael  Walsh  
Scargo,  France
Introduction
Since Foot and Mouth, the market in France is characterised  by relatively  low 
consumption  of lamb, and relatively  high prices. In 2001 with the UK out of the picture  for 
most of the year, prices  were excellent,  with Ireland  having  the highest  market  share at 
18%.
In 2002, the UK was again back in action, putting  downward  pressure  on prices and 
regained  their leader  position  in terms  of market  share. New Zealand  displaced  Ireland  
as No. 2 exporter  to France. Since prices  were still relatively  higher  than pre Foot and 
Mouth,  the door was wide open for NZ and Australian  products.  In 2002, NZ accounted 
for 15% of market  share.
Consumption  of lamb in 2003, was lower than 2002. Aside from price and availability  
factors,  this was largely  due to the exceptionally  hot summer,  which  saw prices  slump  by 
20% during  the months  of July and August.  However,  despite  reduced  levels  of demand, 
UK imports  into France  increased  by 12% on 2002. In terms of market  share,  NZ retained 
No. 2 position.
How is Irish lamb perceived  on the French  market  in relation  to competition?  
United  Kingdom
Since  2001, Irish lamb is perceived  to have  a quality  premium  over UK lamb between  April 
to early September.  Outside  this period,  buyers  tend to prefer  UK product  because  their 
iambs  are more regular  in terms  of weights,  conformation  and prices. Obviously  currency 
has an important  factor  on the price, and compared  to the pre foot and mouth  era when 
Irish lamb was systemically  10-15 pence lower in price, that situation  has now been  
reversed.
It is an important  psychological  advantage  to have a quality  premium  perception,  and is 
something  that Ireland  will need to maintain  in the future if Irish lamb is to continue  to 
enjoy a superior  price over our UK competitors.
New Zealand
As a competitor,  NZ has made  serious  inroads  into the French  market,  mainly  because  of 
competitive  pricing. Offering  a 3-month  shelf-life  to fresh vac packed  lamb cuts, and a 
standardised  product  has enabled  them to enjoy  considerable  growth  in fresh lamb sales,  
e g. French  industrial  meat processors  producing  lamb kebabs  (“brochette  d'agneau ”) 
have switched  from the European  product to NZ legs of lamb or shoulders.  Supermarkets  
have also demonstrated  a willingness  to increase  their orders  with NZ for festive  periods 
(Christmas  and Easter)  in order to cater  for extra demand.
Given advantages  in price competitiveness,  standardisation  of product  and other  
technological  advances,  NZ sheep farmers  can expect  several  good years to come.  
Although  not a direct  competitor  on carcase  lamb sales, the relatively  high prices  of the
19
European  product  since 2001 will ensure  that NZ continues  to enjoy increased  market  
share  penetration.
Spain
SPANISH  LAMB IS MAINLY  SOLD IN THE SOUTH  OF FRANCE  (PROVENCES:- 
ALPES  COTE  D’AZUR,  RHONE  ALPES,  LANGUEDOC  ROUSILLON),  BUT THIS LAMB  
HAS MADE  ITS WAY UP TO THE PARIS  REGION  BECAUSE  OF PRICE  DIFFERENCE.  
IT IS PERCEIVED  AS A LESSER  QUALITY  PRODUCT  THAN IRISH LAMB BECAUSE  
IT LACKS  CONFORMATION  AND QUALITY,  AND  IS GENERALLY  A LIGHTER  CARCAS  
(14-1 5KG).
How is lamb  from ireland  marketed  in France?
Customers  and Channels  of Distribution
PRODUCER  O WHOLESALER  O RETAILER  O CONSUMER
FACTORY ABATTOIR  
CUTTING  PLANT  
INDUSTRYSUPERMARKET
BUTCHERS
RESTAURANTS
Wholesalers
The vast majority  of lamb is sold through  the wholesale  network,  a step before  the retail 
customer.  The wholesaler  provides  the functions  of distribution  (to retailers),  cutting  of 
carcasses  and price negotiation.  The wholesalers  are an important  link in the chain, as 
they also have greater  flexibility  out of season  when retailers  swap over to UK lamb.  
During  this period  the wholesaler  still service  a small butcher  clientele,  and restaurant  
base.
Retailers
Supermarkets  account  for approx  60% of retail lamb sales, butchers  for 40%. During  the 
season  from April to May, Irish lamb has an excellent  image in terms of quality  and is 
preferred  by the supermarkets  over product  supplied  by our UK counterparts.  Price is the 
essential  motivating  factor  for a supermarket  buyer  once product/quality  specifications 
are adhered  to.
Nearly  all promotional  activity  on lamb is centred  around  price,  which  is why New Zealand  
lamb is so successful.
Irish lamb needs to be competitively  priced with regards  to UK lamb during summer  
period (not more than 10 cents greater  in order for the supermarkets  to absorb  the 
quantities).
Butchers
Most traditional  French butchers  have seen their businesses  decline  over the years.  
However,  more resilient  butcher  chains  are becoming  more popular  as they compete  on 
price with supermarkets  and provide  a confidence  link with consumers  who need to be 
reassured  on safety  etc.
Muslim  butchers  deserve  a mention  for lamb sales,  as they are a very big segment  of the 
market. There  are 6-7 million  Muslims  in France  (over 10% of the population  of France)
20
and they are big lamb eaters. It is estimated  that they account  for 30% of overall  lamb  
consumption.
How to improve  links with the various  players  in the market  place?
The common  denominator  between  all the customers (be it retailers  or wholesalers)  is that 
product  specification  is the same  throughout.
Product  Specification  - LAMB  CARCASS
TRACABILITY
WEIGHT  (16-19  kg)
CONFORMATION - U2
U3
R2
R3
• QUALITY  - NOT FAT
In practice  what happens  when product  specification  is not respected?
1. lambs  rejected  by the customer;
2. no repeat  or less frequent  orders;
3. easier  competition  for the opposition;
The result:-  e g. fat lambs used to fetch 30 cents less than No 1 lambs, today the 
difference  is more like 60 to 80 cents!
What  is your Industry  doing  to enhance  links with customers?
S.C.A.G.R.O  (subsidy  of Dawn Meats)  in France  has invested  heavily  in marketing  over 
the years, and built strong  relationships  with retailers  in what is a fairly volatile  market.  
Currently  they are producing  a 'Consumer  Retail Pack' with an Irish label, which will be 
available  to the major retail groups in France. The future for these products  is 
encouraging.
21
Moving  from 50 - 100.cows
John Hannon
Kiltemplan,  Clarina,  Co Limerick
Introduction
The Hannon  Family home farm is in the townland  of Kiltemplan,  in the parish of 
Patrickswell.  A busy minor  road divides  the farm of 130 adjusted  acres. 90 acres is dry 
limestone  type land, and can be grazed  most  days of the year (the farmyard  is within  this 
portion).  The remaining  40 acres  is a heavier soil type, known  locally  as ‘Coreas ’ and lies 
at the other  side of the public  road. This is excellent  grass growing  land but would not 
usually  be suitable  for grazing  in the period  mid November  to early March.
In 1980 and 1982 John and Charles  Hannon,  two brothers  who now farm together 
completed  the then ACOT  100 hour course  and assumed  full management  of the farm in 
the mid 1980 ’s. The farm milk quota was set at 45,000  gallons  and in addition,  15,000  
gallons  of milk quota  was leased  privately.  Neither Mitchelstown  Co-Op  or later Dairygold  
had available  quota  to lease or buy.
Table 1. Kiltemplan  farm 1985
Acres Cows Gallons
Owned
Leased130 adjusted 50 45,000
15,000
Developments  on the farm
• 1985
An 8 unit-milking  parlour with room for 2 extra units was built, and the entire home farm 
was re-seeded,  including  the reclamation  of 15 acres of rough land. Winter  
accommodation  was increased  from 40 to 80 cow cubicles,  and roadways  and paddocks  
were put in to service  part of the farm. A water  supply  was extended  to most parts of the 
farm.
• 1989
Thirty  acres  of land and 10,000  gallons of quota  were leased  3 miles  away  from the home  
farm.
• 1990s
In the early 1990 ’s the farm ran a flock of over 100 ewes. This enterprise  was disposed  
of in 1993. Subsequently  a farm of 40 acres, 3 miles away was leased,  and a 40-cow 
suckler  herd established.  The followers  from the beef and dairy herds  were finished  to 
slaughter  for a number  of years
• 1993
Thirty-five  adjusted  acres of land and 10,000  gallons  of milk quota were purchased  3 
miles  from the home-place.
• 1995
Eighty acres of land and 25,000  gallons  of milk quota were leased,  6 miles from the 
home-farm.  This farm has winter  accommodation  for 50 adult  cattle. In the spring  of 1998 
the lease  of a local farm ended  with the loss of 10,000  gallons  of milk quota  and 30 acres  
of land.
22
Table 2. Kiltemplan  farm 1995
Acres Cows Gallons
Owned 165 adjusted 82 55,000
Leased 30 10,000
Leased 80 25,000
At this time it was decided  to sell the suckler  enterprise  and obtain  more milk quota. After  
many  advertisements  in the local newspaper,  51,000  gallons of quota  and 79 acres  of land 
were acquired  7 miles  from the home-farm.  This farm had excellent paddocks,  roadways,  
50 cow and 50 weanling  cubicles.  The herd of 50 cows came  as part of the deal. There  
was no history  of tillage  on the leased  land, so calf to beef was the only viable option.  
Extra cattle  were bought  in from time to time when  value  could be got. Approximately  half 
of the land farmed  would not be suitable  for serious  winter  grazing.
Table 3. Kiltemplan  farm 1998
Acres Cows Gallons
Owned 165 adjusted  118 55,000
Leased 80 25,000
Leased 79 51,000
On the morning  of March 23, 1998 70 cows were milked  at Kiltemplan.  At the evening 
milking  112 were milked. It was an exciting  time on a farm that for years  had been starved 
of quota. There  were now an extra 41, 000 gallons  of quota  to be filled and a farm quota 
of 131,0000  gallons.
However,  the excitement  soon wore off as milking  and herding  in the now enlarged  herd 
took a lot more time each day. Milking  time was extended  because:
• Ten milking  units were not enough;
• No drafting  facilities  existed;
• A certain fatigue  factor sets in, when one the one and half-hour  milking  barrier  is 
passed
To alleviate  the pressure  of work,  the Farm Relief  Service  was employed  in 1998  and 1999  
to do did a good proportion  of the evening  milking.  This allowed  time for other farm work.  
From 1998 onwards,  a contractor  was employed  to spread slurry and for two years 
topping  was also contracted  out.
1998 was a wet difficult  year, and the shortage  of roadways  became  obvious  in poor 
conditions.  It was also clear after a few months  that improvements  needed  to be done  to 
the parlour  and roadways.  However,  it took time to get them done because  of disruption 
to an already  busy day to day routine. In addition,  in order  to fill the quota  the parlour  was 
almost  in continuous  use. In spite of these  difficulties,  500 meters  of extra roadway  was 
added  in 1998, as well as resurfacing  most of the existing  roadway.
• 1999
400 m of additional  roadway  were added.
23
• 2001
Work on the roadways  was completed  with the addition  of a final 300 m section. The 
blinding  material  for the surface  of the roads was the only material  that had to be 
purchased.  Red soft shale was levelled  and received  several  passes  of an industrial  
vibrating  roller, which  produced  a cow friendly  surface. Roadways  now extend  to over 2 
km. The Farm Relief Service  fenced  the paddocks.
In warm weather  water in some of the paddocks  became  a problem  due to piping and 
troughs  being too small. By fitting large concrete  troughs  300/350  gallons  it solved  the 
water  shortages and the existing  piping  was retained.  Costs  associated  with this work  are 
shown  in Table  4. No grants  were available  for this work.
Table  4. Costs  incurred  (€)
Cost {€)
Roadways 19,744
Fencing 6,088
Water  supply 4,300
Total 30,132
Since  the increase  in numbers  in 1998 no investments  were made in buildings,  surplus  
cows being transported  to winter  accommodation  on the leased  farms. Also, with the 
exception  of a double  cow box and a disc mower  (items,  which  were required  regardless  
of the increase  in stock),  no investment was  made  in machinery.
Sufficient  cows were milked  in the summer  of 2000 to enable  the parlour  to be closed  
down and improvements  made  to the facilities.  Improvements  made Included:
Extending  the milking  shed - 6 units were added  to the existing  10-unit  machine;
The pit was made  narrower;
The existing  feed system  was extended  and a bulk bin installed;
A new rectangular  yard with a hydraulic  backing  gate was installed;
Building  a new rectangular  yard and cattle  crush;
Installing  a drafting  gate;
Purchasing  a hoof crate.
Total cost €57,386
A new 1,600-gallon  Bulk Tank (replacing  a 760-gallon  tank) was purchased  in 1998 
costing  €20,950.  In 2002 a quad was purchased  for €5,000,  which has proved  to be 
invaluable.
One of the things  that came  as a surprise,  was the increased  amount  of time required  in 
herding  cows  to and from the parlour. This situation  is made  worse  by the crossing  of a 
very busy public  road. When  there  were 60 cows  they only crossed  the road for a couple  
of weeks  in the year for some  after-grass.  When  not crossing  the road it only took about  
15~20  minutes to bring the 60 cows  for milking  twice a day. The cows  now cross  the road 
for about  7 months  of the year and cover  a distance  of about  1.25 km. It takes  20 minutes  
in the morning  to put them across  the road, and approximately  40-45 minutes  in the 
evening  to bring them back to the parlour. This is an increase  of 3-4 hours a week  
between  a 60 and 120-cow  herd.
24
A considerable  amount  of time is also spent  travelling  to outside  farms. They appear  to 
be only 15 minutes  away, but include  the return  journey  and multiply  by 6 days and you 
have another  3 hours  and only one farm covered!  Adjusting  cattle  to grass growth  can be 
another  time consuming  job, where  the cattle have to be moved  between  farms  via truck.  
This takes  a lot of time and costs in the region  of €650-700/year.
Locally  there are good employment  opportunities,  providing  options  for farmers  and non­
farmers  alike. This has brought  mixed  blessings  since  it means  that farmers  who had time 
on their hands in the past, and could be called upon to do jobs like herding,  fertiliser  
spreading  etc., are now working  part or full time and so find time scarce  enough  to run 
their own farms.
The only reason  land was leased  was to obtain  milk quota. The first leases  involved  milk 
quota only, but as time went by more and more obstacles  seemed  to come in the way of 
leasing  and expansion.  No allowances  were made in the rules that two brothers  were 
working  in partnership.  The lease in 1998 escaped  the 20% clawback  by 48 hours.  
However,  every cloud has a silver lining, and the land leased  with quota will put the 
enterprise  in a favourable  position  post decoupling.  Decisions  will have to be made as 
regards  the new environment  in farming  and how things  will proceed  in the future.
The business  has substantial  leasing  charges  and these  will have to be watched  carefully  
in order to keep a firm eye on costs. To achieve  this, grazed  grass forms an important  
part of the diet, with cows grazing  from early (February  as they calve) until the end of 
November.  Regular  grass budgets  are done. Membership  of the local Ballybrown 
Discussion  Group  (formed  1993)  is a great  help in maintaining  an ongoing  analysis  of cost 
and efficiency.  The discussion  group  facilitates:
Monthly  meetings;
Annual  analysis  via Profit Monitor;
Praise  and criticism  from the members  when deserved:
Up to the minute  information  from the group  facilitator;
Ready  access  to the local Teagasc  advisor.
To help with the paper  work in 2004 a computer  package  was purchased.
Future  goals
• To produce  milk for 12 c/I;
• To buy/get  ownership  of quota leased  at present;
• If quota  comes  in at zero cost, to increase  production  to 160,000  gallons;
• To invest  off farm.
Life
The family wanted  to improve  their lot and so expanded.  They tripled output  and are 
proud of what they have achieved.  It can be a pleasant  walk through  their farm, which 
goes to show  that good production  and regard  for the environment  can go hand in hand.  
There  can be dark days too - especially  in springtime when  keeping  all the balls in the air 
at the one time can take its toll. A 75-hour  working  week and only a few hours off on 
Sunday  are the reality. If you are fond of attending  rugby.  All Ireland  league  matches  on 
Saturdays  or play a couple  of rounds  of golf each week, this is not the career  move for 
you. The time factor  involved  in running  a dairy enterprise  and running  a beef  enterprise  
in three different  farms  has to be experienced  to be believed!  With some  adjustments  in 
the future  the Hannons  are confident  that working  hours  can be reduced.  However,  if you
25
like working  for yourself and are prepared  to take on a challenge,  there is a reward  in the 
job satisfaction  of growing  a dairy enterprise
Quota
Appendix  1. 1984 - 346 gallons  to the acre on the home  farm
Year Gallons Owned Leased
1984 45,000 Home  Farm
1986 - 1989 15,000 Leased
1989-  1998 10,000 Leased
1993 10,000 Bought  with Land
1995-2006 25,000 Leased
1998-2005 51,000 Leased
Leased 76,000 
Owned 55,000
That is 1,007  gallons  to the acre on the home  farm.
€239,334  spent  on leased  quota over the last 20 years.
High quota prices  were never  entertained  and 8 c/I and lower  would  be the nornial
Appendix  2. Stock  as at 30/05/2004
Cows Dry cows 0-1 years 1-2 cattle Rep heifers Bulls
115 12 85 52 45 2
Milk Yield 1,187 Gallons/cow  
Butterfat:  3.71%
Protein:  3.36%
Appendix  3. Expenditure
Year Cost  (€)
1985 8 Unit milking  parlour  & slatted  collection  tank 42,000
1988 Slatted  beef shed & 20 extra cow cubicle 46,000
1993 38 acres  of Land and 10,000  gallons  of milk quota 80,000
1994/1995 Reseeding,  fencing,  cattle handing  facilities  and general  tidy
up for above 22,800
1994 Conversion  of an existing  shed to calving  boxes  that could
be cleaned  with a tractor 4,300
1995 2 units added  to parlour 2,200
1998 Bulk tank 1600 gallons  replaced  760 gallons Upgrade 20,950
and alterations  to dairy 3,750
2000/2001 Parlour  upgrade 57,386
1998,1999 1.2 km of new roadways  and resurface  existing  road
2001 Fencing  and new paddocks 6,088
2001 New water  troughs 4,300
Disc mower 5,777
2002 Quad
36 teat mobile  calf feed 5,000
2003 Spinner for  Quad 600
Land drainage  (for extra early grazing) 4,300
2004 Up-grade  fencing  in all grazing  paddocks  to accommodate  calves 1,350
26
Is there  a future  for Irish milk?
Jerry Hinchy  
Dairygold
Introduction
Based  in Munster,  Dairygold  is Ireland ’s largest  Co-Operative  milk processor,  processing 
a milk pool of 190 million  gallons,  from a geographic  supply  area incorporating  counties  
Cork, Tipperary,  Limerick  and Clare.
In the last year, management  at Dairygold  responded  to the challenges  presented  by the 
changing  dairy industry  (both domestic  and global),  in a drive to build a strong  business 
capable  of competing  successfully  on an international  stage. This has been, and remains 
the core objective  of Dairygolds  consolidation  and restructuring  program.  To this end, the 
past year has witnessed  the Co-Op  exit certain  non-profitable  and/or  non-core  aspects  of 
its traditional  business,  so as to strengthen  and re-focus  the business  for survival,  and 
growth  into a world-class  consumer  foods  business.
Whilst there has been successful  implementation  of many aspects  of this program  in 
some  areas,  there is a need to re-structure  the Consumer Foods,  Agri-Services  and Retail  
Divisions,  and Milk Processing  in order  to realise  full potential  going  forward.  The primary 
focus is and will remain  on milk processing.  This will entail  getting  the cost base, product 
portfolio  and plant configuration  right so as to operate  a profitable  milk processing 
business,  whilst  at the same  time paying  a sustainable  price for milk. The challenges  are 
great, and the options  many and diverse.
Dairygold  is acutely  aware  that the Irish dairy industry  is very interdependent,  and needs  
to cooperate  and work together  to focus  on how it might  best process  the entire Irish milk 
pool at least possible  cost, and at maximum  added  value.
The future  success  of the Irish dairy industry  will also depend  on how the industry  exploits  
the potential  that it has invested  in the Irish Dairy Board  (IDB). As an industry,  cooperating  
to secure  a viable future for milk production  in Ireland,  it must look at how It can best 
harness  the capability  of the IDB, to support  the future  for Irish milk production,  five and 
ten years  from now.
Meeting  the challenges
Is there a future  for Irish milk? It is a question  that is very relevant to those who  work and 
earn a livelihood  in the dairy industry.  It is also a pertinent  question  for Ireland  as a whole, 
given the strategic  importance  of the industry  in terms  of employment  and contribution  to 
GNP In answer  - YES, there is a future  for Irish milk, but there  are a number  of key factors 
underpinning  this belief
• Strong  and growing  global  demand  for dairy products;
• The emerging  and exciting  opportunities  presented  by the health  dimension  of dairy 
products;
• That the grass based  production  systems  prevalent  in Ireland  maintain  a competitive  
advantage  with regard  to costs.
27
Growing  global  demand
There  has been strong  growth  in global  demand  for dairy products  from late 2003 and into 
2004 with the forecasts  for the remainder  of 2004 continuing  to be positive. World  
demand  for dairy products  is growing  at around  2% per annum. This demand  is higher  
than the total annual production  of Australia  (around  10.5 million tones). The key 
fundamental  driving  this growth  has been the strong growth  in world gross domestic 
product (GDP), which is expected  to moderate  from the 6% annualised  growth  
experienced  in the second  half of 2003, to a respectable  4% plus rate in 2004. More  
importantly  for the dairy industry,  has been the growth  in the key import  markets  of Asia 
and China  - especially  in relation  to GDP growth,  which  in 2004 ranged  from around  9% 
in China  to 5.4%  for the ASEAN-4  [Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Philippines  & Thailand]  countries.  
Consequently,  global  import  demand  for dairy products  is expected  to remain  strong
Increasing  affluence  in these countries  leads to an increase  in the consumption  of dairy  
products.  The local dairy industries  cannot  cope effectively  with this increase  in demand  
(be it for reasons of infrastructure,  capacity  or technology).  A clear  lag develops  between  
growing  consumption  and under-supply  by the local dairy sector,  which  has to be met by 
imported  product.
Increasing  New Zealand  exports  to China
An example  of the impact of this increased  demand  is the fact that China is now 
Fonterra ’s fourth  largest  market  by value,  generating  in excess  of NZ $300 million  (Al62  
million)  in 2003. Two years  earlier  (in 2001),  China  was not in Fonterra ’s top 10 export 
markets.  In 2002, Fonterra  supplied  70% of China's dairy imports  (excluding  whey,  where  
the USA is the major supplier).  The bulk of Fonterra ’s sales  to China  are generated  from 
the supply  of ingredients  to companies  manufacturing  dairy products.  In the three years  
from 2001 to 2003, New Zealand’ s exports  of whole  milk powder  to China increased  by 
166%, from 29,638  tons to 78,806  tons. Its exports  of non-fat  dry milk increased  by 
199%, from 7,061 tons to 21,086  tons. Exports  of butter  increased  by over 600%  from 
1,346  tons to 9,543  tons, while  cheese  exports  to China  over this period  grew by 530%,  
from a relatively  low base of 390 tons to 2,458  tons.
China ’s consumption  of dairy products  and demand  for dairy  ingredients  is continuing  to 
grow as a result of increased  urbanisation,  rising incomes  and growing  consumer  
sophistication.  This is backed  with support from the Chinese  State  Commission  for Food  
and Nutrition,  who are promoting  the benefits  of dairy products  with initiatives  such as the 
school  milk scheme  [The school  milk program  aims to provide  600,000kg  of milk to 3 
million  students  over three years. The program  has already provided  380,000kg  of milk 
to 1.9 million students].  According  to figures  published  by the Chinese  Ministry  of 
Agriculture,  dairy consumption  has grown  by 10% for the past three  years. All indications  
suggest  that that consumer and ingredients  demand  will continue  to increase  beyond  the 
capacity  of the local Chinese  industry  to supply, creating  market opportunities  for 
companies  like Fonterra  in China [The New Zealand  and Chinese  governments  are in 
advanced  discussions  regarding  the creation  of a free trade agreement  between  the two 
countries,  which they hope to have in place by 2005. Such an agreement  would  
significantly  benefit  Fonterra ’s exports  to China. Fonterra  is also currently  completing  
negotiations  with the Chinese  government  and China's  third largest  dairy company  - 
Sanlu  to purchase  a 39% stake].
28
The health  dimension  of miik and the demand  for higher value  products
Society  has become  increasingly  body conscious,  and actively  seeks  foods  that promote 
good general  health,  as well as good specific  health in areas such as strong bones,  a 
healthy  digestive  system  or a healthy  weight. Dairy ingredients  are being used across  a 
huge array of products  from weight  management  systems  to protein  drinks  and bars for 
athletes.  Ongoing  nutrition  and health  studies  are rapidly  expanding  our understanding  of 
the enormous  health benefits  of the vitamins,  minerals,  proteins,  peptides,  amino  acids 
and various  lipid fractions  in dairy products  and ingredients,  as well as the probiotic  
benefits  of cultured  dairy products.
There  are significant  growth  opportunities  in developing  health  and nutritional  solutions  in 
immune  health, gastrointestinal  health, infant nutrition,  sports health, bone health and 
animal  health. With all this health  potential  from dairy products  we are seeing  non-dairy 
companies  trying to get in on the act. This year, Coca-Cola  purchased  Israel ’s third 
largest  dairy - Tara, for $39m. Coca-Cola  explained  its decision  by saying  that it needed 
to extend  its product  range and to gain access  to the growing  market  for drinkable  dairy  
products.  Last year  Coca-Cola  launched  a range  of milk drinks  in the US and is planning 
a similar  launch  in Australia  in 2005.
Cost of production  advantage  from grass  based  feeding  system
Ireland enjoys a competitive  advantage  in the production  of milk over most northern 
European  countries.  This competitive  advantage  is due to our grass-based  feeding 
system  for dairy herds,  and is facilitated  by the country  ‘s moderate  climate,  which  makes 
it very suitable  for grass production.  The grass-based  feeding  system  has proven  to be 
more cost-efficient  for producing  milk than the mainly grain-fed  systems  used in 
continental  EU countries.  The pasture-based  feeding  system  also has the advantage  of 
being more environmental  and welfare  friendly  for dairy cows and milk production.
However,  while there are a number  of very positive  factors,  which  should  help secure  a 
viable  future  for Irish milk, this won't  happen  just because  there  are reasonably favourable  
market  conditions.  To secure  this future,  the industry  will have to be market  focused, 
agile, responsive  and efficient  so as to deliver  value  throughout the  supply  chain from the 
dairy farmer,  right through  to the end consumer.  There are fundamental  changes  and 
improvements  that have to happen  in the industry  in Ireland  is to survive  the changing 
market  environment,  and benefit  from an increasing  demand  for dairy  products.
Seasonal  milk supply
In this era of decoupled  direct  payments,  Ireland  will have to arrive  at a situation,  whereby  
milk is produced  as far as possible  in response  to market  needs. Milk supply  will have to 
be matched  with demand  without  discounting  the advantages  of milk from grass. The 
current supply cycle results in huge seasonal  supply peaks. The responsibility  for 
collecting  this milk, processing  and the development  of new products  rests with the dairy 
processors.
While it makes  economic  sense  for the dairy farmer  to maximise  milk output  in the lowest  
cost production  periods,  it is not without  its costs  to the industry  as whole. The seasonal 
supply  glut of raw milk forces  the processors  to look at converting  this milk into longer  life 
commodity  type products,  which have low returns. The seasonality  peak also results  in 
costs associated  with under  utilised  plant capacity  in the off peak periods.  The industry 
must re-examine  these  issues,  as there are enormous  capital  costs involved.
29
There  is a need to tackle  the seasonal  peak supply  issue. Ways  of shifting  some of this 
peak onto the shoulder  periods  at either side of the peak must be investigated.  This may 
involve  some system  of differential  pricing,  or price penalties  for excess  milk supplies  at 
the peak, with bonuses  for suppliers  who follow  an extended  grass production  model  of 
spring  and autumn  calving. A means  of ensuring  that whatever  is put in place is fair to 
the farmer  will obviously  be required.
Dairy  farmers
Starting  with the first link in the supply  chain - the dairy farmer. The policy environment  
going  forward  will be very different  from the one in which  dairy farming  has operated  over 
the last 30 years. The new era is one where  the value of EU export  refunds  and market  
supports  are falling  and may eventually  disappear  altogether.
Product  mix choices
Irish dairy processors  have to process  around  5.3 million  tones  of milk each year. They  
have to decide  which products  can turn this delivered  raw milk into a profitable  return,  
however  modest. The product  type choices  available  to processors  are to produce  a 
range  of commodity  type products  or specialist  products
Product  evolution
To be a successful  commodity  product  provider  in the future,  in a market  environment  of 
reduced  or eliminated  EU supports  and protections,  the processor  will need to be very 
efficient  and price competitive.  A low cost milk production  advantage  will be beneficial  
compared  to some of our EU competitors  who have to operate in higher cost 
environments.  However,  a lower cost of milk production  advantage  alone, will not be 
sufficient to survive  and compete  successfully  as a supplier  of commodity  dairy products.  
Processors  will have to be ruthlessly  efficient  in all aspects  of their business  from raw milk 
collection,  to the delivery  of product  to the end customer. Processors  will have to 
maximise the utilization  and productivity  of their resources  and to minimise  their  costs. All 
resources;  capital, plant, labour, energy,  environmental  and transport  will have to be 
utilised  and managed  effectively  and efficiently.  Large scale is less of an issue for the 
production  of specialist  products,  but the requirements  for efficient  use of resources  
certainly  applies.
For specialist  producers,  the ability to flexibly  and competitively  deliver  product  in the 
quantities  and specifications  required  by their customers  are the key factors  for success.  
They need to develop  strong  long-term  relationships  and supply  partnerships.  They need 
to work with their customers  to improve  the quality,  functionality  and value  of the products  
delivered.  To achieve  this, they need to be close to their customers  to understand  and 
anticipate  current  and future requirements.  They need to build supply  relationships  that 
make it difficult  or costly  for competitors  break into.
Customers
We have seen the retail multiples  exercising  a lot of power  in the market  place, pushing  
down prices, rationalising  the number  of suppliers,  and putting additional  supply  
requirement  costs on dairy companies.  Other key customers  of dairy companies  are 
imposing  similar  type demands  and disciplines.  They require  their suppliers  to be 
proactive  in improving  quality and functionality,  responsive  and agile in meeting  their 
needs  in terms of quantity,  quality,  consistency,  and the competitiveness  of the product  
supplied Dairy companies  have to be close  to their non-commodity  customers  and work
30
with them in meeting  their product  requirements.  In these  types of supply  relationships, 
customers  want  to deal and communicate  directly  with their suppliers  and there is no role 
or value  for middlemen  in the supply  relationship.
A roadmap  for the future
The old prescription  for increased  scale and efficiency  was merger,  acquisition  and 
consolidation.  This has been stated  and restated  regularly  over  the past two decades  and 
no one in the industry  has offered  a different  long-term  solution.  However,  it has not been  
fully embraced  by the industry  for a variety  of reasons.  These  reasons  have as much to 
do with tradition,  as they have to do with the structure  of the industry  itself The key and 
central  role played  by local co-ops  in their communities  over the past century  should  not 
be underestimated.  They played a highly significant  role in the evolution  of Irish 
agriculture  and the ties between  them and their shareholders  and communities  are far 
more than financial,  they exist also at an emotional  level. For the shareholders  and 
managements  of these entities to participate  in a wide scale rationalisation  or 
consolidation  of the industry,  is asking  a lot. There  is also the issue of local rivalries  and 
simple  fear of the unknown.  Merger  with a traditional  rival may be seen by many  involved 
as similar  to asking Cork and Kilkenny  to field a joint hurling team! Also existing 
management  teams and others may fear for their own future in an enlarged  and 
rationalised  business
Where  consolidation  has occurred,  the parties  have generally  been slow to realise  the 
potential  efficiency  gains, again for a variety  of reasons.  Chief  among  these has tended  
to be the terms of the original  merger  or acquisition  under which all parties  involved 
(shareholders,  management,  staff, suppliers  and so on), were assured  that nothing  would  
change.  These  assurances  tended  to be made  to smooth  the merger  process.  Star ting 
from such a position  it is always  going  to be difficult  to realise  the benefits  of a merger  - 
particularly  in the industrial  relations  context.  Probably  the single  successful  exception  to 
this rule was Kerry  Group ’s unapologetic  purchase  of Golden  Vale.
At Dairygold  the painful  process  of realising  the necessary  efficiency  gains has begun.  
Over the past year a root and branch  review  of every aspect  of the business  has been  
instigated.  In each area the formula  of “fix it, outsource  it, sell it, or shut it” has been  
applied. This has resulted  in approximately  1,000 redundancies;  i.e. exit from pig 
slaughtering  and red meat; rationalisation  of the UK cheese operations;  and the 
outsourcing  of yogurt manufacturing  and transport  operations.  This has resulted  in a 
leaner  more  efficient  business,  but there is more  to do. While the  headline  number  of staff 
reduction  was high, most  of this did not apply  to the milk processing  division,  and although 
numbers  were reduced  by 20%, it is still inefficient  due to the number  of sites. The scale  
to compete  successfully  on international  commodity  markets  of the future  is still not there.  
The resources  to compete  as a specialist  product  manufacturer  are also still not there.  
Challenging  targets  for 2007 have been set and to achieve  these, new models  for the 
business  will have to be examined  - models  that will involve  a major  step shift.
The Irish dairy industry  is not one unit, but for the most part a series  of tribes  connected 
only by relative  position  in the milk price league  and ownership  of a trading  and investment  
house  - the IDB. This may seem a healthy  attribute  to those  who see the world through 
the jaundiced  eye of the perceived  failure  of mergers  in this country.  However  the 'divided 
we stand, united  we fall’ mindset  of the cynic cannot  be allowed  to flourish. Stand  for a 
moment  outside  the box and imagine  what would happen  if a change  team was handed  
a clean sheet of paper and told to forget about past failures/rivalries,  forget  about the
31
power  of the interest  groups,  just simply  write down how to maximise  the competitive  
position  of those  who milk cows on this green island.
The change  team
The ‘change team ’ would very likely come back with the following  summary  
recommendations:
• The emergence  of a small number of strategically  placed,  scale commodity  sites with 
their own sales arm;
• The  development  of a number of smaller  sites, strategically  chosen  to cluster  existing  
volume  of non-commodity  products,  should  they not fit best alongside  the commodity  
sites. Sales  and Tech development  would  be aligned  to ensure  these  businesses  are 
positioned  to extend  and defend  their businesses;
• Target  markets  for emerging  products  would  be nominated;✓ Nutrition  - U S;✓ Cheese  flavour/texture  - U.K;✓ Dairy ingredients  - China;✓ Medium  and hard cheese  - southern  Mediterranean;✓ Food service  - US/UK,
• Appropriate sales/R&D teams  would  be constructed  to address  each of these  markets  
and state agency,  dairy orientated,  market  and tech research  would be absorbed  by 
these  entities.
• Non-core  assets  would either be sold to fund change  or given back to the original  
stakeholders  to be managed  outside  of the milk processing  structure.
• Governance  and ownership  would be driven  by how Dairy Ireland  progresses  away  
from commodity  towards  lifestyle  health orientated  ingredients.  There is room for a 
stock  market  and farmers,  if there is a path of growth.  There  is room for farmers  only 
if we remain  in non-growth,  non-intellectual  property  type products.
To speak  of a single  strategy  for the Irish dairy industry  is a fine lofty topic. However,  as 
the industry  is structured  today, it is a complete  waste of time. You cannot  develop  a 
strategy for a series  of fragmented  businesses  with separate  ownership  and management  
structures.
So is there reason  for hope?
Management  of today ’s processing  entities  are progressively  attempting  to examine  
means of working in a pragmatic,  non-threatening  manner  with their neighboring  
processors,  to find the lowest cost means of solving their commodity  processing  
challenges.  This is an important  step. Farmers  today, and the boards  that represent  
them have moved  far beyond  parochial  issues. They are becoming  focused  on ensuring  
that positive  change  occurs  to mitigate  the effects  of reducing  EU supports,  and indeed  
trying  to move Ireland  into the sweet  spot of leading  edge technology  application.
It is very early days yet, however,  the Irish dairy industry  is neither  young nor without 
history  and roots,  and it would  be unrealistic  and indeed  perhaps  unhelpful  if the evolution  
of the industry  was to occur too quickly.
Dairygold  restructuring
As the largest  co-op processing  milk on the Island,  and especially  given its geographic 
position,  Dairygold  will play its role in the future  developments  of the Irish dairy industry.  
A strategy  for dairy processing  has only now been completed.  It will deliver  change,
32
which  will be robust  in the face of the future  evolution;
• One large efficient  commodity  processing  site;
• Repositioning  of current  value-added  products,  either as discreet  clip-ons  to the 
commodity  site or located  on sites where  they have a long term future.
• The creation  of a speciality  ingredients  business  to drive added-value.
To drive this change  will require  funds; the intention  is that these funds  would be put in 
place in a manner  that would  prevent  Dairygold  from becoming  a brake  on Irish milk price  
over the course  of the change  period  - the next 2 to 3 years. It is therefore  vital that non- 
agri foods are managed  in a manner  that ensures  they maximise  their value for the 
business,  and that the assets  built up outside  of the Dairygold  balance  sheet  are unlocked 
e g. in businesses  that are part owned  (such  as lAWS and the IDB).
From a Dairygold  perspective,  it is perfectly  reasonable  to suggest  the IDB can best serve  
Irish dairy farmers  by going back to what it was put in place to do 'Market  Irish Dairy  
Products ’, and release  the extensive  value it has built up outside  this remit to act as a 
catalyst  in the forward  development  of the Irish dairy industry.  A good business  case can 
be made for having a centralised  commodity  clearing  house to dispose  of Irish dairy 
commodity  products,  but it does  not need  to have a large and expensive  infrastructure  and 
overheads.  It has to be lean and efficient  in every aspect of its operations.  This 
requirement  is no different  for the dairy farmer  or the dairy processor.
There  has been only limited  development  of the Kerrygold  brand in recent  years. There  
is a need to examine  if a different  organisational  structure,  and marketing  focus  is required 
to successfully  develop  and expand  the range  and quantity  of branded  Irish dairy products  
sold on international  markets,  at higher  margins.
The IDB going  forward
The new go-forward  structure  of the IDB should  aim to;
• become  a low cost commodity  sales management  operation;
• separate  out it's 'value  added'  branded  business,  and drive it forward;
• give up on being a speciality  ingredients  player,  it's not the role for a trader.
From a Dairygold  perspective,  it is reasonable  to suggest  that the IDB can best serve  Irish 
dairy farmers  by going  back to what  it was put in place  to do - 'market  Irish dairy products ’ 
and release  the extensive  value  it has built up outside this  remit,  to act as a catalyst  in the 
forward  development  of the Irish dairy industry.  A good business  case can be made for 
having a centralised  commodity  clearing  house to dispose  of Irish dairy commodity 
products,  but it does not need to have a large and expensive  infrastructure  and 
overheads.  It has to be lean and efficient  in every aspect  of its operations.  This 
requirement  is no different  for the dairy farmer  or the dairy processor.
Conclusions
A challenging  transition  period  is now upon the Irish dairy industry  as it leaves  behind  the 
era of EU supports.  This paper  has identified  a number  of key industry  strategies  that 
must be addressed  if further  progress  is to be made;
• At farm level, the milk supply  curve  has to be better  managed.
• At the processing  stage,  the asset-sharing  model  must  be embraced  as a realistic  and 
viable  means  of ensuring  low cost commodity  production.
33
At the sales  end, the IDB (which  has served  the nation  well), needs  to look at radically  
transforming  its structures  to ensure it focuses  on being the most cost efficient  
commodity  seller  and the best manager  under the Kerrygold  brand.
There  is a future  for Irish milk, but this future  is by no means  guaranteed.  As an industry  
Ireland  Inc. ’ may not have prepared  as well as possible  for an environment  of significantly  
reduced  EU supports  and increased  international  competition.  To secure  a viable  future,  
tough  but necessary  actions  will have to be taken. The prize is worth  fighting  for, - is the 
resolve  there?
34
strategic  use of nitrogen  in a new environment
J. Humphreys,  K. O’Connell,  A. Lawless  and K. McNamara 
Teagasc,  Moorepark,  Solohead and Johnstown  Castle
Introduction
In recent  times,  the control  of nitrate  losses  from agriculture  to surface  and ground  waters  
have been the focus of attention  pending  the instigation  of a National  Action  Programme 
under  the Nitrates  Directive  (91/676/EEC).  The objective  of this Directive  is “to reduce 
water pollution  caused  or induced  by nitrates  from agricultural  sources  and to prevent 
further  such pollution ”. Pollution  by nitrates  is defined  as concentrations exceeding  50 mg 
nitrate/I, known as the Maximum  Allowable  Concentration  (MAC). However, 
concentrations  of less than 25 mg/I (the guide level) are considered  desirable.
In Ireland the whole country  has been designated  as subject  to controls  under this 
directive,  which  seeks  to limit soil amendments  by N contained  in organic  manures to 170 
kg/ha/year.  Such amendments  include  the direct deposition  of excreta  by grazing 
livestock  and land spreading  of organic  manures.  These  manures  include  that generated  
by ruminant  livestock  housed  on the farm, by intensively  managed  livestock  such as pigs 
and poultry,  and others, such as spent composts,  sludges  etc. Restrictions  are also 
placed  on periods  during  which  these  manures  can be applied,  ranging  from mid-October  
to early January  in the south and east, and the beginning  of October  and the end of 
January  in the north. The main impact  of the limit of 170 kg organic  N/ha is to restrict 
stocking  rates on farms  to around  2.0 LSU/ha  (0.8 cow/acre).
These limits are not yet ‘set in stone' and will be the subject  of intense  negotiation 
between  Irish government  departments  of agriculture  and environment  and the EU 
commission.  However,  this is not an issue that will be dealt with in this paper,  but rather  
the objective  is to outline  some of the factors  that influence  the efficiency  of N use on 
grassland  farms. Improving  efficiency  of N-use  is necessary  to maintain  production  under  
restricted  fertilizer  N regimes,  and also to reduce  losses  to the environment.  This will also 
strengthen  Ireland ’s case for derogation  in future. Improving  efficiency  of N-use is also 
important  from the perspective  of lowering  costs on farms where  incomes  are coming 
under  increasing  pressure  following  the recent  reforms  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy 
(CAP).
Fertilizer  N use on intensive  dairy farms
Surveys  of fertilizer  N use on intensive  dairy farms  indicate  that at similar  stocking  rates,  
there is considerable  variation  in the quantities  used (Figure  1). There  are a number  of 
reasons  for this including  differences  in soil-type  and natural  background  fertility  (see 
below),  differences  in the type of stock being carried  and the extent  to which maize  and 
whole-crop  are grown,  and the extent  to which  concentrates  and other  feeds  are imported 
onto farms. The latter  will tend to lower  fertilizer  N use on farms. Nevertheless  it is clear  
that some  farmers  are using N more  efficiently  on their  farms,  than others. It can be seen  
in Figure  1 that fertilizer  N use on farms  stocked  at 2.5 LSU/ha  ranges  between  225 and 
400 kg/ha. Obviously  the farmer  operating  at 225 kg/ha will be better  able to meet the 
future  requirements  of the Nitrates  Directive  compared  to the farmer  using  400 kg/ha. The 
question  is why is one farmer  so much more efficient  than the other?
35
Figure  1. Fertilizer  N use on intensive  dairy farmers  in the south  west  of ireland.
Factors  influencing  iosses  of N
Available  N for uptake  by the sward
Efficient  management  of N on farms  requires  that N is supplied  to the soil at a time and 
In a manner  that ensures that as much  of that N as possible  is taken  up by the sward  and 
used to grow  grass to feed livestock.  This requires  that losses  between  application  to the 
soil and uptake  by the sward  be minimised.
Nitrogen  is available  in the soil in two forms:  nitrate  and ammonium,  both of which  can be 
taken up and used by the sward. Fertilizers  supply both nitrate and ammonium,  for 
example,  CAN is calcium  ammonium  nitrate. Urea, on the other hand, is broken  down  to 
ammonium  once it is applied  to the soil. Any ammonium  that is not readily  taken up by 
the grass  roots  accumulates  in the soil where  it is converted  to nitrate. This is unfortunate  
because  nitrate  is prone  to being lost from the soil.
Soil particles  are negatively  charged.  Ammonium  in the soil is positively  charged  and 
therefore  ammonium  is held quite  well in the soil. In contrast,  nitrate  is negatively  charged  
and is therefore  repelled  from soil particles.  Thus nitrate  in the soil moves  easily  with the 
flow of soil water,  which  facilitates the transport  of nitrate  to plant roots  when  the sward  is 
taking up soil water. The soil water is drawn to the plant roots by a process  called  
evapotranspiration.  Approximately  4,500 m^ of water/ha/year  (a little less than 400,000 
gals/acre)  is drawn  out of the ground  by this process.
Nitrate  leaching  and denitrification
The mobility  of nitrate  is a disadvantage  under conditions  of high rainfall  because  it leads  
to leaching.  This is a mechanism  by which nitrate  is washed  out of the topsoil  as water 
passes  down  through  the soil profile. Leaching  of nitrate  is mostly  associated  with sandy,  
free-draining  soils. In heavy  soils with impeded  drainage,  nitrate  is lost by an alternative  
mechanism  that is also dependant  on the soil water  status. Under  high rainfall,  the soil 
pores of heavier  soils get increasingly  saturated  with water, which depletes  the soil of 
oxygen.  Under such circumstances certain  bacteria  in the soil are able to take the nitrate  
(NO 3) and detach  the oxygen  (O2) and use it to survive  the waterlogged  conditions.  This 
process  is called  denitrification  and leads to the release  of NjO and N2 gasses  into the 
atmosphere.
36
In Ireland,  there  are high rates  of rainfall  during  the autumn,  winter  and spring  (Figure  2a). 
In contrast,  rates of evapotranspiration  are highest  during  late spring,  summer  and early 
autumn. Average  rainfall in Ireland is around 1000 mm per year, whereas  
evapotranspiration  is around  450 mm per year. The difference  is known as surplus 
rainfall,  which  either  drains  down through  the soil or runs off the soil surface  into drains  
etc. This surplus  rainfall  amounts  to around  5,500 m^ of water/ha  or around  500,000 
gals/acre).
As can be seen in Figure  2b, most of this surplus  rainfall  occurs  between  October  and 
January. These huge volumes  of surplus  rainfall can cause considerable  losses of 
nutrients  either by denitrification  of nitrate,  nitrate leaching  or run-off  etc., and this has 
implications  for the timing  of fertilisers  and slurry.
Figure  2. a) Average  monthly  rainfall  (bars)  and potential  evapotranspiration  (line)  
(mm/month),  and (b) surplus  rainfall  (mm/month)
(a)
Ijj? Mar Ap? V| lijf :\iiH  t-KC0
50(b)
Sfjx .Vftf {‘ift S p \-o* IVr
Volatilisation  of ammonia
The opposing  influences  of rainfall and evapotranspiration  also influence  the other  
important  mechanism  of N loss from grassland,  i.e. volatilisation  of ammonium  (NH 4) to 
ammonia  (NFI 3) gas. This loss of N is generally  associated  with the application  of urea 
fertilizer.  Once urea is applied  to the soil it is broken  down into ammonium  and dissolves  
in the soil water. Ideally  this soil water  seeps  down to the grass roots. Flowever,  under  
good drying  conditions,  the water  containing  the ammonium  can be evaporated  off into the 
air as water  vapour. The ammonium  dissolved  in this water  is like-wise  volatilised  off as 
ammonia  gas. It can be seen in Figure  2b that evapotranspiration  exceeds  rainfall  during 
May, June and July. Flence, these are the months  when there is greatest  risk of 
volatilisation.  For this reason  it is not generally  recommended  that urea fertilizer  be used  
after the beginning  of May.
The greatest  loss of N by volatilisation  occurs  during  the application  of slurry. The N in 
slurry  exists  in two main forms:  (1) ammonium  and (2) organic  material,  which  is the solid 
fraction  of the slurry  (e g. the fibrous  residue  of digested  silage etc ). Ammonium  accounts  
for around  50% of the N in slurry  and the solid fraction  accounts  for the other  50%. Once 
the slurry  is applied  the ammonium  is immediately  available  for uptake  by the sward. The 
N in the solid material  only becomes available  as the organic  material  rots away  over  time.
However,  ammonium  in slurry  can easily  be lost by volatilisation,  in the same  manner  as 
it is lost following  the application  of urea fertilizer.  In fact, virtually  all of the ammonium  in
37
slurry applied  after the beginning  of May can be lost by volatilisation,  particularly  where  
slurry is applied  to bare silage  stubble  under  dry conditions  during  the summer.  This is 
partly because  of weather  conditions,  but it is also due to the method  of application.  
Spraying  slurry  into the air via splash-plate,  promotes  the process  of volatilisation.  These  
losses  occur  during  and immediately  after application  and virtually  all of the ammonium  
in the slurry  can be lost within  a few hours  of the slurry  being applied.  The application  of 
33 m^/ha (3000 gals/acre)  of slurry can contain  around  100 kg N/ha, half of which is 
ammonium  dissolved  in the liquid fraction. Hence,  around  50 kg N/ha is rapidly  lost by 
volatilisation  when the slurry is applied  under  the wrong  conditions.  This represents  a 
significant  loss of N when it is considered  that average  fertilizer  use by the group of 
intensive  dairy farms  presented  in Figure  1 is 300 kg fertilizer  N/ha.
Volatilisation  losses  can be minimised  by applying  slurry under  conditions  that promote  
the rapid infiltration  of the slurry  into the soil. Two factors  facilitate  the achievement  of this 
objective;  (1) applying  slurry under  damp misty conditions  and (2) applying  fairly dilute  
slurry.
Damp  conditions
To get the best response  to slurry, it is necessary  to apply slurry under  cool damp  misty  
conditions,  preceding  or coinciding  with active  grass  growth  and rapid uptake  of nutrients  
from the soil. The most ideal concurrence  of these  conditions  is during  the spring  months  
of February,  March  and April, and to a lesser  extent  the autumn  months  of September  and 
October.  However,  when slurry is applied  in October,  it is being applied  just prior to the 
four wettest  months  of the year (Figure  2a) and at a time of declining  grass growth.  
Hence,  while applying  slurry in October  might lower  ammonia  losses,  there is increased  
risk of P loss in runoff  and nitrate  loss by denitrification  and leaching  over the winter.
The greatest  responses  to applied  slurry  is during  the spring,  when infiltration  is high, and 
there is a huge inorease  in grass  growth;  going from around  5 kg DM/ha/day  in January  
to around  80 kg DM/ha/day  by the end of April. This generates  a huge demand  for the 
nutrients  ensuring  rapid uptake and efficient  utilization  of the nutrients  in the slurry.  
Furthermore,  when slurry is applied  during the spring,  the solid material  gets washed  
down into the soil where it rots away slowly during the summer  months,  releasing  
nutrients  for uptake  by the sward. In contrast,  when slurry is applied  during  October,  the 
solid fraction  rots away during  the winter  months,  when uptake  by the sward is low and 
there is high rainfall causing  the loss of these newly released  nutrients  by run-off,  
denitrification  or leaching.
Application  of dilute  slurry
In Ireland,  the solid fraction  of slurry  generally  accounts  for between  2 - 10% of the total 
volume  of slurry. As this becomes  more dilute  due to rainwater  or mixing  with dirty water,  
there is a dilution  of the nutrients  contained  in the slurry. This creates  greater  volumes  of 
slurry. As slurry  gets more dilute,  the relative  efficiency  of utilization  of the ammonium-N  
increases,  because  more dilute slurry infiltrates  into the soil much more quickly  that 
higher DM slurry. This is particularly  the case for slurry applied  during the summer 
months  when the likelihood  of volatilisation  is greatest.  With high DM slurry, a greater 
proportion  of the nutrient  value adheres  to grass or the soil surface,  where it remains  
exposed  to the air for longer,  leading  to greater  losses  through  volatilisation.
38
Grass  growth  and N uptake  from the soil
Factors  influencing  grass  growth
Sunlight  (day length and intensity),  soil temperature  and soil moisture  are the three 
primary  determinants  of grass growth. Sunlight  provides  the energy  that fuels grass 
growth  through  the process  of photosynthesis.  The extent  of sunlight  depends  on the 
combination  of daylength  and the intensity  of the sunlight.  Daylength  varies  from around  
8 hours/day  in mid-winter  to 16 hours/day  in mid-summer.  However,  the incidence  of 
sunlight  is about 10-times  higher  in mid-summer  than mid-winter.  This is because  the 
intensity  of sunlight  is about  5-times  higher  in mid-summer than in mid-winter.
During the winter and early spring, low soil temperatures  limit grass growth. At soil 
temperatures  of less than 4.5°C there is no net accumulation  of new pasture. Between 
4 5°C and 6.0°C there are small amounts  of pasture  accumulation.  It is only when soil 
temperatures  increase  above  6.0°C that there are substantial  amounts  of grass growth.  
Grass growth increases  rapidly with increasing  soil temperatures  above 6.0°C.  
Winter/spring  temperatures  vary widely  across  the country,  with grass  growing  virtually  all 
year round  at Valentia  (Co. Kerry),  but limited  by low soil temperatures  during  December,  
January  and February  at Clones  (Co. Monaghan).
Soil temperatures  generally  place a greater  constraint  on grass  growth  during  the spring 
than during  the autumn. In the autumn  grass  growth  is constrained  more by decreasing  
sunlight  and by changes  in the physiology  of the sward. During  the late autumn  the sward  
begins  to accumulate  resources  in the stubble  rather  than producing  new leaves  that 
might be burned  off by frost. Also, grass  leaves  are the machinery  that absorbs  sunlight  
for photosynthesis.  The cost of running  this machinery  is respiration,  which  describes the 
energy  used to maintain  the internal  workings  of the grass sward. As sunlight  declines  
during  the autumn  the respiration  cost associated  with a large amount of leaf material  can 
begin to exceed  the level of photosynthesis  that oan be maintained  on the declining 
sunlight. Hence  for the plant, having  a large amount  of leaf material  starts  to become  a 
liability. Under  such circumstances,  energy  loss by respiration  can exceed  the energy 
absorbed  from sunlight,  and grass  starts  to shed some  of its leaf material,  which is often  
manifested  as white-tips  on the leaves  of grass. This process  also leads  to a loss of DM 
when heavy  covers  are carried  into the winter.
A soil temperature  of 6.0°C is generally  considered  an important  threshold  for grass 
growth during the spring It has occasionally  been suggested  that, because  soil 
temperatures  remain above 6.0°C until as late as November,  that this justifies  the 
application  of fertilizer  N during  November.  This is nonsense.  Applying  fertilizer  N during 
November  is a complete  waste of money,  since the possibility  of getting  a worthwhile  
response  in grass  growth  is long gone!. Furthermore,  high rates of surplus  rainfall  will be 
entering  the soil during  November,  December  and January  during  a period  when uptake 
by the sward  will be virtually  zero. Under  such conditions,  fertilizer  N will not remain  for 
long in the soil.
In general,  soil temperatures  in coastal  areas of the south and west are relatively  high 
during  the winter  and spring,  and lower in inland  areas  of the north and east. This has 
implications  for the application  of fertilizer  N during the spring. In contrast  to soil 
temperatures,  the incidence  of sunlight  varies relatively  little in different  parts of the 
country.  Therefore,  while higher soil temperatures  during  the winter  favour  a longer  grass ­
growing  season  in the south,  there  can be much  less of a difference  in the amount  of grass
39
grown  during  the year. As can be seen in Table 1, there is little difference  in the amount  
of grass grown in Moorepark,  Co. Cork compared  to Ballyhaise,  Co. Cavan,  although  
Ballyhaise  is much further  to the north. The implication  is that at colder  locations,  there  
is much the same potential  to grow grass except  that it will be grown over a shorter  
growing  season,  characterised  by a huge surge in grass  growth  during  April and May.
Table  1. The productivity  of permanent  grassland  under  simulated  grazing  around  
Ireland
Site Production  (t DM/ha/yr) SD
Moorepark,  Co. Cork 14.51.2
Kilmaley,  Co. Clare 14.21.8
Solohead,  Co. Tipperary 15,8 1.9
Ballyhaise,  Co. Cavan 14.4 1.5
Grange,  Co. Meath 13.61.0
There  are clear relationships  between  the factors  that influence  grass  growth  and hence  
requirements  for N from the soil, and those likely to result in losses  of N from the soil. 
During  the main growing  season  there is a huge demand  for N from the soil, whereas  the 
risk of loss is limited  to volatilisation  of ammonia.  During  the winter the demand  for N is 
low whereas  the risk of denitrification  and leaching  is high. The important  questions  are 
(1) when to start applying  fertilizer  N in the late winter  or spring  and how much to apply;  
and (2) when to stop applying  fertilizer  N during  the autumn?
Fertilizer  N recommendations  for grassiand
The requirement  for available  soil N
Annual  grass production  rarely exceeds  15 t DM/ha  (Table 1), and is dependant  on the 
uptake  of at least  450 kg N/ha from the soil. The availability  of at least 450 kg N/ha from 
the soil supplies  30 g/kg N in the grass DM - the minimum  required  for optimum  
photosynthesis.  However,  it is not necessary  to supply  all of this as fertilizer  N. This is 
because  soils have the capacity  to supply  a certain  amount  of N, known  as background  
N, each year (Figure  3a).
Background availability of N in the soil
Mineral  soils (as opposed  to peat soils) in Ireland  contain  around  8.5% organic  matter 
(ranging  between  5 and 20%)  mixed  in with the sand, silt and clay particles.  This organic  
matter  has accumulated  in the soil over thousands  of years,  and is made  up of decaying  
grass, roots and other herbage,  organic  material  deposited  in dung and slurry etc. 
Organic  matter  is the glue that holds soil together,  and plays an important  role in water 
retention  and availability.  It is also an important  component  of soil fertility,  regulating  the 
availability  of many nutrients  in the soil. The soil organic  matter (SOM)  contains  around  
7,000  kg of N/ha, Most of this N (SOM-N)  (98%)  is in a form that is not available  for plant  
uptake. However,  the SOM is constantly  being  turned  over by earthworms  and other  soil 
organisms,  and this turnover  makes  a small amount  of N available  for uptake  by the 
sward  each year (Table  2).
The background  availability  of N from Irish grassland  soils is the subject  of an on-going  
study  by Teagasc.  Early results  indicate  that average  background  availability  during  the 
growing  season  (mid-February  to the end of October),  is around 140 kg N/ha/year,
40
ranging  between  56 kg/ha and 220 kg/ha (Table 2). These results are preliminary; 
nevertheless  they Indicate  the range  in background  availability  of N that can be expected  
from Irish grassland  soils. Lower  quantities  are associated  with lighter  soils with shallow  
topsoil. Higher  quantities  are associated  with heavier  soils and soils with deeper  topsoil. 
Soil organic  matter  content  and drainage  status  are also important  characteristics.
The wide range in the amount  of fertilizer  N being used on intensive  dairy farms  (225 to 
400 kg N/ha for farms stocked  at 2.5 LSU/ha  - Figure 1), is largely a reflection  of 
differences  in the background  release  of N on different  farms. On otherwise  fertile  sites,  
there can be a difference  of 100 kg N/ha in background  availability  of N during  the growing 
season  (e g. Clonroche  and Johnstown  Castle,  both in Co. Wexford).  This clearly  has 
implications  for fertilizer  recommendations  and for the requirement of fertilizer  N on farms.
Figure  3. The annual  requirement  for available  soil N by a sward  producing  15 t 
DM/ha/year,  and meeting  that requirement from  background  availability  of N in the 
soil and applied  fertilizer  N
(a) Requirement  for available  soil N
N
reouiremen!
N
reauirement
41
Table  2. Background  availability  of N from grassland  soils in Ireland^
Location Background  availability  (kg N/ha/year)
Ballinamore Co. Leitrim 56
Kilmaley Co. Clare 82
Clonroche Co. Wexford102
Oakpark Co. Carlow112
Kildalton Co. Kilkenny 113
Gurteen Co. Tipperary 113
Moorepark Co. Cork 120
Athenry Co. Galway 136
Clonakilty Co. Cork 141
Solohead Co. Tipperary 142
Tullamore Co. Offaly 162
Grange Co. Meath 190
Johnstown  Castle Co. Wexford 200
Pallaskenry Co. Limerick 205
Ballyhaise Co. Cavan220
Average 140
^K. O’Connell,  unpublished data)
The requirement  for fertilizer  N during  the spring
The release  of background  N continues  throughout  the year, and is influenced  by soil 
temperature  and moisture  status. Highest  rates of availability  are associated  with high 
soil temperatures during  August and September  combined  with a plentiful  supply  of water.  
Availability  is impeded  by drought conditions.  Lowest  rates of availability  occur  during  the 
winter  months,  due to low soil temperatures  and waterlogging.  Nevertheless,  substantial  
quantities  of background  N can become  available  during  the winter,  e g. between  late 
October  and the middle of March the background  release  of 43 kg N/ha has been  
recorded  at Moorepark  (O’Donovan  et al., 2004). This is the equivalent  of 270 g 
N/ha/day. More generally,  estimates  of N release  during November,  December  and 
January  at Solohead  and Moorepark,  range  between  200 and 250 g N/ha/day.
In Figure 3a, the background  availability  of N based on data from Solohead  and 
Moorepark  is presented  in comparison  with the requirement  for 450 kg fertilizer  N/ha by 
a sward producing  15 t DM/ha/year  (close  to maximum  potential  production).  It can be 
seen that the background  release  of N is able to meet the requirements  of the sward  
during  November,  December  and January.  The release  of 200 to 250 g N/ha/day  during  
this period is sufficient  to support  the production  of 600 to 700 kg grass DM/ha  (or a 
growth  rate between  6.5 and 7.5 kg DM/ha/day).
At some  stage  during  January  and February,  sward  demand  for available  N from the soil 
begins  to exceed  the background  supply. At this point there is likely  to be a response  to 
fertilizer  N. This can happen  as early as mid-January  in the southwest  and as late as mid 
March in the north. Over large parts of the country  the point where requirement  for 
fertilizer  N begins  to exceed  background  supply  is likely to be in mid-February.
The next question  that arises  is how much  fertilizer  N to apply  during  the early spring?  At 
Moorepark,  O’Donovan  et al., (2004)  showed  very high production  responses  in terms  of
42
grass  grown  by 18 March  to fertilizer  N input of 90 kg N/ha. For experimental  reasons  all 
of this fertilizer  was applied  in one application.  When  this fertilizer  was applied  between 
mid-January  and early February,  recovery  in the sward was around 50%. Earlier 
application  resulted  in lower  rates of recovery,  due to high levels  of surplus  rain coinciding 
with low rates of N uptake  from the soil (Figure  4). In this example,  around  45 kg N/ha is 
lost before  it ever contributed  to grass production.  Some losses  will be unavoidable,  but 
by splitting  the application;  i.e. 30 kg/ha applied  in mid-January  and the remaining  60 
kg/ha applied  in mid-February,  the risk of loss will be lowered  because  the bulk of the 
fertilizer  will be applied  closer  to the time of high uptake  by the sward. This will vary with 
location. Accordingly,  it is generally  recommended  that 29 kg N/ha (23 units/acre)  is 
applied  in the first application,  and that this is followed  four to six weeks  later by around 
58 kg/ha  (46 units/acre)  depending  on growing  conditions  (Fig. 3b). The initial application 
may need to be as early as mid-January  in the southwest,  mid-February  in the midlands 
and the end of February  in the northeast.  This strategy  will result  in higher  recovery  of N 
by the sward  resulting  in more efficient  use of N on the farm.
Figure  4. 
2004)Recovery  of fertiliser  N (%) during  the grazing  season  (O’Connell  et al.,
I25
Recovery  of 
fertilizer  N (%)
l.'-lcb  I2-Apr  l»-V1ii\ 24-VU:. N-Jun  2fi-Jiil
In Figure 3b, a fertilizer  N application  strategy  to meet the demand  for fertilizer  N is 
outlined.  This is based  on a fairly  typical  approach  where a 0.5 bag of urea/acre  is applied 
in February,  followed  by 1 bag urea/acre  during  March  and April. Subsequently  during 
early May, 1.5 bags CAN/acre  are applied,  followed  by 1 bag of CAN/acre  at four-week 
intervals  during  late May, June, July and August.  A bag or 0.5 bags CAN/acre  is applied  
during  early to mid-September.  The total quantity  of fertilizer  N applied  is around  350 kg 
N/ha.
Strategies  to lower  fertilizer  N requirements  on farms
Matching  fertilizer  N use to stocking  rate
Recent  work at Solohead  has shown  that, with grass-only  swards,  around  170 kg fertilizer  
N/ha is required  to support  a stocking  rate of around  2.0 LSU/ha.  Average fertilizer  N use 
on Irish dairy farms  stocked  at 2.0 LSU/ha  is 175 kg/ha  (Coulter  et al.. 2002). Therefore  
there is good conformity  between  the rate of fertilizer  N being used on farms,  generally,  
and that found  to be necessary  to support  this stocking  rate at Solohead.  Furthermore,  at 
Solohead,  it was found that for every increase  in stocking  rate by 0.1 LSU/ha,  an 
additional  30 kg N/ha was required  (Flumphreys  et al., 2004). These  results  have been  
incorporated  into the Teagasc  fertilizer  recommendations.
43
It can be seen in Table  2 that the soil at Solohead  has the capacity  to supply  around  140 
kg background  N/ha during  the main growing  season  (mid-February  to late October;  a 
further  25 kg/ha is released  during the winter period). This is similar  to the national  
average.  Taking  into account  the range  in background  availability  of N from different  soils,  
it is clear that these fertilizer  N recommendations  are likely to be too low on farms  with 
soils with low levels  of background  availability,  and too high on farms  with high levels  of 
background  availability.  Therefore  the Teagasc  recommendations  serve to indicate  the 
quantities  of fertilizer  N that are likely to be required  in an average  situation.  It is not 
possible  at the present time  to be able to accurately  delineate  the extent  to which  the soil 
on a particular  farm is able to supply  background  N.
Most farmers  have a fair idea of the background  fertility  and production  capacity  of their 
farms. It is fairly obvious  when not enough  fertilizer  is being applied  on the farm; not 
enough  grass is being grown. It is also fairly obvious  when too much fertilizer  is being  
used, when excessive  quantities  of surplus  grass is being baled as wrapped  silage.  
Under  such circumstances  it pays to cut back on fertilizer  N. The saving  in fertilizer  N is 
small compared  to the saving  of not making  bales.
Matching  fertilizer  applications  to 'responsiveness'  to fertilizer  N and demand  for grass  
The best response  to fertilizer N will be achieved  by applications  made  during  late March,  
April and May. During  this time of the year, it pays to apply optimum  rates of fertilizer  N 
on the grazing  area and maximise  stocking  rates, thus making  as much ground as 
possible  available for  first cut silage. Given  the high rates  of grass  growth  during  late April 
and May, it is possible  to make  around  20% more  silage  per ha for more-or-less  the same  
inputs costs compared  to second-cut  silage. Thus making  a large first-cut  lowers  the 
need for second-cut  silage (the economics  of which is becoming  increasingly  
questionable).  Therefore  a smaller  area needs  to be closed  for second  cut. This makes  
a greater  area available  for grazing  providing  substantial  scope  to lower  fertilizer  N inputs  
onto the grazing  area from June onwards.
When it comes to lowering  fertilizer  N input to the grazing  area from mid-summer 
onwards,  a question  that often arises,  is whether  to make a large application  of fertiliser 
at long intervals  (e g. 40 kg N/ha applied  once  every  eight  weeks),  or a smaller  application  
at shorter  intervals  (e g. 20 kg/ha  every  four weeks). Experience  todate  is that small but 
regular  applications  help to maintain  a steady  supply of high quality pasture. Large  
applications  at long inten/als  result  in a boom-and-bust situation  where  grass  starts  to run 
out of control,  often triggering  the decision  to harvest  bales,  and then the grass  begins  to 
disappear  because  there is not enough  N available  in the soil. Applying  rates of 15 to 25 
kg N/ha at four to  six-week  intervals  during  the summer  is recommended  on moderately  
stocked  farms  (Table  3).
Teagasc  has suggested  a general  approach  to fertilizer  N applications  for farms,  where  
first-cut  silage  is maximised  and second  cut silage  is minimised  (Table  4). The basis of 
these recommendations  is to apply fertilizer  in a way that maximises  response  in terms  
of grass  grown,  and that this grass  is supplied  in line with demand  on the fami. On farm 
applicability  can vary because  of issues relating  to farm fragmentation  etc., and also 
because  of different  soil capabilities  to supply background  N. An approach  that has 
worked  well at Solohead,  is to link the application  of fertilizer  N from June onwards,  with 
achieving  target  pasture  covers. At high stocking  rates, if grass supply  remains  above  
target, the application  of fertilizer  N is halved,  for example  from 35 kg/ha to 17 kg/ha.
44
Table 3. Suggested  approach  to fertiliser  N applications  on the grazing  area of 
farms  with different  stocking  rates during  the growing  season
Over-all Jan/ March April May June July Aug. Sept. Total
farm stocking Feb
rate (LSU/ha)(kg N/ha)
1.8 29 29 17 17 17110
19 29 58 19 17 17 140
2.0 29 29 582017 17 170
2.1 29 50 58 29 17 17200
2.2 29 50 58 35 24 17 17 230
2.3 29 58 58 35 23 23 17 17 260
2.4 29 58 58 52 35 24 17 17 290
2.5 29 58 58 52 35 35 35 17 320
2.6 29 58 58 52 52 35 35 31 350
Under moderate  stocking  rates, where small amounts  of N are being applied  at each 
application,  if grass  supply  remains  above  target,  the application  of fertilizer  N is delayed 
for a week. If supply  again remains  above  target,  fertilizer  N application  is again  delayed 
etc. This approach  makes  maximum  use of background  N and can result in savings  in 
fertilizer  N. More importantly  it avoids  the need to make baled  silage. The pasture  cover  
targets  used at Solohead  for moderate  and high stocking  rates (2.0 and 2.5 LSU/ha  
respectively)  are presented  in Figure  5.
Figure  5. Target  pasture  covers  at various  stages  during  the grazing  season
6 T
O^Target  tuppiy ” farms  
■ " S u p p l y  s h o r t a g e "  f a r m s
r 3
2 -
1 -1 Llill I
• 6
Fertilizer  N application  In spring  and autumn
A question  that often arises  is whether  it is better to apply  CAN or urea during  the spring.  
Numerous  experiments  have been conducted  comparing  the two. In no cases  was CAN 
ever found to be better  than urea under  Irish conditions,  but urea was sometimes  better  
than CAN. The reason  for this is that once urea is applied  to the soil during  the spring,  it 
is converted  to ammonium,  and is held reasonably  well by the soil particles.  In contrast.
45
CAN contains  both nitrate  and ammonium,  and the nitrate  is immediately  at risk of being  
leached  or denitrified.  Furthermore,  some  recent  research  has shown  that ammonium  is 
more easily  taken up than nitrate  under  cold soil conditions.  Urea is cheaper than CAN 
in terms of Euro/kg  N applied  in the fertilizer.  Taking  into account  that the N in urea is 
used as efficiently  as the N in CAN during the spring, urea is clearly  the more cost-  
effective  fertiliser  to apply  during  the spring.
It must be noted that while it takes time for urea to break  down to ammonium,  and that 
the ammonium  adheres  reasonably  well to soil particles,  any ammonium  that is not taken  
up by the sward will eventually  be converted  to nitrate in the soil. Therefore  the 
application  of urea fertilizer  does not prevent  nitrate  leaching  or denitrification  during  the 
spring. It just means that the N in urea is likely to be safely  held in the soil for longer  than 
the N from a similar  application  of CAN during  the early spring.
As indicated  earlier,  the responsiveness  to fertilizer  N declines  during  the autumn. In 
general,  research  has shown  that there is no worthwhile  response  to fertilizer  N from 
around  mid-September  onwards  in the southwest  and from around  the end of august  in 
the north. Fertilizer  applied  in mid-September  will be taken up at a rate of around  0.5 kg 
N/ha/day  during  the remainder  of September and October.  Therefore,  it takes  around  60 
days for 30 kg N/ha to be taken up from the soil. By mid-November,  the requirement  for 
fertilizer  N will be very low and will be within  the supply  capacity  of background  N.
The application  of slurry
On most farms, slurry management  is a headache,  and is usually seen as a non­
productive  cost. However,  when it comes  to spreading  slurry, it generally  costs as much  
to ‘make  the best of it’ as it does to 'make  a mess  of it’.
The best response  to slurry  is obtained  during  the spring,  where  half of the N is in the form 
of ammonium,  which is not readily leached  and is more easily taken up under cold 
conditions.  The other half of the N is in the form of organic  matter,  which is effectively  
held in the soil. This material  has to rot away before  the N is made available  for uptake  
by the sward. The rate of release  of the N in the organic  material  increases  with rising  
soil temperatures,  making  N available  in line with increasing  grass  growth. Slurry  can be 
used very effectively  to replace  fertilizer  N for the first application  in spring.
An application  of slurry  @ 28 m^/ha  (2500  gals/acre),  is estimated  to contain  a total of 75 
kg N/ha, around  35 kg/ha  of which  is readily  available  as ammonium  N. The sward  takes  
up around  20 kg/ha, and the remainder  of the ammonium  N is unavoidably  lost. This 
application  of slurry  replaces  the 29 kg N/ha applied  as urea fertilizer  (much  of which  will 
also be unavoidably  lost) recommended  in Table 4. This application  of slurry does not 
seem  to have any detrimental  effect  on the acceptability  of the grass  to the cows.
On intensive  farms,  stocked  at around  2.5 cows/ha,  efficient  management  of slurry can 
directly  lower fertilizer  N used on the farm by around  35 kg/ha (or 10%) and probably  
accounts  for some of the difference  in the efficiency  of fertilizer  N use between  different 
farms  outlined  in Figure  1.
White  Clover
White  clover has the potential  to make  huge savings  in N fertiliser  costs  to Irish grassland  
farms,  but because  of persistency  problems,  little of this potential  has been realised.  The 
use of herbicides  and high rates of fertilizer  N are partly  responsible,  but the fundamental
46
problem  is that white clover  has an average  life expectancy  of around  five years. White  
clover  is not persistent  in the same  way as permanent grassland.  Individual  clover  plants  
die off and need to be replaced  at regular  intervals,  rather  like bringing  replacements  into 
a herd of cows. Ongoing  research  at Solohead  has shown  that this can be achieved  at 
very little cost by mixing  pelleted  white clover  seed with a P & K fertilizer,  and spreading 
onto first-cut  silage stubble. Around  one-fifth  of the farm is over-sown  on a five-year  
rotation,  maintaining  highly  productive  white clover  swards  from year to year.
At Solohead,  white clover  swards  receiving  90 kg N/ha/year  (72 units/acre)  support  a 
stocking  rate of 2.2 cows/ha  producing  6,250  I of milk/cow  (13,750  I/ha). The equivalent  
stocking  rate on grass-only  swards  requires  fertilizer  N input of around  230 kg/ha (Table  
4) This indicates  that white clover  provides  the potential  to lower fertilizer  N input by 
around  140 kg/ha. This N is supplied  through  the fixation  of atmospheric  N by Rhizobium  
bacteria  that live in nodules  in the roots  of white  clover. On a whole-farm  basis,  the annual 
cost of over-sowing  is around €l0/ha,  with a saving in fertilizer  N of approximately  
€110/ha, (an annual net saving of €100/ha).  Although,  this potential  may not be 
achievable  on all farms, it is realistic  to expect  that white clover  will lower fertilizer  N 
requirement  on moderately  stocked  farms by around  90 to 100 kg/ha  with an associated 
net saving  of around  €65/ha.
Teagasc  National  Farm Survey  data indicates  that 70% of the milk produced  in Ireland  is 
produced  on farms  stocked  at less than 2.0 LSU/ha  (Connolly  et al., 2001). Around  98% 
of beef  and sheep  farms  are stocked  at less than 2.0 LSU/ha.  On a national  basis,  around 
93% of grassland  farms are stocked  at less than 2.0 LSU/ha. This indicates  the huge  
potential  of white clover  to lower  fertilizer  N inputs  to grassland  in Ireland.
Conclusions
The Nitrates  Directive  and other  legislation  is creating  pressure  to lower fertilizer  N inputs  
and increase  the efficiency  of N-use on farms. Increases  in efficiency  are possible.  
Improvements  can be made  by;
matching  fertilizer  N inputs  to stocking  rates,
avoiding  the need to harvest  surplus  grass  as baled silage;
maximising  the utilization  of residual  N in soils;
applying  fertilizer  N in the spring  at rates and times that anticipate  increasing  demand 
for N by the sward;
the use of slurry  to replace  fertilizer  N during  the spring;  
make  the last N application  of the season  before  mid-September; 
the wider  adoption  of white clover.
Rcfcronccs
Connolly,  L., Burke, T. and Roche, M. (2001) Teagasc  National  Farm Survey  2000.  
Teagasc,  19 Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin  4. 13 pages,  www.tpagp^dm.
Coulter,  B.S., Murphy,  W.E., Culleton,  N., Finnerty,  E. and Connolly,  L. (2002) A Survey 
of Fertiliser  Use in 2000 for Grassland  and Arable  Crops. Teagasc,  Johnstown  Castle  
Research  Centre.  Wexford.
Humphreys,  J , Lawless,  A., O'Connell,  K. and Darmody,  P. (2004). The development  of 
systems  of milk production  and grazing  management  based on low stocking  rates and 
very low artificial nitrogen  inputs End of Project Report No. 4468, Teagasc,  19 
Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin.
47
O’Connell,  K., Humphreys,  J. and Watson,  C.J. (2004) Apparent  recovery  of fertilizer 
nitrogen  by pasture. Agricultural  Research  Forum,  Tullamore,  1 & 2 March  2004, page  
18.
O’Donovan,  M., Delaby,  L. Stakelum,  G. and Dillon, P. (2004) Effect of autumn/spring  
nitrogen  application  date and level on dry matter  production  and nitrogen-efficiency  in 
perennial  ryegrass  swards.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research  (in press).
48
Grass  watch  - tools  for profitable  dairying
Jack Kennedy
Irish Farmers  Journal.  Irish Farm Centre,  Bluebell.  Dublin  12
Introduction
It Is not until you travel  outside  of Ireland  that you learn to appreciate  just how suitable  the 
climate  is for growing  an abundance  of good quality grass. In March 2003 the Irish 
Farmers  Journal  initiated  Grass  Watch  to stimulate  further  interest  in grass production  and 
improve  readers  understanding  of the measurements  associated  with grass production 
and utilisation.  The aim was to track some  of the best farmers  in the country  and establish  
how they manage  grass throughout  the grazing  year. Combined  with this monitoring, 
there is advice  on the targets  farmers  should  be reaching  - given a certain  stocking  rate 
or demand  on the farm
A primary  objective  was to highlight  the importance  of grazed  grass in the diet of the 
lactating  cow, and that by increasing  the intake  of grazed  grass  in the diet, increased  profit 
on the farm. The Grass  watch  program  is ongoing,  and the second  year  of measurements  
is just about  finished.  Grass  watch  has proven  that farmers  can consistently  measure  and 
manage  grass  throughout  the grazing  year, and that if they are aware  of targets,  can make  
decisions  that will maintain  grass  quality  in the ideal grazing  state
How does grass  watch  work?
In the first year of the program,  four measurements  were recorded  weekly These  
measurements  were identified  as being  crucial  to the farmer  in helping  to make  educated 
decisions  on how best to manage  grass. These measurements  were stocking  rate; 
average  farm cover;  pre grazing  yield; and a calculated  growth  rate.
In the second  year of Grass  watch,  the stocking  rate figure  was changed  to demand,  so 
that farmers  could better  relate  the demand  they had on the farm with the actual  growth 
rate they were achieving  that week.
Figure  1. Details  of the Grass  watch  as it appears  in the Farmers  Journal
49
Method  of calculating  weekly  growth  rate (GR)
Table 1 demonstrates  how the growth  rate is calculated  for each farm on a weekly  basis.  
Each week the farmer  completes  a farm cover. This is the product  of the estimated  
paddock  cover  in the current  week,  subtracted  from that recorded  in the preceding  week,  
divided  by the number  of days since  the cover  was taken. In the worked  example  (Table  
1), it was 7 days since  the cover  was estimated.  In the calculations,  paddocks  that were  
grazed  during  the week  are ignored.  Average growth  rate is obtained  by dividing  the total 
daily growth  rates by the number  of paddocks.
This is a simple  way of calculating  growth  rate, and is probably  the best estimate  that a 
farmer  can make  of the growth  rate on his farm for the previous  week.
Table 1. An example  of the calculations  involved  in determining  weekly  growth  
rates (kg DM/day)
Week  33
PaddockEstimated
coverWeek 34
PaddockEstimated
cover kg DM/day kg DM/day
170011050 1050-700 = 350/7  days 50
27002 10001000-700 = 300/7  days 43
3 650 311001100-650 = 450/7  days 64
4 450 4 650 650 - 450 = 200/7 days 29
5 450 5 700 700 - 450 = 250/7  days 36
6160061700 1700 - 1600 = 100/7 days 14
7 1500 7 200200 - 1500 = -1300/7  days Ignore*
83008450 450 - 300 = 150/7  days 21.5
9 300 9 500 500 - 300 = 200/7 days 28.6
Average  growth  rate for week 36
•Paddocks  that have been grazed  during  the week are not calculated  in the estimation
Method  of calculating  average  farm cover  (AFC)
Average  farm cover  is estimated  by dividing  the total amount  of grass  in each paddock  of 
the farm, by the total number  of hectares  available  for grazing.
Table 2. An example  of the calculations  involved  in determining  average  farm 
cover(kg)
[A]
Paddock[B]
Paddock  size 
(ha)[C]
Estimated  cover  by 
farmer  (kg)[D] = [B X C]
Cover  in paddock  
(kg)
10.99 800 792
21.61 300 483
3 1.78 400 712
4 1.3 20002600
5 1.03 600 618
61.75 1400 2450
7 1.37 2300 3151
81.24 1900 2356
9 1.2920002580
102.31 500 1155
Total 14.67
Average  Farm cover  (AFC)16105
16897/14.67
1151
50
Method  of calculating  pre grazing  yield (PGY)
This is simply  the estimated  yield of grass  in the paddock that the  farmer  is going  into with 
his cows.
Method  of calculating  demand  (D)
Demand  is an estimate  of the amount  of grass required  to grow on the farm in order  to 
satisfy the needs  of the grazing  animal. It is expressed  in kg dry matter  per hectare  (kg 
DM/ha),  and can be directly  related  to growth  rate, which  is also expressed  as kg DM/ha.  
Therefore  if a farmer  has a demand  of 50 kg DM/ha  per day then the farm needs  to have 
3 growth  rate of this amount  to fully feed the herd at grass. If growth  rates are less than 
this, then cows  will be eating  more than the farm is growing  and if no action  is taken,  eat 
into reserves  of grass  on the farm. Therefore  demand  is used as a daily tool to establish 
if supplementation  is needed.  Alternatively,  when growth  rates are higher  than demand 
for prolonged  periods,  surpluses  can arise which  must also be dealt with if sward  quality  
is to be maintained.
There may be more grazing  animals  than just lactating  cows on the grazing  area, and so 
an estimate  of what they are consuming  is necessary.
Table 3. Estimates  of daily allowances  of different  animai  classes.
kg DM/day
Lactating  cow20
Dry cow10
In Calf heifer 9
Weanling  heifer 7
Calves 4
There are many ways to influence  demand.  Supplementation  can be increased  to the 
milking  cows,  which  will lower  the demand  for grass  on the farm. Demand  will increase  if 
dry cows and calves  are on the grazing  area. Depending  on feeding  and age, grass  DM 
intake  for calves  will vary considerably.
Example  calculation:
A farmer  is grazing  second  round  grass and is not feeding  concentrates.  All stock  are out. 
Estimates  of grass DM intake  are as follows;
Animals  grazing;
Milking  cows (63) x 20 kg DM intake;
Dry cows (7) x 10 kg DM intake;
Bulling  heifers  (11) x 9 kg DM intake;
Heifer  calves  (21) X 4 kg DM intake.
= 1260 + 70 + 99 + 84 = 1513 kg DM/day
i.e. 1513 kg DM is required  every  day to feed stock. The farmer  has 19.4 ha available  for 
grazing. Therefore  1513/19.4  = 78 kg DM/ha/day  are required  to fully feed stock. If 
growth  rate was estimated  at 60 kg DM/ha/day,  the farm is not growing  enough  feed to 
meet demand.
A one to one substitution  of concentrate  for grass  is suggested  to account for concentrate  
supplementation,  e g. if total DM intake  is 20 kg grass, and cows are receiving  2 kg of 
concentrate,  then the DM intake  of cow is 18 kg.
51
Demand  - [Number  of cows milking  x DM intake of cow / Total number  of hectares  
available  for grazing]
Lessons  from Grass  watch
At the outset  of this program,  most farmers  were of the opinion  "I don't think I would  have 
the time every  week ”, or “yes I walk the farm, but not every  week  and anyway  I would  be 
right most of the time ” All have learned  that even if they are incorrect  in estimating  how 
much grass is in a paddock  (example  500 instead  of 700) they will not be far out when  
they calculate  the average  farm cover It is not the precision  that is important  but the 
estimation  of an average  so that it can be compared  to a target.
Many  farmers  found  that setting  a time at the start of the week (say Monday  or Tuesday  
morning),  and sticking  to this rigidly, was a great way of disciplining  oneself  to do farm 
covers  each week. These  2 hours  are set aside,  and most now find it the most important  
2 hours  of the week - allowing  them to plan for the week ahead.
There is little point in doing a farm cover if there isn't a farm budget  to see where  you 
should  be. It is important  to have a budget  set out so that you can compare  the results  
from your cover  to where  it should  be and taking  the necessary  action Most  of the Grass  
watch  clients  have the Teagasc  grass  planner  set up and each week  compare  the results  
that they have budgeted  for with what they actually  achieve.
It is good practise  is to calibrate  the 'eye' every now and again. Some participants  in 
Grass  watch  bring a metre  square  and clippers,  and weigh  a cutting  in some paddocks  
More have invested  in a grass  meter.
Once  the farm cover  is completed,  you can plan where  the cows will graze  - maybe  not 
exactly  but very close Decision-making  becomes  very stressful  when you have to do it 
every  day, - when you can plan with measurement,  why not?
What  to remember?  The Journal  is just the messenger,  farmers  drive Grass  watch.
Grass  watch  continued
At the outset,  10 farmers  agreed  to allow  the Journal  print weekly  growth  rates. Most of 
the farmers/managers  were  experienced,  in that they had been doing  grass  measurement 
for a number  of years At the start some were sceptical  about doing Grass watch'  
because  of the work involved.  Most  thought they would  not be able to furnish  the Journal  
with results  on a weekly  basis. In 2004 there were 12 committed  and dedicated  farms  in 
the system,  and it is hoped  with the help of the participating  farmers  to continue  with 
Grass  watch  for the foreseeable  future. Anyone  measuring  grass  on a weekly  basis and 
would like to furnish results to the Journal is asked to contact  
jkennedy@farmersjournal  ie.
Conclusions
Reality:  Most  of out European  neighbours  are jealous  of the profits  that a good Irish dairy  
farmer  can attain simply  by making  the most of grazed  grass. Are you achieving  these  
profits? Our climate  is changing  every year, making  the grazing  year longer  and more  
adaptive  to high utilisation  of grazed  grass.
Without  measurement  you are planning  in the dark. However  without  budgeting  there is
52
no point in measurement.  Measurement  and budgeting  go hand in hand. Set up your 
budget  at the start of each main grazing  period  and do a weekly  grass cover  to monitor  
progress.
In the post Fischler  era, the hidden  costs associated  with intensification  are in danger  of 
pulling Irish dairy farmers  down. This becomes  especially  apparent  in the low payout 
years. The hidden  costs associated  with feeding  include:  production  costs, wastage  at 
feed out, machinery  running  costs and capital  costs  where  feeding.  These  hidden  costs 
do less damage  when the payout  is high, but when the payout  is low and fluctuating, 
IRELAND  BEWARE.
53
Quota  purchasing  - what  can dairy farmers  afford  to pay?
L Shalloo'',  P. Dillon'',  T. Dwyer^,  D. McCarthy^  and B. Fingleton'*  
'^Moorepark  Production  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.  
^Teagasc,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
^Teagasc,  Kildalton.
'^Rural  Economy Research  Centre,  Teagasc,  Dublin
Introduction
Since joining the European  Community  in 1973, Irish milk producers  have enjoyed  
relatively  high milk prices  due to the support  system  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy  
(CAP). However,  dairy farmers  are now facing important  changes  to their economic 
environment.  In particular,  the Luxembourg  agreement  on the reform  of the CAP (Mid 
Term Review)  entails  a fundamental  change  in agricultural  policy  with the decoupling  of 
support  measures  from production.  In Ireland,  full decoupling  will be introduced  from 
2005 and milk price is projected  to fall by 5 to 5.5 cent per litre (c/I) due to reduced  price  
support  for butter and skimmed  milk powder. These changes  mean that many dairy  
farmers  need to reappraise  their business  strategy  and consider  necessary  adjustments 
that will ensure  viability  in the longer  term. The objectives  of this paper  are to examine  
key factors  that will need consideration  for a future  in dairy farming,  and in particular,  what 
might be more appropriate  milk quota exchange  values in a new era of decoupled 
production.
A number  of issues are addressed  in this paper and are structured  in the following  
manner:
(1) Cost  efficiency  at farm level.
(2) Expanding  production  - quota acquisition  and costs.
(3) Scenario  results  and sensitivities
(4) Implications  and conclusions
1. Cost  efficiency  at farm level
Table 1 shows  the evolution  of input costs,  gross  outputs  and margins  from 1990  to 2002  
for specialist  dairy  farms  in Ireland.  The results  show  that total input  costs  have increased  
on average  by 1.75 c/I or less than 1% per annum  from 1990/91  to 2001/02.  Direct  costs  
increased  by 1.16 c/I and overhead  costs  by 0.6 c/I over the period. The CSC  Agricultural 
price index for total agricultural  inputs  rose by 13.6%  between  1990 and 2002 whereas 
total costs for specialist  milk production  (Table 1) showed  an increase  of 11%. This 
indicates  a real decrease  in unit costs or an efficiency  gain of 2.6% over an eleven-year  
period. The results  also indicate  that direct  costs (+1.16  c/I) increased  at twice the rate 
of overhead  costs (+0.59  c/I). The cost: price squeeze  in 2002, mainly  due to reduced  
milk prices,  has resulted  in a major fall in net margins  per litre.
54
Table 1. Itemised  costs, outputs  and net margin  (c/I) of milk 
specialist  manufacturing  milk herds  1990-2001production  for
YearDirect
CostsOverhead
CostsTotal
CostsGross
OutputNet
MarginCost / Output  
Ratio
1990 8.348.2116.55 27.72 11.17 0.60
1991 8.09 7.93 1602 25.60 9.58 0.63
1992 8.27 7.80 16.07 27.43 11.65 0.59
1993 8.87 8.23 17.10 29.80 12.70 0.57
1994 9.36 7.86 17.22 29.63 12.41 0.58
1995 9.87 8.50 18.37 31.02 12.65 0.59
1996 9.84 8.63 18.47 30.00 11.53 0.62
1997 8.628.2016.82 28.50 11.67 0.59
1998 9.12 8.30 17.42 29.3011.880 59
1999 9.088.2217.30 27.85 10 56 0.62
20008.83 8.65 17.49 29.4912.010.59
20019.11 8.76 17.88 30.73 12.85 0.58
20029.63 8.56 18.19 28.47 10.27 0.64
Source:  W. Fingleton  (2003),  Rural Economy,  Teagasc.  Derived  from NFS records
Variation  in input  costs
Table 2 shows  the gross output,  total input costs, direct costs, overhead  costs and net 
margin  (c/I) for the five cost quintiles  and for the average  specialist  dairy farms in 2002.  
The total cost of production  for the lowest  quintile  (20%)  was 13.6 c/I, compared  to 23.4 
c/I for the highest  quintile,  or a difference  of 9.8 c/I; while the average  cost of production  
was 18.2 c/I. The high cost group  was effectively  producing  a litre of milk at 72% higher  
input costs than their more efficient  counterparts  and almost  30% above the overall 
average.  This difference  in cost of production  between  the lowest  and highest  quintiles  
represents  a difference  of 9.2 c/I (14.9 c/I vs. 5.7 c/I) in net margin,  while  the net margin 
of the average  producer  was 10.3 c/I. In 2002, differences  in total direct  costs and total 
overhead  costs contributed  48 and 52% respectively,  to the total difference  in unit costs 
between  the highest  and lowest cost quintiles. Differences  in feed costs (mainly 
concentrate  costs) were responsible  for one-third  of the total cost difference.  Of the 
overhead  cost items,  the major  contributors  to overall  variation  in unit input costs  were - 
hired labour  (10%), machinery  operating  and depreciation  charges  (14%), land rental 
charges  (9%) and interest  payments  on loans (9%).
Table 2. Variation  in unit costs by quintiie  for specialist  dairy farms in 2002  
(population  resuits).
Quintile Q1 (c/I) Q2  (c/I) Q3  (c/I) Q4 (c/I) Q5 (c/I) Average  (c/I)
Gross  output 28.56 27.75 28.46 28.34 28.50 27.82
Total costs 13.58 16.16 17.68 19.35 23.40 18.18
Direct  costs 7.61 8.30 9.28 10.24 12.31 9.63
Overhead  costs 5.97 7.86 8.40 9.1111.108.55
Net margin 14.91 11.59 10.79 8.99 5.67 10.27
Source:  W. Fingleton  (2003),  Rural Economy,  Teagasc.  Derived  from NFS records.
Dairy Farmers  can increase  their efficiency  (i.e. reduce  their costs) by following  the 
principles  set out at the Teagasc  National  Dairy Conference  (Dillon  et al., 2003),  i.e.
55
Selection  of high EBI pasture  based  genetics
• Maximise  utilisation  and performance  from grazed  grass;
• Developing  labour efficient  systems  of milk production;
Expanding  milk production  using low fixed costs systems.
2. Expanding  of production  - quota  acquisition  and costs
Currently,  milk quota  transfer  in Ireland  takes  place  through  an administrated  system  with 
a fixed price and reallocation  based on a priority  system,  which favours  smaller  milk 
producers.  Therefore  the true market  value of milk quota is unknown  in Ireland. The 
Minister  for Agriculture  sets the price of milk quota with advice  from the Milk Quota  
Review  Group. Traditionally  the quantity  of milk quota available  for restructuring  in 
Ireland has been limited. FAPRI-lreland  farm level research,  suggests  that post­
decoupling  (2005)  a larger  amount of milk will be available  for restructuring  when  the dairy 
premium  is decoupled.  In a market-based  system,  the price that a producer  should  pay 
for quota should  be related  to the additional  farm profit he/she  expects  to earn in the 
future  from that additional  quota acquired.
How much  can dairy  farmers  afford  to pay for milk quota?
The amount  any individual  farmer  can pay for milk quota will depend  mainly on the 
expected  milk price and the expected  cost of milk production  for every  year that the quota  
remains  binding. To allow for future inflation  the future farm profit must be discounted  
(adjusted)  to present  day values.  Apart  from the variable  costs  of producing  the additional  
milk, the cost of farm expansion  to produce  the additional  quota  must also be considered.
Three  distinct  stages  of expansion  have been defined;
Stage 1; Increase  deliveries  per cow through longer lactation and better  
feeding/management.
Stage 2; Replace  alternative  grazing livestock  with dairy cows and increase  the 
specialisation  in milk production.
Stage  3: Expand  production  using additional  animals,  housing,  land and labour.
Stage 1 expansion  requires  no capital  investment,  as cow numbers  remain  unchanged  
However  variable  costs of production  (mainly  feed costs)  increase  in line with increased  
milk production.  At this stage  of development  dairy farmers  can afford  to pay a relatively  
high price for milk quota. However,  for the purpose  of this analysis  it was not considered  
as a separate  expansion  scenario  but as part of any expansion  plan It is estimated  that 
milk production  could be increased  by 10% in Stage 1, which is composed  of a 6 to 7% 
increase  through longer lactations,  and a 3 to 4% increase  through better  
feeding/management.
Methodology  used in the economic  analysis
The three  expansion  scenarios  are considered  over the period  2004 to 2008 As there is 
no guarantee  of milk quotas  beyond  2014,  the additional  milk quota  purchased  in all three  
scenarios was depreciated  in value  to zero by 2014. In all three  scenarios  there is a 10% 
increase  in milk production  in 2005 as outlined  above  and 1% in yield per cow in each  
year thereafter.  Based  on the Moorepark  Dairy Systems  Model  (MDSM)  (Shalloo  et al.. 
2004),  the additional  cost associated  with this increase  in milk production  is 5 c/I in 2005  
(variable  feed cost of production).  The farm used in this analysis  is based  on the average  
specialist  dairy farm from the NFS sample  in 2002. In the analysis,  all three scenarios  
are investigated  for low cost producers  (LC), average  cost producer  (AC) and high cost
56
producers  (HC). The LC is the average  of the 40% lowest  cost producers  (average  of 
Quintiles  1 and 2), the AC is the overall  average  of specialist  producers,  while  the HC are 
the average  of the 40% highest  cost producers  (average  of Quintiles  4 and 5).
Table  3 shows  the key herd parameters  used in the economic analysis.  The average  farm 
size (total forage  area) is 52.2 ha, with an ED milk quota of 243,470  litres and 54 dairy 
cows The average  milk production  delivered  per cow is 4643 litres, with a further  310 
litres per cow retained  on the farm. The average  number  of livestock  units of cattle  
(excluding  cows and dairy replacements)  is 32.
Table  3. Key herd parameters  used in the analysis
Average  cost 
(AC)Low cost 
(LC)High cost 
(HC)
Land Area (ha) 52.2 52.2 52.2
Cow number 54 54 54
Quota  size (1) 243,400 243,400 243,400
Milk sold per cow (1) 4643 4643 4643
Average  number  of beef  units 32 32 32
Variable  costs (c/I) 9.63 7.96 11.28
Fixed costs (c/I) 8.56 6.9210.11
Inflation  over  the period  of analysis  is based  on FAPRI  projections  (i.e. 1.25 and 2.5 % per 
year for variable  and fixed costs respectively).  All purchase  of milk quota  is financed  up 
to 2014 at 6% interest  rate. The length of the loan depended  on year of purchase.  All 
price projections  are based on the analysis  carried  out by FAPRI-lreland  (Binfield  et al., 
2003). Over  the period  2004 to 2013, milk price is projected  to fall from 27c/l to 22c/l, cull 
cows from €390  to €290,  and male calves  from €190  to €108. The opportunity  cost of 
land is considered  to decrease  from €471/ha  to €268/ha.  The decoupled  farm payment  
was estimated  on the basis  of the average  premia  drawn  on the specialist dairy  farms  over 
the period 2000, 2001 and 2002. Dairy entitlements  established  in 2005 are also 
included.
It is assumed  that the average  specialist  dairy farmer  had no additional  free labour  
available,  therefore  labour  cost increased  in line with increased  cow numbers.  Data from 
the Moorepark  labour  study (O’Donovan,  2003)  has shown  that as the cow numbers  in a 
herd increase,  the overall  time required  per cow decreases.  Based  on these  findings,  an 
increase  of 35 hours per year for each additional  cow is assumed,  at a cost of 
€12. 50/hour.
In all three  scenarios,  the breakeven  cost of quota  purchased  is calculated  for years  2004,  
2005, 2006, 2007 and 2008 for the LC, AC and HC producers,  using total discounted  net 
farm profit over a 10-year  period. Since  it is possible  to receive  capital  allowances for the 
construction  of farm buildings,  machinery  and milk quota  the three scenarios  investigated 
are compared  net of tax. Capital  allowances  for milk quota purchase,  construction  of 
housing  and improvement  in milking  facilities  are included  at 15% for the first 6 years  and 
10% for the seventh  year (Teagasc,  2003). The 6% interest  rate for quota purchase 
corresponds  to an opportunity  cost of having  additional  money  tied up in milk quota.
57
Scenarios  investigated
Table  4 shows  the key parameters  associated  with the baseline  and the three expansion  
scenarios.  The baseline  situation  is where  the farm remained  static over the 10-year  
period.
Scenario  1(S1):
• 25  dairy cows and 7 replacement  units replace  the 32 Cattle  units;
• The  sale of the cattle financed  the purchase  of the dairy stock;
• There  is an additional  housing  cost of €200/cow  for modification  of beef housing  for 
dairy cows;
• There  is no additional  cost in milking  facilities;
• A new milk bulk tank is purchased  at a net cost of €10,000,  financed  over 10-years  
at 6%, with both interest  and depreciation  (15-years)  considered  an expense;
• Labour  requirement  is increased  by 1,000 hours for the dairy herd (40 hours*  25), 
while labour  for the  beef  operation  is reduced  by 250 hours  (10 hours*  25).
Scenario  2 (S2):
• S2  is similar  to SI in that 25 dairy cows and their replacements,  replaced  the 32 beef 
units and the sale of the beef cattle  finance  the purchase  of the dairy stock;
• However  cow numbers  are further  increased  by 21, purchased  at a unit cost of 
€1320,  financed  over 10-years  at 6%, where  the interest  portion  is considered  an 
expense;
• Milking  facility  is expanded at a cost of €9,600  (an additional  unit per 7 cows)  and
more housing  added at a cost of €33,600  (€1,600/cow),  both investments are
financed  over 20-years  at 6%;
• An additional  10 ha of land is needed  and is rented  at a cost of €268/ha;
• Labour  is increased  by 735 hours  (35 hours/cow).
Scenario  3 (S3):
• S3  is similar  to S2 in all respects  except  that a low cost housing  system.  This includes  
a standoff  pad and earthen  bank to contain  slurry and soiled water, at a cost of 
€262/cow  instead  of conventional  housing  for the  additional  cows in the herd.
Each scenario  is compared  to the Baseline  Scenario  where  no expansion  took place. A 
computer  program  called ‘Solver ’ (Microsoft  Excel) is used to calculate  the milk quota  
purchase  price where  the calculated  total discounted  farm profit over the 10-year  period  
is equal  to the baseline  farm profit (See  Appendix  1).
Table  4. Key physical  data used in the scenarios  investigated
Baseline Scenario  1Scenario  2Scenario  3
Land area (ha) 52.2 52.2 62.2 62.2
Cow number 54 79 100 100
Original  milk quota size (1) 243400 243400 243400 243400
Additional  milk supplied  (1) - 152760 260010 260010
New milk quota  size (1) 243400 396200 503400 503400
Milk sold per cow (1) 4643 5107 5107 5107
Beef cattle units (number) 32 - - -
58
3. Scenario  results  and sensitivities
Table 5 shows  the baseline  10-year  total discounted  farm profit for the LC, AC and HC 
producers  from the NFS for years  2004 to 2008. The baseline  total discounted  net farm 
profit is derived  by adding  10 years  of farm net profit together with each year discounted  
for inflation.  Therefore  the baseline  for 2004 is the 10 subsequent  years  with each year 
discounted  to correct  for inflation  (see Appendix  1). On average  over the 10-year  period  
the difference  in farm profit between  LC and AC cost producers  is €41,944,  while that 
between  the LC and HC is €92,565.
Table 5. Baseline  scenario  10-year  total discounted  farm net profit {*) by 
production  cost variation.
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Low cost (LC)
Average  cost (AC) 
High cost (HC)327,415
286,500
236,257307,346
266,367
214,056291,301
249,365
197,618276,630
233,878
183,420262,868
219,730
171,038
Table  6 shows  the breakeven  price is 86, 52 and 22 c/I (3.90, 2.36 and 1.00 €/gal)  for the 
LC, AC and HC producers  in 2004 respectively.  The corresponding  values  in 2005  are 51 
and 12 c/I (2.31 and 0.54 €/gal)  for the LC and AC producers  respectively.  However  in 
2005, the HC producers  did not achieve  the baseline  profit in SI and would have to 
receive  9.0 c/I with the quota  to reach  the breakeven  farm profit. The results  also indicate 
that the breakeven  price that a farmer  could pay for additional  quota  decreases  over the 
period. This is because  of declining  milk prices and increasing  production  costs.  
Additional  milk quota  will also have to be financed  over a shorter  time period. The high 
cost producers  would  have to get money  when  they bought quota  to reach  the breakeven 
level.
Table 6. Breakeven  quota purchase  price (c/I) by year of purchase  and by 
production  cost level for Scenario  1
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Low cost (LC) 86.0 51.0 43.0 37.0 33.0
Average  cost (LC) 52.0 12.0 5.0 1.0 *-1.0
High cost (HC) 22.0 *-9.0 *-12.0 *-15.0 *-19.0
‘Base farm profit could not be reached  therefore  quota  could not be purchased 
economically
Table 7 shows  that the breakeven  price for additional  milk quota is much reduced  where  
the costs of expansion  are high. For both the AC and HC producers  the breakeven  price  
is not achieved  from 2005 onwards.  There  is a large reduction  in discounted  farm profit 
with the HC producers.
59
Table 7. Breakeven  quota purchase  price (c/I) by year of purchase  and by 
production  cost ievel for Scenario  2
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Low cost (LC) 45.0 14.0 7.0 3.0 •-0.5
Average  cost (LC) 15.0 •-14.0 •-18.0 •-20.0 •-22.0
High cost (HC) •-11.0 •-41.0 •-45.0 •-48.0 •-50.0
•Base farm profit could not be reached  therefore  quota could not be purchased  
economically
Table 8 shows  the influence  of quota purchase  year and producer  cost variation  on the 
breakeven  quota  price for scenario  3. Using a low cost housing  system  (€262/cow)  as 
compared  to traditional  higher cost housing  (€1,600/cow)  the breakeven  price was 
increased  by 5 to 7 c/I.
Table 8. Breakeven  quota purchase  price (c/I) by year of purchase  and by 
production  cost level for Scenario  3
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Low cost (LC) 51.0 19.0 12.0 8.0 4.0
Average  cost (LC) 21.0 •-11.0 •-14.0 •-16.0 •-17.0
High cost (HC) •-6.0 •-34.0 •-39.0 •-41.0 •-44.0
•Base farm profit could not be reached  therefore  quota could not be purchased  
economically
Sensitivity  analysis
Milk price, cost of additional  labour  and inflation  are shown  to have a large effect  on the 
breakeven  milk quota purchase  price. Table 9 shows  the influence  of variation  in milk 
price and year of quota purchase  on the breakeven  quota price for SI for the average  
cost producers.  It indicates  that for every one c/I increase  in milk price the breakeven  
price of quota will increase  by 13.5 cent in 2004 and 16.5 cent from 2005 to 2008.  
Similarly  for a reduction  of 1 cent in milk price, the breakeven  price of milk quota will 
reduce  by 10 c/I in 2004, and from 2005  to 2008 will be impossible  to meet.
Table  9. Effects  of variation  miik price on breakeven  quota  purchase  price (c/I) by 
year of purchase  for average  cost producers  Scenario  1
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
FAPRI  projected  milk price (c/I) 52.0 12.0 5.0 1.0 •-1.0
Increase  of 2 c/ 79.0 45.0 38.0 34.0 30.0
Reduction  of 2 c/ 33.0 •-2.0 •-5.0 •-6.0 •-8.0
•Base farm profit could not bereached therefore quota could not bepurchased
economically
Table 10 shows  the effect  of additional  labour  cost by year of quota purchase  price, on 
the breakeven  quota  purchase  price for SI for the average  cost producers.  In a scenario  
where  no additional  labour  is required,  the breakeven  price increased  by 37 c/I when  
purchased  in 2004 and by approximately  47 c/I when purchased  from 2005 to 2008 for 
the average  cost producer.
60
Table 10. Effects  of variation  in labour  efficiency  on breakeven  quota purchase
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Addition  labour  cost 52.0 12.0 5.0 1.0 *-1 0
No additional  labour  cost 89.0 58.0 52 0 48 0 44 0
•Base Farm Profit could  
economicallynot bereached therefore  quota could notbe purchased
Table 11 sho\ws  the influences  of rate of inflation  and year of quota purchase  on the 
breakeven  quota price SI for the average  cost producers.  When  the rate of increase  in 
inflation  for fixed costs is reduced  from 2.5 to 1.5%, the breakeven  quota purchase  price  
increased  by 2, 4, 4 and 5 c/I when the quota was purchased  from 2004 to 2007  
respectively.  However,  when quota is purchased  in 2008, a maximum  of 3 c/I could be 
paid while  at the higher  inflation  rate the breakeven  quota  purchase  cost could not be met.
Table 11. Effects  of variation  in inflation  on fixed costs,  on the breakeven  quota
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Inflation  at 2.5% (FAPRI) 52.0 12.0 5.0 10 *-1,0
Inflation  at 1.5% (lower) 54.0 16.0 9.0 6.0 3 0
•Base Farm Profit could  
economicallynot bereached therefore  quota could notbe purchased
Therefore  milk price, inflation  associated  with fixed costs and the additional  labour 
required  would  have a large influence  on the price that dairy farmers  can afford  to pay for 
milk quota If dairy farmers  can achieve  expansion  at farm level without  additional  labour 
requirements  (through  increased  efficiency),  this increases  the price they can pay 
considerably.
4. Implications  and conclusions
Dairy farmers  that opt to remain  static under  the Fischler  regime  can expect  a reduction 
of 15% in nominal  terms  in net farm income  (Shalloo  et al., 2004). The Fischler  Reforms 
have made retirement  and exit from dairy farming  more attractive  than before as the 
decoupled  compensation  can be retained  even if milk is not produced  For this reason,  
significant  restructuring  is expected  with dairy farm numbers  projected  to fall very 
substantially  over  the next number  of years. The results  of the present  study  indicate  that:
• A reduced  quota acquisition  price is necessary  to facilitate  expansion  from 2004  
onwards;
• The price that individual  dairy farmers  can afford to pay for milk quota from 2004  
onwards  will vary greatly  depending  on farm cost base, milk price, and the level of 
increased  cost incurred  on the farm to facilitate  the increased  production;
• The results  indicate  that the average  supplier  could pay up to 12 c/I (55 c/gal) for 
restructuring  milk in 2005, but that the more cost efficient  dairy farmers  could pay up 
to 51 c/I (€2.37/gal);
• Where  major additional  expenditures  on extra facilities  and labour  are required,  the 
economic  value of milk quota rapidly  diminishes.
61
Conclusion
Over the next number of years,  policies  to facilitate  change  \will be important  in building  a 
strong  viable  dairy industry.  For many  dairy farmers,  expansion  alone will not solve the 
problem  of falling income  caused  by a decline  in milk price. Sustaining  real incomes  will 
come from a combination  of reducing  production  costs and an increase  in scale. For 
scale  increase  to pay dividends,  dairy  farmers  will need to have below  average  production  
costs, to continue  productivity  gains, to pursue  a low cost housing  option,  and to have 
access  to quota  at an affordable  and progressively  declining  price.
The purchase  of quota will be financially  much more difficult  for above average  cost 
producers.  Increased  labour  costs will have a large effect on the breakeven  purchase  
price for milk quota. The productivity,  availability  and cost of labour  will be one of the 
major restrictions  to expansion  over the coming  years. High cost housing  and slurry  
storage  facilities  likewise  reduce  the breakeven  purchase  price of milk quota. Finally  
quota  transaction  costs influence  profit and therefore  the viability  of expansion.  Quota  
depreciation  and interest  charges  rise rapidly  as quota  purchase  price increases.
Low cost operations  need to increase  in scale by over 40% by 2010 to maintain  or 
increase  income  in real terms  (Dillon  et al., 2003). However,  this is a static model  and 
does not adequately  reflect  expansion  costs. A study  carried  out by Shalloo  et al., (2004)  
showed  that approximately  50% of an increase  in scale  over the period  2004  to 2008 and 
some  efficiency  gains were  required  to maintain  real incomes  in the period  2004 to 2013  
for the average  specialist  dairy farmers. For this to take place the quantity  of milk 
restructured will need to increase  from the current 3% of the national  milk pool per annum  
to over  4% per annum  in the years  ahead.
References
Binfield,  J., Donnellan,  T, Hanrahan,  K. and Westhoff,  P. (2003). The Luxembourg  CAP 
reform  agreement:  - implications  for EU and Irish Agriculture.  Medium  Term Analysis  for 
the Agri-Food  Sector.  Teagasc,  Rural  Economy Research  Centre  Dublin  Pp. 1-69 
Dillon,  R, Horan,  B. and Shalloo,  L. (2003). Pathways  to increase  profit. In. Proceedings  
of the Teagasc  National  Dairy  Conference  12*^ and 13^^ of November.
Fingleton,  W. (2003). The situation  and outlook  for dairying  2002/2003.  In: Proceedings
Teagasc  Situation  and Outlook in Irish Agriculture December  2002, Teagasc,  Dublin  
pp.1-11.
O'Donovan,  K., O' Brien, B., Ruane, D., Kinsella,  J. and Gleeson,  D. (2003). Labor  
consumption  on Irish dairy farms  and the effects  of scale and seasonality.  Irish. Journal  
of Agricultural  Research  (Submitted).
Shalloo,  L., Dillon,  P, Rath, M. and Wallace,  M. (2004). Description  and validation  of the 
Moorepark  Dairy Systems  Model. Journal  of Dairy  Science  87 1945-1959.
Shalloo,  L,, Dillon, R, Rath, M. and Wallace,  M. (2004). The Luxembourg  Common  
Agricultural  Policy  Reform  Agreement:  Irish Dairy Farmers  Development  options. Farm  
Management Journal  (Accepted).
Teagasc  (2003). Management  Data for Farm Planning
62
Appendix  1
Baseline  for 2004 for the low cost producers
Farm net Profit  nominal Discount  factor Real Income
2004 41346 1 41346
2005 38997 0.97 37827
2006 39214 0.94 36861
2007 37921 0.91 34508
2008 37443 0.88 32950
2009 37234 0.85 31649
2010 36723 0.82 30113
2011 36255 0.79 28642
2012 36033 0.76 27385
2013 35801 0.73 26135
Total discounted  net farm profit 327415
Baseline  for 2005 is similar  except  that the start year is 2005 and therefore  the start 
discount  rate is at 0.97 and so on for 2006, 2007 and 2008. The baseline  farm profit is 
therefore  different  for each year and for each cost level. The breakeven  milk quota 
purchase  price is calculated  by setting  the target  cell in the Solver  function  on Microsoft 
Excel  to calculate  the farm profit  when  quota  is purchased  the same  as the baseline  farm 
net profit. The quota purchase  price is set at the changeable  cell and therefore  the milk 
quota  price is altered  in order  to reach  the breakeven  farm net profit.
63
Post Fischler  options  analysis  for the farm of Tim & 
Shauna  Meagher
Pearse  Kelly^  Michael  Gottstein^  and John Crosse^
''Teagasc  Kildalton.  ^^Teagasc  Moorepark.  ^Teagasc  Thurles
Introduction
The Meagher  family farm comprises  a beef and tillage  enterprise  together  with a small  
flock of mid season  lambing  ewes. The beef enterprise  is made up of 35 suckler  cows  
finishing  all of the calves  for the under 12 month  system,  and buying  in 115 weanlings 
each year to finish as steers  at 22 to 24 months  of age The Teagasc  eProfit  Monitor  
(ePM)  was completed  for the farm for the last full financial  year, 2003, Table 1 outlines  
the amount  of land that was used in 2003. Thirty-eight  hectares  (ha) are owned  with a 
further  57 ha leased  from within  the overall  Meagher  family. In 2003 another  53 ha was 
leased  bringing  the total land area farmed  to 148 ha
Table 1. Land used in 2003
Hectares
Owned  Land 38
Land Leased  Within  Family 57
Land Leased  Outside  Family 53
Total148
Current  position
Table 2 shows the ePM enterprise  analysis  generated  for 2003, The gross margins  
excluding  all premia for each enterprise  are given, and expressed  as GM/ha (excl 
premia) For comparison  purposes  the average  gross  margin  (excl. premia)  per ha which  
were collected  on 176 beef farms  and 41 sheep  flocks  in 2003 are also shown.
Table 2. Tim Meagher  eProfft  Mon/for  analysis  2003
Enterprise Area (ha)Gross  Margin  (€) 
(excl. Premia)GM/ha  (€) (excl. 2003 ePM Av. 
(excl. Premia)  GM/ha
Beef 83.1 34,487 415 185*Sheep 8.7 8,491 976 420**Tillage 564 17,653 313
Total 148.2 60,631 409
* Combining  average  beef gross margin  (excl. premia)  from 108 suckler  farms and 68 
non-breeding  farms.
** Average  sheep  gross  margin  (excl premia)  from 41 flocks
As can been seen from the above  analysis,  the Meagher  farm compares  favourably  to 
other  farms  analysed  in 2003 ePM. The beef enterprise  generated  more  than double  the 
gross  margin  (excl, premia)  that was generated  on the 176 beef farms  also analysed.  In
64
order to get a clearer  picture of whether  this margin was coming  from the suckler  
enterprise  or the weanling  to beef enterprise,  a separate  financial  analysis  (using the 
Teagasc  Batch  Analysis  Package)  was carried  out on the weanlings  that were finished  in 
the weanling  to beef enterprise  in 2004 (bought  in autumn  2002). This analysis  showed 
that the weanling  enterprise  returned  a gross  margin  (excl. premia)  of just €7/head.  This 
is similar  to the performance  on the 68 non-breeding  farms that  were analysed  using  €PM  
for 2003, where the gross margin (excl. premia)  per ha was on average  just €17.  
Therefore,  when looking  at the gross margin  (excl. premia),  the suckler  herd on the 
Meagher  farm is compensating  for the weanling  to beef enterprise.
The sheep  enterprise  appears  to be generating  a significantly  higher  gross margin  (excl.  
premia)  than was achieved  on 41 other  flocks  analysed  for 2003. Most of this advantage 
is coming  from very low variable costs  per ewe due to the fact there  is a very small number  
of them compared  to the number  of cattle on the farm and costs are probably  artificially  
low because  of this.
Table 3 gives the Meagher ’s total fixed costs for 2003 as calculated  using ePM. Three  
significant  proportions  that go to make up the total figure are also shown. These  are 
machinery  running  costs,  depreciation  and land lease  costs. Also shown  are the average  
fixed costs  from the 176 beef farms  recorded  in 2003.
Table  3. Fixed  Costs  associated  Tim Meaghers  farm from eProfit  Monitor  {200Z)
Total (€) Per ha (€)2003 ePM 
avg. FC/ha*  (€)
Machinery  Running 15,116 102 84
Depreciation 29,492 199 86
Land Lease 16,894** 114 56
Other  Fixed Costs 26,370 178 219
Total 87,872 593 445
* Combining  average  beef  fixed costs  from 108 suckler  farms  and 68 non-breeding  farms.  
** Land Leased  from non-family  members.
The biggest  difference  between  the two is the depreciation  figure  at €199 versus €86/ha.  
The land lease cost figure given is only for land rented  from outside  the family. It still 
represents  a significant  cost to the farm. Fixed costs in general  are high on this farm in 
comparison  to a lot of other farms.
Looking  to the future
Before  examining  what steps might be taken with regard  to a particular  enterprise,  it is 
worth looking  at what the likely affect  might  be of dropping  the 53 ha of leased  land (the 
land leased  from outside  the family). If the overall  farmed  area was to be reduced  by 53 
ha but the same enterprise  mix retained  (at a reduced  scale), the gross margin  (excl.  
premia)  per ha should  remain  the same. Obviously  this would  not be an option  in reality  
but it is interesting  to see the overall  likely affect  on net profit.
65
Table  4. Affect  of consolidating  entitiements  on overail  net profit  {€)
Overall  farmed  area reduced  by: 53 ha (leased  land)
Lower  gross  margin  (excl. premia) -21,677
Chanaes  to fixed costs
Lower  land lease + 16,894
Lower  machinery  running + 5,406
+ 22,300
Overall  affect  on net profit + 623
Revised  fixed costs 65,571
Fixed  costs per ha (95 ha) 690/ha
Table 4 summarises  what the affect  of this reduction  in farmed  area might  be. The loss 
to the farms  overall gross margin would  be €21,677.  The land lease  payment  of €16,894  
would  be saved  and there would  no longer  be a machinery  running  charge  for this 53 ha 
saving €5,406  (53 ha x €102/ha).  The net benefit  therefore  of dropping  the rented  
ground  would  be €623.
In this scenario,  the farms overall  fixed costs are reduced  in the area of machinery  
running  costs and leased land, but they would still be high at €690/ha  because  they 
would  now be spread  over a smaller area (95 vs. 148 ha). Within  this total figure  for fixed 
costs, depreciation  would rise from €199 to €310 per ha. If this revised  figure is 
compared  against  the average  of €86/ha  already  mentioned  (from the 2003 ePM) the 
contrast  is even bigger.
Irrespective  of what option is chosen  for the future, one aim must be to reduce  the 
depreciation  figure  by investing  less in what has caused  it to rise in the first place,  which  
for the most part was machinery  purchases.  These  may have been needed  in the past 
for the scale of the operation  but might not be needed  in the future on a smaller  area 
farmed. By bringing  the depreciation  cost back to €150/ha,  it would add a further 
€15,200  to the net profit  figure.
However,  if land lease costs  did fall substantially  over the next couple  of years,  the farm 
would  be in a position  to considerably  increase  scale in a short  period  of time because  of 
the infrastructure  that has been put in place. Therefore  ‘offloading ’ machinery  without  
seeing  what will happen  in the land rental market  first is not a consideration  at this point  
in time.
Assumptions  used
When examining  what options  might be suitable  in the future, assumptions  have to be 
made about  a number  of the key variables  that are needed  to calculate  the likely gross  
margins  that will be achievable  from these options. Table 5 outlines  the assumptions  
made. Fertiliser  usage on this farm is low and the cost per tonne of purchased  
concentrates  is also below  what is typically  being paid. It is assumed  that these lower 
than average  costs  will remain  into the future. Contractor costs per hectare  are also low 
because  most of the work Is done  with owned  machinery.  It is also assumed  that this will
66
remain  the case for the foreseeable  future.
As can be seen in Table  2, the gross  margins  generated  on this farm in the past compare 
favourably  with that achieved  on other farms. Gross margin  (excl. premia)  is a good 
indicator  of the level of efficiency  that a farm is being run at. It is assumed  that this high 
level of efficiency  will be continued  into the future.
Table  5. Assumptions  used when  assessing  future  margins
Suckler  calving  date Early  autumn/spring
Weanling  purchase  date Late  autumn
Weanling  purchase  price (€/100kg) 180
Sales  dates  (months)
Heifers Summer  (20)
Steers  (home  bred) Summer  (22)
Steers  (bought  in) Spring  (22)
Bulls Spring  (15)
Carcase  weights  (kg)
Heifers 290
Steers 380
Bulls 350
Beef selling  price c/kg carcase
Spring 300
Summer 280
Autumn 260
Lamb  weaning  rate 1.5
Lamb  sale value (€/head) 80
Options  for the future
Six different  options  were examined  for the farm and these are detailed  in Table 6. 
Options  one to five are all based  on dropping  the 53 ha of outside  rented  land with option 
six holding  onto it. Options  one and six are on the basis that the REPS  scheme  is not 
entered  into. In the other four  options  REPS  is embraced.
Table  6. Future  systems  analysed  for Tim Meagher
Land (ha) REPS System
Option  1 95 No 120 autumn  suckler  cows 
Finishing  steers  & heifers
Option  2 95 Yes 100 autumn  suckler  cows 
Finishing  steers  & heifers
Option  3 95 Yes 110 autumn  suckler  cows 
Finishing  bulls & heifers
Option  4 95 Yes 40 autumn  suckler  cows
110 weanling  steers  to beef
Option  5 95 Yes 1000 mid-season  ewes
Option  6 148 No 100 autumn  suckler  cows
85 spring  suckler  cows
67
Gross  margin  analysis
When  comparing  the gross margins  that might be possible  from each of the six options  
analysed  the single  farm payment  is not included  but the REPS  payment  is so that one 
system  can be compared  fairly with another.
Table  7. Projected  gross  margin  (excl. premia)  but including  REPS
Gross  margin/ha  (€) Gross  margin  (€)
Option  1 €798 75,851
Option  2 €750 71,209
Option  3 €709 67,348
Option  4 €655 62,263
Option  5 €821 78,000
Option  6 €789 116,840
Table 7 shows the possible  gross margins  calculated  using all of the assumptions 
mentioned  above.
The gross  margin  per hectare  that each system  has the potential  to generate  is a return  
for the labour  that is involved  with a system. Table 8 gives  an estimate  of the man work 
units (MWU)  that would be involved  with each of the six options. Also if a system  can 
generate  enough  of a gross margin  to cover a farms fixed costs then the single farm 
payment  will be fully retained.  For a farm to retain  the single  farm payment  it will have 
to have a gross margin  of close to €66,000  if it is farming  the 95 ha or €88,000  if it 
continues  to farm the 148 ha (with no reduction  in land rental  or machinery  running  costs).
Table  8. Man work units (MWU)  required  for each system  analysed
MWU Gross  margin/MWU  (€)
Option  1 1.9 39,922
Option  2 1.6 45,506
Option  3 1.6 42,093
Option  4 1.4 44,474
Option  5 3.1 25,161
Option  6 3.1 37,690
When  looking  at the possible  gross  margins  from each of the options  analysed  it is worth  
noting  a number  of points. Comparing  option  one and two, the only difference  between  
these options  was farming  within REPS or farming  an extra 20 cows with the progeny  
brought  through  to beef The extra margin  generated  is €4,500  for an extra 0.3 of a MWU  
needed.  On the 95 ha farm the option  that gives  the highest  gross  margin  is the all sheep  
enterprise  (option  five). This may well be the case in the future but the extra income  
generated  from having  all sheep  instead  of cattle  would  be got at the expense  of labour.  
As can be seen in Table 8, an extra 1.2 MWU's  would be needed  for this option over 
option  one. Option  four gives  the lowest  gross margin  of all. This is because  it still has 
a significant  proportion  of bought  in cattle in it. It also has the lowest  number  of MWU ’s 
associated  with it, but this will be at the loss of having  a reduced  margin  overall.
68
Comparing  Options  1 and 6
The only real difference  between  options  one and six is the scale  they are carried  out at. 
Neither  is in REPS  and both involve  suckler  herds  with all the progeny  brought through  to 
beef. Table 9 shows  that the difference  in the gross margin  would be approximately  
€41,000
Table 9. Option  1 (120 cows)  vs. Option  6 (185 cows)
Option  1 Option  6
Land area (ha) 95 148
Suckler  cows 120 185
Labour 1.9 MWU 3.1 MWU
Gross  Margin  (excl. premia)  (€) €75,851 116,840
Gross  margin  difference +€41,000
No saving  in fixed costs -€20,000
Net Benefit  (rental  & return  on labour) +€21,000
OR /ha (on 53 ha) +€396
OR /ac (on 131 ac) +€160
As the scale of the farm will not be reduced  it can be assumed  that there  will not be any 
saving  possible  in overall  fixed costs. This is a loss of approximately €20,000  (from  Table  
4). The real benefit  therefore  of farming  to this greater  scale is €21,000.  From this 
€20,000  the land rental  cost for this extra 53 ha. will have to be deducted  to give the real 
return on labour. Land rental costs will fall over time but until this happens  it will not be 
possible  to say whether  option six will be worthwhile  or not. Apart from the land rental  
costs  of the future,  the time commitment  that would  be involved  with option  six would  also 
make it much less attractive  in comparison  to options  one to four.
Conclusions
This farm has a significant  proportion  of rented land and consequently  has built up 
considerable  fixed costs  that cannot  be reduced  overnight.  Unless  the purchase  price of 
weanlings  falls below  what has been assumed  and the sale price of finished  beef rises 
substantially  above  what was assumed,  the weanling  to beef enterprise  on this farm will 
have to be seriously  questioned  into the future. The value of joining  REPS  will almost  
outweigh  the financial  benefits  of not being in it, but more importantly  it would mean a 
reduced  workload  into the future.
If land rental prices  drop substantially  over the coming  years  the fixed costs on the farm 
could be spread  over a much larger  area by renting  land. The level of the drop in rental  
prices  will determine  whether  this will be a worthwhile  option  or not, especially  taking  into 
account  the extra workload  that would  be involved  in going to this level of scale. If land 
rental  costs  do not reduce  and the area farmed  remains  at 95 ha the fixed costs will have  
to be reduced  overtime  to a more realistic  level for the size of farm involved  and the type 
of enterprise  farmed.
69
70
Irish Grassland  
Association  Journal
2004  VOLUME  38
IRISH  GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION
CORPORATE  MEMBERS  2004
ACC Bank  
AIB Bank  
Alltech
Bank  of Ireland  
Bord Bia 
Connacht  Gold  
Dairygold
Dairymaster  Limited  
Dawn  Group  
Devenish  Nutrition  
FBD Insurances  
Germinal  Ireland  Ltd 
Glanbia
Goldcrop  Limited  
Grassland  Fertilizers  Limited  
Greenvale  Animal  Feeds  
I.A.W.S  Group  pic
Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation  Society  Limited  
Irish Country  Meats/Slaney  Meats  Ltd 
I FAC Accountants  
Irish Farmers  Journal  
Janssen  Animal  Health  
Richard  Keenan  & Co. Ltd 
Kerry  Agribusiness  
Lakeland  Dairies  
LELY  Ireland  Limited  
McQuinn  Consulting  
Monsanto  Ireland  Ltd 
Mullinahone  Co-op  
Osmonds
New Zealand  Genetics  (Ireland)  Limited  
Premier  Molasses  Company  Limited  
SWS Farm Services  Ltd 
Timac  Limited  
Wexford  Milk Producers
TEAGASC  EDUCATION  and ADVISORY  SERVICES
Ballyhaise  Agricultural  College  
Cork East  
Cork West  
Laois  
Limerick
Regional  Advisory  & Training  Services,  Kildalton  
Regional  Office,  North,  Grange  
Tipperary  North  
Tipperary  South
Irish Grassland  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 38 2004
Edited  by 
David McGilloway
ISSN 0332-0588
Printed  by Walsh,  Printer,  Roscrea
CONTENTS
J. Brooks  &
F. Young
J.R Hanrahan
A. Kehoe  &
B. Kehoe
D.J. O’Brien
M. Walsh  
J. Hannon  
J. Hinchy
J. Humphreys,
K. O'Connell,
A. Lawless  &
K. McNamara
J. Kennedy
L. Shalloo,  P. Dillon  
T. O’Dwyer,
D. McCarthy  &
W. Fingleton
P. Kelly, M.Gottstein  
& J. CrossePAGE
Life after Fischler  1
A new era for lowland  Sheep  production.
Flock  performance  and issues  from on-farm  studies 3
A Family  Plan for Sheep  farming  2005-2013  11
Parasite  resistance  to anthelmintics  in livestock
in Ireland  15
The main export  markets  for Irish lamb  19
Moving  from 50 to 100 Cows  22
Is there  a future  for Irish milk?  27
Strategic  use of Nitrogen  in a new environment  35
Grass  Watch  - Tools  for profitable  dairying  49
Quota  purchasing  - what can Dairy Farmers
afford  to pay 54
Post Fischler  options  analysis  for the farm of
Tim & Shauna  Meagher  64
COUNCIL  2004  - 2005
President  
Vice-President  
Past-President  
General  SecretaryBrendan  Barnes  
Jan Frederiks  
Tony Pettit 
Grainne  Dwyer
Kevin Commins,  Noel Culleton,  Michael  Doran,  Jim Dwyer,  John Donworth,  
Sean Flanagan,  Jan Frederiks,  Padraig  French,  Brendan  Horan,  Pearse  Kelly,  
Jack Kennedy,  William  Kingston,  Tim O’Leary,  Pat McFeely,  Mark McGee,  
Nicholas  McGill,  David McGilloway,  Andrew  Moloney,  John O’Brien,  
Robin  Talbot,  Peter  Young.
Irish Grassland  Association,  Moneymore,  Borris  in Ossory,  Co. Laois  
Phone/Fax  0505 41025 Email: arainne@irisharassland.com
Life after Fischler
John Brooks' ’ and Frank  Young^  
Taughmaconnell,  Ballinasloe  
^Teagasc,  Athlone
Introduction
Tablet.  Forage  area
ha
Land owned 53
Land rented 20
Total 73*
*Land is fragmented  over six separate  parcels
Soils
Limestone  and well drained  brown  earths  (with the exception  of 2 ha subject  to prolonged  
winter  flooding  (Turlough).
Machinery
Basic  range  of own farm machinery.  Contractor  for silage  harvesting  and slurry  spreading.
Buildings
Four slatted sheds - two with accommodation  for 144 adult cattle, and two with 
accommodation  for 800 ewes (one of the latter units can also be converted  to hold a 
further  84 adult cattle). There  is sufficient  slurry  storage  capacity.
Grazing  system
Controlled  mixed  grazing
Cattle Forty  eight suckler cows  - females  slaughtered  under  12 months  old - males  sold 
as weanlings/yearlings  in April. 60 weanling  heifers bought for slaughter  under 12 
months.  (In previous  years  calves  and bought  in stores  were finished  at 20-26  months)
Sheep  Pedigree  Suffolk  & Texel  ewes 85
Pedigree  ewe lamb replacements 40
Commercial  ewes 550
Ewe lamb replacements 140
Rams  (Suffock,  Texel, Beclare,  Charolais) 15
Mid season  system
Commercial  flock  - litter size 1 98 - 2.02, lambs  reared/ewe  to ram 1 70 - 1 75 and lambs  
reared/ewe  lamb to ram 1.0
Impact  on Fischler  reforms
Decoupling  - no constraints  on sale dates;
Flexibility  to change  systems;
Bigger  differential  in price for quality  stock;
Production  - market  led;
Need for more farmer/factory/partnership  for lucrative  markets;  
Entitlement  payments  not index linked;
Will entitlements  have mid-term  review?
Income?
WTO implications.
Table  2.Net entitlement  payments  (€)
Year € €/ha
2005 34,283 459
2006 33,970 455
2007 33,657 450
Note if National  ceiling  is exceeded  then entitlements  will be reduced  accordingly.  
Area based  compensatory  allowance  = €4,000
Options  post Fischler
• Reduce  significantly  total livestock  numbers  (sofa farming);
• Continue  same  farming  system;
• Maintain  current  livestock  units, but increase/reduce  either  cattle or sheep;
• Post  2005 - lease  farm - trade  entitlements  - get job!
• Participate  in REPS  - comply  with 170 kg organic  N Limit.
Decision
Reduce  organic  N from current  level of 204 kg/ha  to less than 170 kg/ha;  
Reduce  ewe numbers  to 50 pedigree  and 500 commercial;
Increase  suckler  cows  to 60, and rear progeny  for slaughter  at 12 months;  
Discontinue  purchase  of 60 weanling  heifers  for slaughter  at 12 months.  
Join REPS.
Benefits
• Significant  reduction  in workload  - better  life quality;
• Lower  input costs;
• REPS  payment  of €8,800  to cushion  any income  drop;
• Scheme  payments  €46,456.
A new era for lowland  sheep  production?  Flock  
performance  and issues  from on-farm  studies
Seamus  P. Hanrahan
Sheep  Production  Department,  Teagasc,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Introduction
The implementation  of the Fischler  reform of CAP, which will decouple  ewe premium 
payments  from the actual  production  on the farm, is generally  expected  to usher  in a new 
era in the lowland  sheep sector. This new era will see much greater  emphasis  on 
individual  animal  productivity  at farm level. Some  commentators  have described  this new 
dispensation  as “market-driven ” rather  than “subsidy  driven ” farming.  The decoupling  of 
support  payments  is widely  considered  to mean that producers  will focus  much more on 
the profitability  of the enterprises  on the farm, and the animal performance  traits and 
associated  management  factors  that determine  variation  in the productivity  of the sheep 
enterprise.  It should  also be noted  that stocking  rate limits in the context  of the Nitrates 
Directive  and REPS  are also pertinent  drivers  of the role of increased  animal  productivity  
and its impact  on income.
In this presentation  I will review  some of the main animal  performance  factors  that are 
important  determinants  of flock productivity  and product  quality  against the background  of 
information  that has been accumulated  in Teagasc  over the last 3 years from on-farm 
studies,  in collaboration  with a widespread  network  of about 40 sheep fanners. This 
network  has been the basis for a Technology  Evaluation  and Transfer  (TET) project  that 
was initiated  just before  the foot and mouth  emergency  in spring  of 2001.
The main issues  examined  will be ewe productivity,  lamb growth  and drafting  patterns, 
and carcass  quality. The variation  among  farms  in lamb growth  and drafting  pattern  will 
be examined  in relation  to general  measures  of grassland  management  and flock 
management  including  the issue of parasite  control. I will try and put this information  in 
the context  of our on-going  research  programme  in Teagasc  and the lessons  and 
implications  for the future.
The general  characteristics  of the set of TET flocks  are summarised  in Table 1. It is clear  
that the set of farms  involved  were well above  the average  for lowland  farms  in National 
Farm Survey  (e g. Connolly  1997). The lamb growth  achieved  is essentially  equal  to the 
targets  set out in Teagasc  advisory  programmes  and the performance  levels  reported  for 
Teagasc  research  flocks (Hanrahan,  1999). On these farms  the predominant  ewe-type  
was Suffolk-cross  and Suffolk  and Texel rams predominated  as the sires of the lambs.
Table  1. General  characteristics  of Technology  Evaluation  and Transfer  flocks
Feature Mean Range
Area farmed  (ha) 69 23 to 48
Stocking  rate (LU/ha) 1.8 1 to 2 6
Ewes  put to ram (no.) 340 100 to 1000
Lambing  date 23 March 1 Mar to 14 Apr
Lambs  per ewe to the ram
lambs  born 1.61 1.10 to 2.03
lambs  weaned 1 48 1.10  to 1.96
Carcass  weight  (kg) 19.5 18.1 to 21.3
Growth  rate (g/day)  of twin lambs  (birth to weaning) 275 220 to 320
Lamb mortality  (%) 7 1.5 to 19
Flock  productivity
The number  of lambs  reared  per ewe put to the ram is the most important  measure  of ewe 
performance  and hence flock productivity,  since costs associated  with annual  
maintenance  of the ewe dominate  the cost of keeping  the flock. Results  for lowland  
sheep  flocks  in the National  Farm Survey  show  that the number  of lambs  reared  per ewe 
joined  has a very significant  impact  on both gross  margins  per ewe and per hectare. In 
the present  context  the concern  is with gross  margin  per ewe. Thus,  the evidence  shows  
that increasing  the number  of lambs  reared  per ewe to the ram from 1.4 to 1.6 is expected  
to increase  gross margin  per ewe by 20% (Hanrahan  and Connolly,  1997). In present  day 
terms  this is equivalent  to about  an extra €12/ewe.  Improved  feeding  and management 
of current  ewe flocks  is unlikely  to yield an increase  of 0.2 in lambs  reared  per ewe - but 
some improvements  are possible  through  this route. Teagasc  research  has consistently  
shown  that improvements  of this order can be achieved  through  implementation  of an 
appropriate  breeding  policy for flock replacements.  The impact  of Belclare-cross  ewes  
on ewe productivity  has been clearly  demonstrated  at Blindwell  and Knockbeg  over many  
years. The performance  data from the TET flocks over the last 3 years have been  
examined  to see what further evidence  there is on this issue. The TET flocks  have been  
classified  according  to the predominant  ewe breed.
The classes  were:-
Suf_X  ; Suffolk  cross only
Bel_X  ; Belclare  crosses  (among  others)
Low_X  : Mixture  of lowland  types  but not Belclare  
Mule ; Hill cross types (e g. Mules)
The average  performance  of the flocks in each of these categories  is summarised  in 
Figure 1. The results show that flocks with Belclare-cross  ewe types significantly  
outperformed  all of the other  categories  by an extra 0.1 to 0.2 lambs  reared  per ewe This 
finding  is remarkably  consistent  with the various  research  station  studies  over the years  
and confirms  the ability of a breeding  programme  based on using Belclare  genetic  
material,  to significantly  increase  flock productivity  The data from the TET flocks show  
the importance  of litter size in determining  the number  of lambs reared  per ewe joined 
(Figure  2). This clearly highlights  the need to pursue  a breeding  policy designed  to 
increase  litter size.
Figure  1. Effect  of ewe breed  on the number  of lambs  born (LBej)  and reared  (LWej)  
per ewe joined  with rams in TET flocks  (2001 to 2003)
Low_X 
■ LBejMute
Figure  2. Relationship  between  iambs  born per ewe joined  and lambs  reared
Lambs  borfi per ewe joined
Another  factor  that is a source  of variation  in flock productivity  is the proportion  of ewes 
put to the ram that actually  produce  lambs. With good management  around  mating  time 
and no unusual  ewe mortality  or abortion,  at least 94% of ewes put to the ram should 
lamb The variation  among  TET flocks  in this regard  is in Figure  3.
Ewe fertility,  which is the proportion  of ewes  joined  that actually  lamb should  be equal to 
or better than 94%. If lower, causes  need to be sought  (e g. mating management  
condition  of the ewe flock at mating  etc ). Most TET flocks  achieved  fertility  levels at or 
above 94%, so this aspect  of flock performance  appeared  to be generally  satisfactory  - 
as one would expect  in well managed  flocks  where joining  is in October
The third factor  determining  the number  of lambs  reared  per ewe is lamb mortality.  The 
average  value  from the TET flocks  was 7.2% but the variation  among  flocks  was relatively 
large. It is also likely that the true figure is greater  as often only live-born  lambs are 
counted  - rather  than all lambs  born.
Figure  3. Average  values  for the proportion  of ew/es  joined  that actually  lambed  in 
TET flock  (Fertility:  2001 to 2003)
t:
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \
Lamb  growth
In the initial consultations  on the performance  factors  that concerned  sheep  producers,  
“poor lamb thrive ” emerged  as one of the central  issues. Consequently,  a considerable  
effort has been devoted  to establishing  the lamb growth  rate and drafting  patterns  in TET 
flocks. It appears  that "poor thrive ” is usually  recognised  in terms of slowness  to get 
lambs  fit for sale. Most of the growth  of lambs  towards  slaughter  weight  is achieved  by 
weaning  at around  14 weeks  of age. Due to generally  much lower  growth  on pasture  in 
the July-September  period  the weight  of lambs  at weaning  is a major detenninant  of age 
at drafting. Thus, each extra 1 kg in average  weaning  weight  will reduce  the age of 
slaughter  by 1 week. The pattern  of lamb drafting  is in fact, an excellent  indicator  of the 
growth  rate of the flock and three different  patterns  are depicted  in Figure  4. This figure  
shows  the cumulative  percentage  of lambs  drafted  as the season  progresses  for flocks  
where  growth  rate is equal to the targets  that represent  an average  performance  for a 
lowland  system  without  concentrates  being offered  to the lambs.
Figure  4. Examples  of cumulative  drafting  patterns  for mid season  flocks
Combined  ADG Pre & Post
May Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Sep Sep Oct Oct 
‘Good “““A—Poor “ o - Average
Also shown is the pattern  for a flock where  growth  rate is below  this target  (15% less).  
The shape  of the drafting  curve is very different  for these two scenarios.  In the case of 
poor lamb growth  rate the curve is “saucer"  shaped  whereas  the ‘average ’ lamb-growth 
flock is clearly  convex  and with a fairly steady  increase  in the cumulative  percentage  
drafted  from when the first lambs  are drafted.
Table 2. Growth  performance  for twin lambs  in TET flocks  and Teagasc  targets
Growth  traitTET
averageTeagasc
target
Daily gain from birth to weaning  (g) 277 276
Weight  at 14 weeks  (kg) 32.4 32.0
Post-weaning  daily gain (g) (July period) 187 205
The growth  rate in TET flocks  was about  equivalent  to Teagasc  target  figures  as shown  in 
Table 2. Compared  with the Teagasc  target values  the average  for TET flocks was 
comparable  up to weaning,  but was lower  than the target  in the early  post-weaning  period.  
There is no farm data for later periods  of the summer/autumn  season. However  the 
generally  satisfactory  average  values  hide an enormous variability  among  flocks  as shown  
for growth rate to 14 weeks  in Figure  4. If the most extreme  values  are ignored,  it is 
evident  that growth  varied  from around  230 g/day  up to around  330 g/day. This means  a 
difference  of 10 kg in weight  of twins at 14 weeks. The reasons  for this enormous  range  
need to be understood  and it will be reflected  in profound  differences  in lambs  drafting 
pattern with undoubted  knock-on  effects on all aspects  of flock performance  and 
management.  Information  on drafting  patterns  for the TET flocks  is summarised  in Table  
3 as the percentage  of lambs  drafted  by 20 weeks  of age. The results  show  that the vast 
majority  of flocks  have no more  than 10% of lambs  drafted  at 20 weeks. This reflects  the 
wide range  in lamb  growth  and probably  a rapid fall off in lamb performance post-weaning.  
It also reflects  the relatively  large carcass  weight  at drafting  - about 1 kg greater  than 
research  would indicate  as appropriate  weight  for the export  market. This practice  is 
presumably  a reflection  of the monetary  returns  from extra weight  despite  the risk of and 
penalties  for the over fatness  that is inevitable  with increased  average  carcass  weight.
Table 3. Lambs  drafted  by 20 weeks  of age in TET flocks
Flocks  with
At least 50% drafted  
Less than 25% drafted  
10% or less drafted18% of flocks 
49% of flocks 
82% of flocks
The possible  reasons  for the wide flock-to-flock  variation  in lamb growth  rate was the 
subject  of a study by John Faughnan,  using information  on TET flocks for the 2002 
production  year. In this study  a whole  range  of aspects  that might impact  on gro\wth  rate 
were considered.  These  included  detailed  assessment  for evaluation  of the grassland  
(herbage  supply,  height,  digestibility),  grazing  management system  (rotational grazing,  set 
stocking,  mixed grazing),  grass supply  at turnout  and parasite  control  status  throughout  
the grazing  season  based  on regular  assessments  of worm eggs in the faeces  of lambs  
and ewes. In addition  to these  straightforward  measurements  an assessment was made 
of the overall  level of the flock management  system.  This essentially  revolved  around  the 
grassland  management  planning  and included
- closing  date for paddocks  to be grazed  by the flock at turnout  in spring  
the state of these paddocks  in Dec/Jan  including  poaching  etc.
- plans  for hay/silage  conservation  (where/when)
standard  facilities  for flock handling  and the fencing  on the grazing  area 
timing  of spring  N application
Based  on information  on the above  aspects,  each farm was given a score of 1 (= OK) or 
0 (not OK). Likewise  infonnation  on parasite  control  was assessed  and flocks were  
classified  as either  being parasites  under  Control  (= 1) or not (= 0). These  two variables,  
overall  flock management  system  and parasite  status  of flocks,  were clearly  associated  
with differences  among  flocks in lamb growth  rate, and together  with average  lambing  
date and grazing  system  accounted  for about  70% of flock-to-flock  differences.
Conclusions  from this work are that while specific  measurements  like grass quality,  
herbage  supply  or stocking  rate will impact  on lamb growth  rate, there is a more  complex  
set of factors  operating  that need attention  in order  to improve  the level and consistency  
of flock growth  rate. Effective  control  of roundworm  parasites  is also important,  as are 
facilities  for flock handling  and management.  All of the above issues  have been well 
tested  and validated  in research  studies  over many  years. No one element  on its own is 
adequate  - what is required  is a planned/conscious  approach  to the annual  cycle  of grass  
supply  for the flock. This must be practised  at farm level and not just “listened  about ” at 
open days and farm walks.
The need to improve  flock management  facilities  on many farms is evident  from an 
assessment  that was made of handling  facilities  on TET farms,  where  over 50% were  
classified  as having  either  poor  facilities  (35%)  or none (22%). Similar results  were  found  
with regard  to fencing. The opportunity  for better  grassland  management  is shown  by 
information  on the grass  supply  on the grazing  area at flock turnout  in relation  to closing  
date (Figure  4) and the date of application  of N fertiliser  in spring  (Figure  5). As stated  
previously,  most of the flocks involved  had a mean lambing  date in March  yet on many  
farms  the first N application  was not until March lor later. This was clearly  associated  
with whether  grass  supply  during  the year was in "shortage ” or not (Faughnan  2003).
Figure  4. Sward  height  (cm) at fiock turnout  after iambing  and ciosing  date the 
previous  autumn/winter
Figure  5. Date of Nitrogen  application  in spring  and state of grass supply  during  
the grazing  season
6
5
4
15r 3 o
o2
2
1
0[| IO'TsfQeiftitpply"  lurm*
• ‘Supply  «horl«8«*  farms
J.l I
'-Vv
Carcass  weight
There  are two aspects  of carcass  weight  that need to be considered  - the average weight  
and the variability  of weight  about  this average.  The overall  mean weight  of carcasses  
from TET flocks  was 19.8 kg, ranging  from 18.1 kg to 21.3 kg. The variation  in carcass  
weight  within  the group  of lambs  drafted  on any given date (from an individual  flock)  was 
estimated  to be at lest twice  what  it should  be! This aspect  needs  to be addressed  by both 
farmers  and factories  to ensure  that the sector  makes  the most of market  opportunities  
and retains market  share. The issue of carcass  classification,  market  demands  and 
meaningful  price differentials  in terms  of weight,  fatness  and price need to be discussed 
and longterm  needs  identified  by all concerned
Parasites
The detailed  study of parasite  control  status of flocks  
apparent  failures  of control  from anthelmintic  treatment,  
undertaken  two distinct  causes  were clear.in the TET project  highlighted 
Where  follow-up  studies  were
- inappropriate  dose due to faulty  equipment  or improper  use;
- resistance  to anthelmintics  was confirmed  on a number  of farms.  (Good  et at., 2003)
The latter  finding  was to some  extent surprising  as previous  on-farm  investigations  of this 
issue highlighted  the role of inadequate  dosing procedures.  The clear evidence  for 
resistance  to anthelmintics  on farms such as those involved  in the TET project  should 
senre as a clear  reminder  to all sheep  producers  that anthelmintics  cannot  be relied  on as 
the sole component  of parasite  control  strategies,  and that care must be taken to ensure 
that they are used wisely so as to postpone  and hopefully  avoid the emergence  of 
anthelmintic  resistance.
Concluding  remarks
The experience  and evidence  from the TET project  over the last 3 years has Increased  
our appreciation  of the features  of sheep  production  at farm level. Results  clearly  show 
that on-farm  lamb growth  rates  are similar  to those  from research  flocks  and systems  such 
as those at Knockbeg.  Furthermore  the consistency  of the ewe breed differences  in 
prolificacy  observed  at farm level and those  from Teagasc  research  are very encouraging,
and clearly  pinpoint  that potential  and need for a definite  breeding  plan at farm level for 
the production  of productive  flocks replacements.  While I have not presented  the 
evidence  today there is a wide variation  among  flocks in the level of concentrate  inputs  
and in many cases  annual  inputs  of concentrates  per ewe is in excess  of 50 kg. There  
was little evident  relationship  between  the input level and flock performance.  The level of 
use of concentrates  needs to be considered  by individual  farmers  as to whether  it 
represents  value  for money.
Another  more  general  comment that  seems  justified  is that there is considerable  room for 
improvement  in the application  of well established  research  findings  to farm practice.  
Evidence  is presented  on the genetic  differences  in ewe productivity  and the continuing  
dominance  of Suffolk-cross  ewes, in the face of clear evidence  for superior  alternatives;  
the high divergence  between  practice  on N application  date in spring and the long 
standing  recommendations;  the effect of autumn  closing  date on grass supply  at flock 
turnout;  the often quite inadequate  on-farm  facilities  for the flock management.  There  is 
clearly  much scope  for improvement  and the areas  for attention  are evident.  The gains  
from better grazing  management  planning  was clearly indicated  by John Faughnan ’s 
results  for TET  farms  but this is not a simple  “one element"  fix but rather  a more holistic  
integration  of a variety  of elements  specific to individual  farms  and farmers  (!). I suspect  
that there is often too much  reliance  upon,  and expectations  that research  can identify  the 
one key factor  that will transform  the situation  on a given farm. Rather  what is needed  is 
determined  application  of what is known and well established  to the management  
practices  at farm level by the individual  flock manager.
References
Faughnan,  J.R, Nolan,  T, Hanrahan,  J.P and Crosby,  TF. (2003). Pasture  production  
and quality  on sheep farms. Proceedings  of the Agricultural  Research  Forum 2003 
(ISBN 1 8417 4016). Pp 77
Faughnan,  J.P. (2003). Investigation  of management  factors  responsible  for farm-to-farm  
variation  in lamb growth. M Agr. Sc Thesis,  NUI.
Connolly,  L. (1997). Sheep  production  1997. Teagasc  Information  Update  Senes  No 1 
(ISBN 1 901138  20 8). 46 pages.
Good, B., Hanrahan,  J.P. and Kinsella,  A. (2003). Anthelmintic  resistance  in sheep  
roundworms  - preliminary  observations.  Proc. Agricultural Research  Forum  2003 (ISBN  
1 8417 401 6) page 78.
Hanrahan,  J.P. and Connolly,  L. (1997). Lowland  sheep  systems:-  factors  contributing  to 
variation  in margins  Farm and Food, Sept 1997, pp11-18.  Teagasc  (ISSN  0791-6477)
Hanrahan,  J.P. (1999). Genetic  and non-genetic  factors affecting  lamb growth and 
carcass  quality End of Project  Reports:  Sheep  Series  No. 8 Teagasc  35 pages.
10
A family  plan for sheep  farming:  2005 - 2013
Ann and Brian Kehoe
Ballydine,  Kilsheelan,  Clonmel,  Co. Tipperary
Introduction
Sheep  farmers  will face major challenges  over the next decade.  Decoupling  will certainly 
change  the approach  to sheep  farming,  and for many  will determine  if they stay in sheep 
farming  in the long term. For a sheep  only farm, this paper will briefly  review;
the farming  system  and flock performance  details;  
comment  on decoupling  implications  for the farm;  
set out our plans  for the future.
The fanning  system
Background
The farm is situated  in the Suir Valley near Kilsheelan,  Co. Tipperary.  It is in a non- 
disadvantaged  area. The farm details  are as follows.
Total Area Farmed:  
Grassland:
Maize:78 ha 
69 ha 
9 ha
The farm is divided  into three parcels. The main block of 38 ha is located  around  the 
farmyard.  A further  two parcels  of 22 and 20 ha respectively  are located  within  one mile 
of the main block.
Prior to 1997, the farm comprised  60 suckler  cows, 80 acres of tillage and a 250-ewe 
flock. In I997 fundamental  changes  to the farming  operation  were implemented,  and a 
sheep only enterprise  was pursued.  The suckler  cows were sold, and the quota leased 
for three years, before finally being sold in the spring of 2001. There are no cattle 
currently  on the farm.
By 2001 ewe flock numbers  had increased  to 900. Most of the tillage ground  was 
reseeded,  and fencing  upgraded.  New sheep handling  units were built and the winter  
housing  for the expanded  ewe flock was renovated  and extended.
Discussion  group
Membership  of the South Tipperary  Sheep  Discussion  Group has been of immense  
benefit  over the last five years.
Labour  and flock management details
The owners  carry out the majority  of the farm work, with hired labour  kept to a minimum.
• agricultural  contractors  are hired for all maize  work and dung spreading;
• some casual  labour  is used during  lambing.
Management  details
• ewes are housed  in January,
• the flock lambs  as one group  in March;
11
• ewes  go straight  out to  grass  within  48 hours  of lambing;
• lambs  are sold directly to factories  and to butchers  from early July to early December;
• lambs  are finished  off grass  with meals  fed.
Flock  breeding  policy
Crossbreeding  is an essential  element  of the current  breeding  policy. The ewe types  are 
Belclare  x Suffolk,  Texel  x Suffolk  and He de France  x Suffolk.  The He de France  are being  
phased  out. The breeding  programme  for the last two years is given below  (Table.  1). 
There  are no major  plans  to change  the breeding  programme  into the future.
Table  1. Breeding  programme
Flock Ewe Nos. Ewe type Ram used Progeny
Finishing  Flock 650Texel X Suffolk  
Belclare  x Suffolk
He de France  x SuffolkCharolais
Texel
SuffolkAll sold
Replacement
Flock*250Suffolk  X Texel  
SuffolkBelclareMale lambs:
all sold 
Ewe lambs;
kept for 
breeding
*40 to 50 hoggets  are purchased  each year as replacements  for the 250-ewe  flock.  
Flock  performance
Current flock  performance  is considered  to be average.  At present  an average  1.4 lambs  
are reared  per ewe to ram. Flock  output  problems  are related  to two issues.
• Past emphasis  on expansion. During the period 1997 to 2001 efforts were  
concentrated  on increasing  ewe numbers  from 250 to 900 ewes. Insufficient  attention  
was paid to flock breeding  and prolificacy  during  the expansion  phase.
• Ongoing  Toxoplasmosis  problem.  There  is a Toxoplasmosis  problem  within  the flock.  
This leads to lamb losses during pregnancy,  especially  at lambing  time. All 
replacements are now vaccinated with Toxovax  before  mating.  This has improved  the 
situation  but not eliminated  the problem  fully.
Financial  Performance
Output  per ewe and average  lamb price realised  have a major  impact  on gross margin  
figures  (Table 2). It is believed  there is scope to increase  gross margin  (excluding  
premium)  if output  per ewe can be lifted.
Table  2. Gross  Margin  per ewe
Lambs  sold per ewe to the ram 1.4
Average  lamb price (€) 73.50
Gross  Margin  per ewe excl. premium  (€) 43.00
Ewe premium  (€) 22.26
Gross  Margin  per ewe incl. premium  (€) 65.26
12
Decoupling  implications
All sheep  farmers  we will have to come  to grips with the implications  of decoupling.  On 
this farm, it is estimated  that EU entitlements  will approximate  to just under  €25,000  per 
annum  (see Table 3).
Table 3. Estimate  of ‘decoupled  entitlements ’
EU Scheme 2000* 2001* 2002* AverageRate
(€)Total Claim  
(€)
Ewe Premium 900 900 900 900 22.26 20,034
Maize  Aid (ha) 9.15 11.99 9.15 8.33** 365 3,030
Cereal Aid (ha) 9.15 3.05 383 1,168
Peas  Aid (ha) 2.84 0.95 383 364
Setaside  (ha) 2.06 0.69 383 264
Total 24,780
•Reference  years  for establishing  EU entitlements.
•'Maize  area eligible  for entitlements  is 42% of the area claimed  in 2002.
However  entitlements  are likely to be further  eroded  on two counts;
• Clawbacks  for national  reserve  and modulation;
• Future  price inflation.
National  reserve  and modulation  cuts
Entitlements  before deductions  for national  reserve  and modulation,  are estimated  at 
approximately  €318.85  per ha (or €129.03  per ac). It is not possible  at this juncture  to 
be precise  about the actual entitlement  cuts that will apply, but given the following 
assumptions,  an estimate  of the impact  can be made.
• Deductions  for the national  reserve  are likely to be in the region  of 1-3 percent;
• Modulation  cuts are expected  to be in the region  of 5 percent from  2007, however  the 
first € 5000 will be exempt.
It Is estimated  that the modulation  and national  reserve  deductions  could exceed  €1700  
on this farm, reducing  overall  entitlements  to approximately  €23,200  per annum.
Future  price inflation
Entitlement  income  is fixed for the foreseeable  future. However,  there are concerns  that 
overall  price inflation  will also erode  the real value  of the entitlements.  Again  one can only 
speculate  on the future rate of inflation. However,  if an inflation  rate of 3 percent  per 
annum  from 2004  to 2013  were  assumed,  this rate would  reduce  the value  of entitlements  
by about  24% in real terms. Put another  way current  entitlements  of €24,870  would  need  
to increase  by around  €6,000  by 2013 to offset  an annual  rate of inflation  in the order  of 
3 percent.
Consequences
Teagasc  farm income figures indicate  that EU payments  account  for a substantial 
proportion  of actual  farm income  on a typical  sheep  or cattle farm. Taking  the cuts and 
inflation  into account,  it can be seen that entitlements  will meet less and less of income 
requirements  as time goes on. This will put a lot more pressure  on the sheep  farming 
business  itself  to generate  more income.
13
Planning  a future  strategy  for the sheep  farm
In trying  to plan for the future,  it is necessary  to take account  of family  circumstances  and 
dependence  on sheep  farming.  Those  areas  that are likely  to have the biggest  impact  on 
farming  income  must be identified  and prioritised.
Family  Circumstances
Family  circumstances are a major  consideration  when  deciding  what income  is necessary  
for a decent  standard  of living into the future. There  are two children.  The eldest has 
completed  her education  and is now financially  independent,  but the youngest  is still in 
primary  school.
Other  income
At the moment  there is an additional  source  of income,  but this is not guaranteed  to last. 
If/when  this ceases,  there would  have to be a major  adjustment  to the current  strategy.
Farming priorities
The following  areas are viewed  as a priority  to improving  farm profit in a decoupled  
environment.
Increase  output  per ewe
1. A major  priority  is to increase  ewe output  from 1.4 lambs  reared  to 1.6. Achieving  this 
target should increase  gross margin  per ewe by approximately  €12. This can be 
achieved  by increasing  the Belclare  influence  in the replacement  flock, and ensuring  
a good supply  of grass  at flushing
2. Draft  lambs  earlier
The sale of lambs  must begin earlier,  possibly  mid-June.  To have 50% of lambs  sold 
at twenty  weeks  is the target. This can be achieved  by feeding  meals  at an earlier 
stage. This change  should  also provide  the extra  grass  needed  for flushing.  (Looking  
at lamb price patterns  for 2003; earlier  drafting  should  also yield a higher  average  
price).
3. Join REPS
Joining  the new REP Scheme  is essential  to increase  farm income.
4. Extending  the grazing  season
Extending  the grazing  season  is a very important  strategy  on a dry farm. This means  
keeping  the ewes on grass until February  1 and lambing  on March 1.
For the future?
The above  strategy  assumes  continuation  in sheep  farming  up to 2013, but this is by no 
means  certain. In a decoupled  situation  there is no longer  a need to keep sheep  to draw  
down  all entitlements.  All of the above  targets  for the sheep  enterprise  will take hard work 
and commitment.  This commitment  will only continue  be given if there is a good return  
from the market  place. What  is produced  must be of value  - lamb price will eventually  be 
the deciding  factor  as to whether  or not sheep  farming  is continued.
Conclusions
Decoupling  is now a done deal, but there are concerns  going  forward.  It is likely that the 
value of entitlements  will be seriously  eroded  over time. Only time will tell if the market  
place will return the lamb price necessary  to offset reduced  entitlement  income  and 
ongoing  price inflation.
14
Parasite  resistance  to anthelmintics  in livestock  in Ireland
Dermot  J. O’Brien  
CVRL,  Abbotstown,  Dublin  15
Introduction.
Grazing  animals  carry parasites,  picked  up from the pastures.  These  can cause  serious, 
often fatal diseases  or induce  chronic  conditions,  which hinder  economic  husbandry  and 
allow other pathogens  exert their influence  for disease. Under natural conditions  a 
balance  evolves  between  the parasite  and the host, which allows  both exist without  too 
much disruption.  Younger  animals  are less resistant  to these parasites,  but as they grow  
so too does their immunity.  A group  of parasites,  gastro-intestinal  nematodes  or stomach 
and bowel worms,  live in the intestinal  tract, breed and lay eggs, which pass on to the 
pastures  and hatch  there into larvae  that develop  and re-infect their hosts. This cycle can 
become  extremely  rapid in mild moist  conditions  where  animals are in a relatively confined 
area; larvae  build up and cause  parasitic  gastroenteritis,  with severe diarrhoea.  To control 
this, anthelmintics  are given to the animals.  However  as the pasture  larvae  re-infect  the 
animals,  treatment  is repeated  over and over again. The introduction  of new effective 
anthelmintics  in the early sixties  made  treatment  an attractive  efficient  way of producing 
healthy animals in intensive  systems However,  suppressive  treatment  systems, 
especially  in young animals,  may not allow natural immunity  to develop,  leading  to 
problems  later.
In the decade following  the introduction  of the benzimidazole  anthelmintics  (white 
drenches),  resistance  was first recognized  (Le Jambre,  1976; Coles, 1977) and quickly  
spread,  becoming  common  worldwide  (Boersma,  1982; Cawthorne,  1983). Resistance 
soon became  apparent  in Ireland  (O'Brien  and Geraghty,  1990; O'Brien,  1992, O’Brien et 
al., 1994) and now is common  throughout  the country  in sheep,  horses,  pigs and goats 
Although  serious  and widespread  elsewhere,  it has not yet become  a problem  in cattle.  
Recently  resistance  to acaricides  for Dermanyssus  gallinae  (the red mite) of poultry  has 
been detected  in Ireland  (Murphy  et al., 2002).
There are three main groups  of anthelmintics  used against  nematode  worms  (round  
worms), the benzimidazoles,  the imidathiazoles  and tetrahydropyrimidines,  and the 
macrocyclic  lactones. The problem  is not confined  to the benzimidazoles,  the other  
groups have also been affected,  indeed multiple  resistance,  to all three, occurs and 
recently  has been identified,  in sheep,  in Britain  (Yue et al., 2003).
Result  of husbandry
This problem  is caused  by husbandry  practices.  Generally,  animals  kept in extensive  
systems  do not have major  problems  from nematode  worms  and treatments  are seldom 
required,  so no pressure  is exerted  on the anthelmintics.  In this natural  situation,  the 
parasite  population  is almost  entirely  susceptible  to anthelmintics,  however  there may be 
a few individual  nematodes  carrying  the gene for anthelmintic  resistance.  Where 
intensive  systems  are practised  there is a build up of nematode  eggs and larvae  on the 
pastures  with consequent  heavy  infection  rates in grazing  animals,  this leads to lack of 
thrive, disease  and economic  losses, without  anthelmintic  treatment Treatment  is 
successful  but animals  soon become  re-infected  and require  treatment  once more.  
These  repeated  treatments  lead to resistance  as the proportion  of susceptible to resistant
15
worms  increases.  Dosing  with an anthelmintic,  to which  the strain  is resistant,  effectively  
gets rid of the competition  for space  and breeding,  by killing the susceptible  parasites  
and helps the resistant  strain to develop  until eventually  only it remains.  While these  
resistant  worms  are just a few in a population,  there is no problem.  However,  the rate of 
dosing determines  the speed and extent of resistance  development.  The problem  
occurs  more readily  in sheep,  horses,  pigs and goats, as their methods  of husbandry  
involve  frequent  treatment  of whole  populations  of animals  at the same  time; this leads  
to a an overall  drop in-the number  of susceptible  larvae  on the pastures  and a relative  
increase  in the resistant  ones. Nematodes  in goats are particularly  inclined  to develop  
resistance  and if these are nematode  species,  which affect sheep  or cattle, obviously  
there are implications,  Prichard  (1990),  reviewed  the extent  of anthelmintic  resistance,  
its mode  of action  in different  anthelmintic groups  and how it develops  (the problem  can 
also be introduced  with replacement  animals).  Although  under-dosing  can also cause  
the problem,  it is worth  noting  that poor responses  to anthelmintic  therapy  are frequently  
attributable  to inadequate  dosing  arising  from underestimating  the weights  of animals  or 
to the use of faulty dosing equipment.  It is important  to distinguish  between  the 
development  of anthelmintic  resistance  and partially  treated  or re-infected  animals,  
especially  in intensive  systems  where  parasitic  problems  are most likely to occur.
Anthelmintic  resistance  testing
Johansen  (1989),  made  an evaluation  of the in vivo and in vitro techniques  used for the 
detection  of anthelmintic  resistance  in domestic  livestock.  He stated  that the faecal  egg 
count  reduction  test (FECR)  was the most suitable  for field screening  of resistance  and 
that the larval development  assay was likely to prove a valuable  adjunct  in such 
investigations.
Egg hatch assay (Le Jambre,  1976) is a suitable  back up to FECR and provides  an 
accurate  evaluation  of the problem  when benzimidazoles  (BZ) are involved.  There  are 
other  laboratory  tests available  including  the larval motility  assay,  tubulin  binding  assay,  
and various  biochemical  tests, described  by Sutherland  (1988).
Although  newer  assays  are being  developed,  it is logical  that, as the FECR  involves  the 
live animal,  and measures  the effectiveness  of the treatment,  and applies  to all groups  
of anthelmintics,  it is still the most valuable  in-field  test. FECR  requires  examination  of 
faecal  samples  taken from a representative  number  of the animals  under  investigation,  
immediately  before  and twelve  to fourteen  days after dosing  with the anthelmintic  under  
test. It is necessary  for this sampling  interval  to be observed,  since post treatment  egg 
laying  suppression  may persist  for ten days and because  longer  sampling  intervals  may 
allow for re-infection  and egg laying. A reduction  of less than 90% in faecal  egg counts  
warrants an assumption  of a resistance  problem.  Confirmatory  retesting  by FECR  or egg 
hatch assay  is then indicated.
Measures  to limit the probiem
Efforts  to control  a problem,  which is potentially  disastrous  and could leave  farmers  and 
veterinarians  with few or no weapons  with which to fight parasitic  gastroenteritis  in 
livestock,  must be aimed  at keeping  the percentage  of susceptible  parasites  in the host 
and on the pastures  as high as possible  relative  to resistant  ones. The methods  of doing  
this include  good husbandry  as the first principle.  This should  be based on a system  
which allows  rest time for pastures  between  grazing  periods,  so some of the larvae  will 
perish  and so less will be present  to cause  disease,  whilst  leaving  enough  to stimulate
16
immunity  and keep the ratio of susceptible  to resistant  as high as possible.  This can be 
facilitated  further,  by avoiding  suppressive  regimens,  managing  pastures  wisely  and by 
using the older resistant  animals  or other species  to pick up and waste the larvae.  
Fortunately,  for many years in Ireland,  farmers  have been urged to treat animals  for 
parasites  as infrequently  as possible,  consistent  with health,  and to allow animals  build up 
immunity  by contact  with them in controllable  situation.  It has also been stressed  that 
correct  diagnosis  is necessary  before  treatment.  For this reason  the spread  of resistance 
in the country  has not been as rapid as in other countries  and it is vital that farmers  
continue  with that strategy. It is often possible  to dose those animals  with symptoms  
rather  than the entire herd or flock.
As mentioned  previously,  there are three main groups  of anthelmintics  and changing  of 
anthelmintic  group  should  be done  yearly,  rather  than more  frequently.  This slows  the rate 
of build up of resistance  by eliminating  strains  with resistance  to the previous year ’s group; 
it should  be noted  that the change  should  be done on group  rather  than brand basis, for 
the resistance  applies  to all products  within the group. There has been a move, in 
countries  where  widespread  multiple  resistance  occurs,  to combine  drugs from several 
groups,  to cross eliminate  resistant  strains  to each group. However,  this strategy  is not 
recommended  Ireland,  at least not yet. Again the seriousness  of the threat must be 
emphasised  and farmers  must  work  hard at keeping  it at bay.
Goats should not be kept with sheep, as they require  special  attention  in relation  to 
parasite  control  and helminths  more quickly  develop  resistance  in them.
Other  conditions  such as coccidiosis,  bacterial  or viral infections,  toxins  or even over lush 
pastures  can cause similar  symptoms,  so inexpensive  faecal examination  for parasite 
worm eggs is strongly  urged before  expensive  treatments  are contemplated.
The danger  of introducing  the problem  must be borne  in mind when  bringing  new animals 
on to the farm. To ensure  that no resistant  parasites  enter, these animals  should  be 
treated  with a macrocyclic  lactone,  to which  no resistance  has been found in Ireland,  and 
kept away  form the rest of the animals  and pastures  for 24 hours  afterwards.  This strategy 
is important  in the case of liver fluke. Triclabendazole  resistant  strains  of fluke have been  
found in the west of Ireland  for a number  of years now. Liver fluke disease  is a serious 
disease,  which causes  heavy  losses  in cattle and sheep  in Ireland. Resistant  fluke can 
infect all species  therefore  pose a most serious  threat. Suspected  fluke infected 
introduced  animals  should  be treated  with closantel  or some other non-triclabendazole  
based  flukecide  twice at three a three week interval,  before  introducing  to the herd/flock.
Due to enormous  cost, few new products  are being developed,  so we must guard  what 
is available.  In-feed  nematophagous  fungi have been shown  to be a biological  control 
method  with promise,  and for some  time work on breeding  parasite  resistance  strains  of 
animals  has been proceeding  (Windon,  1990). Work on vaccines  against  helminth 
parasites  has also been in train for many  years  (O’Donnell  et al., 1989;  but we must  wait 
some time for any hope of these  being readily  available.
17
References
Boersma,  J.H. and Lewing-Van  der Wiel, P.J. (1982). Benzimidazole  resistance  in a field 
strain of Haemonchus  contortus  in the Netherlands.  Veterinary  Record  110: 203-204.
Cawthorne,  R.J.G. and Whitehead,  J.D. (1983). Isolation  of benzimidazole-resistant 
strains  of Ostertagia  circumcincta  from British  sheep. Veterinary  Record  112: 274-277.
Coles, G.C. and Simpkin,  K.G. (1977). Resistance  of nematode  eggs to the ovicidal  
activity  of benzimidazoles.  Research  in Veterinary  Science  22: 386-387.
Jackson,  F., Coop, R.L., Jackson,  E., Scott, E.W. and Russel,  A.J F. (1992). Multiple  
anthelmintic  resistant  nematodes  in goats. Veterinary  Record  130: p.210.
Johansen,  M.V. (1989). An evaluation  of techniques  used for the detection  of 
anthelmintic  resistance  in nematode  parasites  in domestic  livestock. Veterinary  
Research  Communications  13: 455-466.
Le Jambre,  L.F. (1976). Egg hatch as an in vitro assay  of thiabendazole  resistance  in 
nematodes.  Veterinary  Parasitology  2: 385-391.
Murphy,  T.M , Me Auliffe, A., Clegg, T. and O’Brien, D.J. (2002). Resistance  of 
Dermanyssus  gallinae,  the poultry  red mite, to insecticides  on Irish farms. Proceedings  
of EU COST  Action  833 Conference,  Bari, Italy. September 2002. (EUR 20647)  44.
O’Brien, D.J. and Geraghty,  V. (1990). Possible  benzimidazole  resistance  in horses  in 
Ireland. Irish Veterinary  Journal  43: 104-107.
O’Brien, D.J. (1992).  
PP25-26.Anthelmintic  resistance  in sheep. Irish Veterinary  News 14 (4)
O’Brien, D.J., Strickland,  K.L., ParrS.L.,  Gray, J.S., O’Reilly, PR, Clements,  L., Dwyer,  
P.J., and O’Reilly, L.M. (1994). Anthelmintic  resistant  nematodes  in farm animals  in 
Ireland. E.U. Publication  VI/4125/94-EN  pp101-106.
O’Donnell,  I.J., Dineen,  J.K., Wagland,  B.M., Letho, S., Werkmeister,  J.A. and Ward,  
C.W. (1989). A novel host protective  antigen  from Trichostrongylus  colubriformis.  
International Journal  for Parasitology  19(3) pp327-335.
Prichard,  R.K. (1990). Anthelmintic  resistance  in nematodes:  Extent, recent  
understanding  and future directions  for control  and research.  International  Journal  for 
Parasitology  20(4) pp515-523.
Sutherland,  L.A., Lee, D L. and Lewis,  D. (1988). Detection  of benzimidazole  resistance  
in trichostrongyloid  nematodes.  Parasitology  Today 4: 22- 24.
Windon,  R.G. (1990). Selective  breeding  for the control  of nematodiriasis  in sheep.  
Rev. Scl. Tech. Off. Int. Epiz 9 (2) pp555-576.
Yue, C., Coles,  G., and Blake, N. (2003). Multiresistant  nematodes  on a Devon  farm.  
Veterinary  Record  153(19)  p.604.
18
The main export  markets  for Irish lamb
Michael  Walsh  
Scargo,  France
Introduction
Since Foot and Mouth, the market in France is characterised  by relatively  low 
consumption  of lamb, and relatively  high prices. In 2001 with the UK out of the picture  for 
most of the year, prices  were excellent,  with Ireland  having  the highest  market  share at 
18%.
In 2002, the UK was again back in action, putting  downward  pressure  on prices and 
regained  their leader  position  in terms  of market  share. New Zealand  displaced  Ireland  
as No. 2 exporter  to France. Since prices  were still relatively  higher  than pre Foot and 
Mouth,  the door was wide open for NZ and Australian  products.  In 2002, NZ accounted 
for 15% of market  share.
Consumption  of lamb in 2003, was lower than 2002. Aside from price and availability  
factors,  this was largely  due to the exceptionally  hot summer,  which  saw prices  slump  by 
20% during  the months  of July and August.  However,  despite  reduced  levels  of demand, 
UK imports  into France  increased  by 12% on 2002. In terms of market  share,  NZ retained 
No. 2 position.
How is Irish lamb perceived  on the French  market  in relation  to competition?  
United  Kingdom
Since  2001, Irish lamb is perceived  to have  a quality  premium  over UK lamb between  April 
to early September.  Outside  this period,  buyers  tend to prefer  UK product  because  their 
iambs  are more regular  in terms  of weights,  conformation  and prices. Obviously  currency 
has an important  factor  on the price, and compared  to the pre foot and mouth  era when 
Irish lamb was systemically  10-15 pence lower in price, that situation  has now been  
reversed.
It is an important  psychological  advantage  to have a quality  premium  perception,  and is 
something  that Ireland  will need to maintain  in the future if Irish lamb is to continue  to 
enjoy a superior  price over our UK competitors.
New Zealand
As a competitor,  NZ has made  serious  inroads  into the French  market,  mainly  because  of 
competitive  pricing. Offering  a 3-month  shelf-life  to fresh vac packed  lamb cuts, and a 
standardised  product  has enabled  them to enjoy  considerable  growth  in fresh lamb sales,  
e g. French  industrial  meat processors  producing  lamb kebabs  (“brochette  d'agneau ”) 
have switched  from the European  product to NZ legs of lamb or shoulders.  Supermarkets  
have also demonstrated  a willingness  to increase  their orders  with NZ for festive  periods 
(Christmas  and Easter)  in order to cater  for extra demand.
Given advantages  in price competitiveness,  standardisation  of product  and other  
technological  advances,  NZ sheep farmers  can expect  several  good years to come.  
Although  not a direct  competitor  on carcase  lamb sales, the relatively  high prices  of the
19
European  product  since 2001 will ensure  that NZ continues  to enjoy increased  market  
share  penetration.
Spain
SPANISH  LAMB IS MAINLY  SOLD IN THE SOUTH  OF FRANCE  (PROVENCES:- 
ALPES  COTE  D’AZUR,  RHONE  ALPES,  LANGUEDOC  ROUSILLON),  BUT THIS LAMB  
HAS MADE  ITS WAY UP TO THE PARIS  REGION  BECAUSE  OF PRICE  DIFFERENCE.  
IT IS PERCEIVED  AS A LESSER  QUALITY  PRODUCT  THAN IRISH LAMB BECAUSE  
IT LACKS  CONFORMATION  AND QUALITY,  AND  IS GENERALLY  A LIGHTER  CARCAS  
(14-1 5KG).
How is lamb  from ireland  marketed  in France?
Customers  and Channels  of Distribution
PRODUCER  O WHOLESALER  O RETAILER  O CONSUMER
FACTORY ABATTOIR  
CUTTING  PLANT  
INDUSTRYSUPERMARKET
BUTCHERS
RESTAURANTS
Wholesalers
The vast majority  of lamb is sold through  the wholesale  network,  a step before  the retail 
customer.  The wholesaler  provides  the functions  of distribution  (to retailers),  cutting  of 
carcasses  and price negotiation.  The wholesalers  are an important  link in the chain, as 
they also have greater  flexibility  out of season  when retailers  swap over to UK lamb.  
During  this period  the wholesaler  still service  a small butcher  clientele,  and restaurant  
base.
Retailers
Supermarkets  account  for approx  60% of retail lamb sales, butchers  for 40%. During  the 
season  from April to May, Irish lamb has an excellent  image in terms of quality  and is 
preferred  by the supermarkets  over product  supplied  by our UK counterparts.  Price is the 
essential  motivating  factor  for a supermarket  buyer  once product/quality  specifications 
are adhered  to.
Nearly  all promotional  activity  on lamb is centred  around  price,  which  is why New Zealand  
lamb is so successful.
Irish lamb needs to be competitively  priced with regards  to UK lamb during summer  
period (not more than 10 cents greater  in order for the supermarkets  to absorb  the 
quantities).
Butchers
Most traditional  French butchers  have seen their businesses  decline  over the years.  
However,  more resilient  butcher  chains  are becoming  more popular  as they compete  on 
price with supermarkets  and provide  a confidence  link with consumers  who need to be 
reassured  on safety  etc.
Muslim  butchers  deserve  a mention  for lamb sales,  as they are a very big segment  of the 
market. There  are 6-7 million  Muslims  in France  (over 10% of the population  of France)
20
and they are big lamb eaters. It is estimated  that they account  for 30% of overall  lamb  
consumption.
How to improve  links with the various  players  in the market  place?
The common  denominator  between  all the customers (be it retailers  or wholesalers)  is that 
product  specification  is the same  throughout.
Product  Specification  - LAMB  CARCASS
TRACABILITY
WEIGHT  (16-19  kg)
CONFORMATION - U2
U3
R2
R3
• QUALITY  - NOT FAT
In practice  what happens  when product  specification  is not respected?
1. lambs  rejected  by the customer;
2. no repeat  or less frequent  orders;
3. easier  competition  for the opposition;
The result:-  e g. fat lambs used to fetch 30 cents less than No 1 lambs, today the 
difference  is more like 60 to 80 cents!
What  is your Industry  doing  to enhance  links with customers?
S.C.A.G.R.O  (subsidy  of Dawn Meats)  in France  has invested  heavily  in marketing  over 
the years, and built strong  relationships  with retailers  in what is a fairly volatile  market.  
Currently  they are producing  a 'Consumer  Retail Pack' with an Irish label, which will be 
available  to the major retail groups in France. The future for these products  is 
encouraging.
21
Moving  from 50 - 100.cows
John Hannon
Kiltemplan,  Clarina,  Co Limerick
Introduction
The Hannon  Family home farm is in the townland  of Kiltemplan,  in the parish of 
Patrickswell.  A busy minor  road divides  the farm of 130 adjusted  acres. 90 acres is dry 
limestone  type land, and can be grazed  most  days of the year (the farmyard  is within  this 
portion).  The remaining  40 acres  is a heavier soil type, known  locally  as ‘Coreas ’ and lies 
at the other  side of the public  road. This is excellent  grass growing  land but would not 
usually  be suitable  for grazing  in the period  mid November  to early March.
In 1980 and 1982 John and Charles  Hannon,  two brothers  who now farm together 
completed  the then ACOT  100 hour course  and assumed  full management  of the farm in 
the mid 1980 ’s. The farm milk quota was set at 45,000  gallons  and in addition,  15,000  
gallons  of milk quota  was leased  privately.  Neither Mitchelstown  Co-Op  or later Dairygold  
had available  quota  to lease or buy.
Table 1. Kiltemplan  farm 1985
Acres Cows Gallons
Owned
Leased130 adjusted 50 45,000
15,000
Developments  on the farm
• 1985
An 8 unit-milking  parlour with room for 2 extra units was built, and the entire home farm 
was re-seeded,  including  the reclamation  of 15 acres of rough land. Winter  
accommodation  was increased  from 40 to 80 cow cubicles,  and roadways  and paddocks  
were put in to service  part of the farm. A water  supply  was extended  to most parts of the 
farm.
• 1989
Thirty  acres  of land and 10,000  gallons of quota  were leased  3 miles  away  from the home  
farm.
• 1990s
In the early 1990 ’s the farm ran a flock of over 100 ewes. This enterprise  was disposed  
of in 1993. Subsequently  a farm of 40 acres, 3 miles away was leased,  and a 40-cow 
suckler  herd established.  The followers  from the beef and dairy herds  were finished  to 
slaughter  for a number  of years
• 1993
Thirty-five  adjusted  acres of land and 10,000  gallons  of milk quota were purchased  3 
miles  from the home-place.
• 1995
Eighty acres of land and 25,000  gallons  of milk quota were leased,  6 miles from the 
home-farm.  This farm has winter  accommodation  for 50 adult  cattle. In the spring  of 1998 
the lease  of a local farm ended  with the loss of 10,000  gallons  of milk quota  and 30 acres  
of land.
22
Table 2. Kiltemplan  farm 1995
Acres Cows Gallons
Owned 165 adjusted 82 55,000
Leased 30 10,000
Leased 80 25,000
At this time it was decided  to sell the suckler  enterprise  and obtain  more milk quota. After  
many  advertisements  in the local newspaper,  51,000  gallons of quota  and 79 acres  of land 
were acquired  7 miles  from the home-farm.  This farm had excellent paddocks,  roadways,  
50 cow and 50 weanling  cubicles.  The herd of 50 cows came  as part of the deal. There  
was no history  of tillage  on the leased  land, so calf to beef was the only viable option.  
Extra cattle  were bought  in from time to time when  value  could be got. Approximately  half 
of the land farmed  would not be suitable  for serious  winter  grazing.
Table 3. Kiltemplan  farm 1998
Acres Cows Gallons
Owned 165 adjusted  118 55,000
Leased 80 25,000
Leased 79 51,000
On the morning  of March 23, 1998 70 cows were milked  at Kiltemplan.  At the evening 
milking  112 were milked. It was an exciting  time on a farm that for years  had been starved 
of quota. There  were now an extra 41, 000 gallons  of quota  to be filled and a farm quota 
of 131,0000  gallons.
However,  the excitement  soon wore off as milking  and herding  in the now enlarged  herd 
took a lot more time each day. Milking  time was extended  because:
• Ten milking  units were not enough;
• No drafting  facilities  existed;
• A certain fatigue  factor sets in, when one the one and half-hour  milking  barrier  is 
passed
To alleviate  the pressure  of work,  the Farm Relief  Service  was employed  in 1998  and 1999  
to do did a good proportion  of the evening  milking.  This allowed  time for other farm work.  
From 1998 onwards,  a contractor  was employed  to spread slurry and for two years 
topping  was also contracted  out.
1998 was a wet difficult  year, and the shortage  of roadways  became  obvious  in poor 
conditions.  It was also clear after a few months  that improvements  needed  to be done  to 
the parlour  and roadways.  However,  it took time to get them done because  of disruption 
to an already  busy day to day routine. In addition,  in order  to fill the quota  the parlour  was 
almost  in continuous  use. In spite of these  difficulties,  500 meters  of extra roadway  was 
added  in 1998, as well as resurfacing  most of the existing  roadway.
• 1999
400 m of additional  roadway  were added.
23
• 2001
Work on the roadways  was completed  with the addition  of a final 300 m section. The 
blinding  material  for the surface  of the roads was the only material  that had to be 
purchased.  Red soft shale was levelled  and received  several  passes  of an industrial  
vibrating  roller, which  produced  a cow friendly  surface. Roadways  now extend  to over 2 
km. The Farm Relief Service  fenced  the paddocks.
In warm weather  water in some of the paddocks  became  a problem  due to piping and 
troughs  being too small. By fitting large concrete  troughs  300/350  gallons  it solved  the 
water  shortages and the existing  piping  was retained.  Costs  associated  with this work  are 
shown  in Table  4. No grants  were available  for this work.
Table  4. Costs  incurred  (€)
Cost {€)
Roadways 19,744
Fencing 6,088
Water  supply 4,300
Total 30,132
Since  the increase  in numbers  in 1998 no investments  were made in buildings,  surplus  
cows being transported  to winter  accommodation  on the leased  farms. Also, with the 
exception  of a double  cow box and a disc mower  (items,  which  were required  regardless  
of the increase  in stock),  no investment was  made  in machinery.
Sufficient  cows were milked  in the summer  of 2000 to enable  the parlour  to be closed  
down and improvements  made  to the facilities.  Improvements  made Included:
Extending  the milking  shed - 6 units were added  to the existing  10-unit  machine;
The pit was made  narrower;
The existing  feed system  was extended  and a bulk bin installed;
A new rectangular  yard with a hydraulic  backing  gate was installed;
Building  a new rectangular  yard and cattle  crush;
Installing  a drafting  gate;
Purchasing  a hoof crate.
Total cost €57,386
A new 1,600-gallon  Bulk Tank (replacing  a 760-gallon  tank) was purchased  in 1998 
costing  €20,950.  In 2002 a quad was purchased  for €5,000,  which has proved  to be 
invaluable.
One of the things  that came  as a surprise,  was the increased  amount  of time required  in 
herding  cows  to and from the parlour. This situation  is made  worse  by the crossing  of a 
very busy public  road. When  there  were 60 cows  they only crossed  the road for a couple  
of weeks  in the year for some  after-grass.  When  not crossing  the road it only took about  
15~20  minutes to bring the 60 cows  for milking  twice a day. The cows  now cross  the road 
for about  7 months  of the year and cover  a distance  of about  1.25 km. It takes  20 minutes  
in the morning  to put them across  the road, and approximately  40-45 minutes  in the 
evening  to bring them back to the parlour. This is an increase  of 3-4 hours a week  
between  a 60 and 120-cow  herd.
24
A considerable  amount  of time is also spent  travelling  to outside  farms. They appear  to 
be only 15 minutes  away, but include  the return  journey  and multiply  by 6 days and you 
have another  3 hours  and only one farm covered!  Adjusting  cattle  to grass growth  can be 
another  time consuming  job, where  the cattle have to be moved  between  farms  via truck.  
This takes  a lot of time and costs in the region  of €650-700/year.
Locally  there are good employment  opportunities,  providing  options  for farmers  and non­
farmers  alike. This has brought  mixed  blessings  since  it means  that farmers  who had time 
on their hands in the past, and could be called upon to do jobs like herding,  fertiliser  
spreading  etc., are now working  part or full time and so find time scarce  enough  to run 
their own farms.
The only reason  land was leased  was to obtain  milk quota. The first leases  involved  milk 
quota only, but as time went by more and more obstacles  seemed  to come in the way of 
leasing  and expansion.  No allowances  were made in the rules that two brothers  were 
working  in partnership.  The lease in 1998 escaped  the 20% clawback  by 48 hours.  
However,  every cloud has a silver lining, and the land leased  with quota will put the 
enterprise  in a favourable  position  post decoupling.  Decisions  will have to be made as 
regards  the new environment  in farming  and how things  will proceed  in the future.
The business  has substantial  leasing  charges  and these  will have to be watched  carefully  
in order to keep a firm eye on costs. To achieve  this, grazed  grass forms an important  
part of the diet, with cows grazing  from early (February  as they calve) until the end of 
November.  Regular  grass budgets  are done. Membership  of the local Ballybrown 
Discussion  Group  (formed  1993)  is a great  help in maintaining  an ongoing  analysis  of cost 
and efficiency.  The discussion  group  facilitates:
Monthly  meetings;
Annual  analysis  via Profit Monitor;
Praise  and criticism  from the members  when deserved:
Up to the minute  information  from the group  facilitator;
Ready  access  to the local Teagasc  advisor.
To help with the paper  work in 2004 a computer  package  was purchased.
Future  goals
• To produce  milk for 12 c/I;
• To buy/get  ownership  of quota leased  at present;
• If quota  comes  in at zero cost, to increase  production  to 160,000  gallons;
• To invest  off farm.
Life
The family wanted  to improve  their lot and so expanded.  They tripled output  and are 
proud of what they have achieved.  It can be a pleasant  walk through  their farm, which 
goes to show  that good production  and regard  for the environment  can go hand in hand.  
There  can be dark days too - especially  in springtime when  keeping  all the balls in the air 
at the one time can take its toll. A 75-hour  working  week and only a few hours off on 
Sunday  are the reality. If you are fond of attending  rugby.  All Ireland  league  matches  on 
Saturdays  or play a couple  of rounds  of golf each week, this is not the career  move for 
you. The time factor  involved  in running  a dairy enterprise  and running  a beef  enterprise  
in three different  farms  has to be experienced  to be believed!  With some  adjustments  in 
the future  the Hannons  are confident  that working  hours  can be reduced.  However,  if you
25
like working  for yourself and are prepared  to take on a challenge,  there is a reward  in the 
job satisfaction  of growing  a dairy enterprise
Quota
Appendix  1. 1984 - 346 gallons  to the acre on the home  farm
Year Gallons Owned Leased
1984 45,000 Home  Farm
1986 - 1989 15,000 Leased
1989-  1998 10,000 Leased
1993 10,000 Bought  with Land
1995-2006 25,000 Leased
1998-2005 51,000 Leased
Leased 76,000 
Owned 55,000
That is 1,007  gallons  to the acre on the home  farm.
€239,334  spent  on leased  quota over the last 20 years.
High quota prices  were never  entertained  and 8 c/I and lower  would  be the nornial
Appendix  2. Stock  as at 30/05/2004
Cows Dry cows 0-1 years 1-2 cattle Rep heifers Bulls
115 12 85 52 45 2
Milk Yield 1,187 Gallons/cow  
Butterfat:  3.71%
Protein:  3.36%
Appendix  3. Expenditure
Year Cost  (€)
1985 8 Unit milking  parlour  & slatted  collection  tank 42,000
1988 Slatted  beef shed & 20 extra cow cubicle 46,000
1993 38 acres  of Land and 10,000  gallons  of milk quota 80,000
1994/1995 Reseeding,  fencing,  cattle handing  facilities  and general  tidy
up for above 22,800
1994 Conversion  of an existing  shed to calving  boxes  that could
be cleaned  with a tractor 4,300
1995 2 units added  to parlour 2,200
1998 Bulk tank 1600 gallons  replaced  760 gallons Upgrade 20,950
and alterations  to dairy 3,750
2000/2001 Parlour  upgrade 57,386
1998,1999 1.2 km of new roadways  and resurface  existing  road
2001 Fencing  and new paddocks 6,088
2001 New water  troughs 4,300
Disc mower 5,777
2002 Quad
36 teat mobile  calf feed 5,000
2003 Spinner for  Quad 600
Land drainage  (for extra early grazing) 4,300
2004 Up-grade  fencing  in all grazing  paddocks  to accommodate  calves 1,350
26
Is there  a future  for Irish milk?
Jerry Hinchy  
Dairygold
Introduction
Based  in Munster,  Dairygold  is Ireland ’s largest  Co-Operative  milk processor,  processing 
a milk pool of 190 million  gallons,  from a geographic  supply  area incorporating  counties  
Cork, Tipperary,  Limerick  and Clare.
In the last year, management  at Dairygold  responded  to the challenges  presented  by the 
changing  dairy industry  (both domestic  and global),  in a drive to build a strong  business 
capable  of competing  successfully  on an international  stage. This has been, and remains 
the core objective  of Dairygolds  consolidation  and restructuring  program.  To this end, the 
past year has witnessed  the Co-Op  exit certain  non-profitable  and/or  non-core  aspects  of 
its traditional  business,  so as to strengthen  and re-focus  the business  for survival,  and 
growth  into a world-class  consumer  foods  business.
Whilst there has been successful  implementation  of many aspects  of this program  in 
some  areas,  there is a need to re-structure  the Consumer Foods,  Agri-Services  and Retail  
Divisions,  and Milk Processing  in order  to realise  full potential  going  forward.  The primary 
focus is and will remain  on milk processing.  This will entail  getting  the cost base, product 
portfolio  and plant configuration  right so as to operate  a profitable  milk processing 
business,  whilst  at the same  time paying  a sustainable  price for milk. The challenges  are 
great, and the options  many and diverse.
Dairygold  is acutely  aware  that the Irish dairy industry  is very interdependent,  and needs  
to cooperate  and work together  to focus  on how it might  best process  the entire Irish milk 
pool at least possible  cost, and at maximum  added  value.
The future  success  of the Irish dairy industry  will also depend  on how the industry  exploits  
the potential  that it has invested  in the Irish Dairy Board  (IDB). As an industry,  cooperating  
to secure  a viable future for milk production  in Ireland,  it must look at how It can best 
harness  the capability  of the IDB, to support  the future  for Irish milk production,  five and 
ten years  from now.
Meeting  the challenges
Is there a future  for Irish milk? It is a question  that is very relevant to those who  work and 
earn a livelihood  in the dairy industry.  It is also a pertinent  question  for Ireland  as a whole, 
given the strategic  importance  of the industry  in terms  of employment  and contribution  to 
GNP In answer  - YES, there is a future  for Irish milk, but there  are a number  of key factors 
underpinning  this belief
• Strong  and growing  global  demand  for dairy products;
• The emerging  and exciting  opportunities  presented  by the health  dimension  of dairy 
products;
• That the grass based  production  systems  prevalent  in Ireland  maintain  a competitive  
advantage  with regard  to costs.
27
Growing  global  demand
There  has been strong  growth  in global  demand  for dairy products  from late 2003 and into 
2004 with the forecasts  for the remainder  of 2004 continuing  to be positive. World  
demand  for dairy products  is growing  at around  2% per annum. This demand  is higher  
than the total annual production  of Australia  (around  10.5 million tones). The key 
fundamental  driving  this growth  has been the strong growth  in world gross domestic 
product (GDP), which is expected  to moderate  from the 6% annualised  growth  
experienced  in the second  half of 2003, to a respectable  4% plus rate in 2004. More  
importantly  for the dairy industry,  has been the growth  in the key import  markets  of Asia 
and China  - especially  in relation  to GDP growth,  which  in 2004 ranged  from around  9% 
in China  to 5.4%  for the ASEAN-4  [Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Philippines  & Thailand]  countries.  
Consequently,  global  import  demand  for dairy products  is expected  to remain  strong
Increasing  affluence  in these countries  leads to an increase  in the consumption  of dairy  
products.  The local dairy industries  cannot  cope effectively  with this increase  in demand  
(be it for reasons of infrastructure,  capacity  or technology).  A clear  lag develops  between  
growing  consumption  and under-supply  by the local dairy sector,  which  has to be met by 
imported  product.
Increasing  New Zealand  exports  to China
An example  of the impact of this increased  demand  is the fact that China is now 
Fonterra ’s fourth  largest  market  by value,  generating  in excess  of NZ $300 million  (Al62  
million)  in 2003. Two years  earlier  (in 2001),  China  was not in Fonterra ’s top 10 export 
markets.  In 2002, Fonterra  supplied  70% of China's dairy imports  (excluding  whey,  where  
the USA is the major supplier).  The bulk of Fonterra ’s sales  to China  are generated  from 
the supply  of ingredients  to companies  manufacturing  dairy products.  In the three years  
from 2001 to 2003, New Zealand’ s exports  of whole  milk powder  to China increased  by 
166%, from 29,638  tons to 78,806  tons. Its exports  of non-fat  dry milk increased  by 
199%, from 7,061 tons to 21,086  tons. Exports  of butter  increased  by over 600%  from 
1,346  tons to 9,543  tons, while  cheese  exports  to China  over this period  grew by 530%,  
from a relatively  low base of 390 tons to 2,458  tons.
China ’s consumption  of dairy products  and demand  for dairy  ingredients  is continuing  to 
grow as a result of increased  urbanisation,  rising incomes  and growing  consumer  
sophistication.  This is backed  with support from the Chinese  State  Commission  for Food  
and Nutrition,  who are promoting  the benefits  of dairy products  with initiatives  such as the 
school  milk scheme  [The school  milk program  aims to provide  600,000kg  of milk to 3 
million  students  over three years. The program  has already provided  380,000kg  of milk 
to 1.9 million students].  According  to figures  published  by the Chinese  Ministry  of 
Agriculture,  dairy consumption  has grown  by 10% for the past three  years. All indications  
suggest  that that consumer and ingredients  demand  will continue  to increase  beyond  the 
capacity  of the local Chinese  industry  to supply, creating  market opportunities  for 
companies  like Fonterra  in China [The New Zealand  and Chinese  governments  are in 
advanced  discussions  regarding  the creation  of a free trade agreement  between  the two 
countries,  which they hope to have in place by 2005. Such an agreement  would  
significantly  benefit  Fonterra ’s exports  to China. Fonterra  is also currently  completing  
negotiations  with the Chinese  government  and China's  third largest  dairy company  - 
Sanlu  to purchase  a 39% stake].
28
The health  dimension  of miik and the demand  for higher value  products
Society  has become  increasingly  body conscious,  and actively  seeks  foods  that promote 
good general  health,  as well as good specific  health in areas such as strong bones,  a 
healthy  digestive  system  or a healthy  weight. Dairy ingredients  are being used across  a 
huge array of products  from weight  management  systems  to protein  drinks  and bars for 
athletes.  Ongoing  nutrition  and health  studies  are rapidly  expanding  our understanding  of 
the enormous  health benefits  of the vitamins,  minerals,  proteins,  peptides,  amino  acids 
and various  lipid fractions  in dairy products  and ingredients,  as well as the probiotic  
benefits  of cultured  dairy products.
There  are significant  growth  opportunities  in developing  health  and nutritional  solutions  in 
immune  health, gastrointestinal  health, infant nutrition,  sports health, bone health and 
animal  health. With all this health  potential  from dairy products  we are seeing  non-dairy 
companies  trying to get in on the act. This year, Coca-Cola  purchased  Israel ’s third 
largest  dairy - Tara, for $39m. Coca-Cola  explained  its decision  by saying  that it needed 
to extend  its product  range and to gain access  to the growing  market  for drinkable  dairy  
products.  Last year  Coca-Cola  launched  a range  of milk drinks  in the US and is planning 
a similar  launch  in Australia  in 2005.
Cost of production  advantage  from grass  based  feeding  system
Ireland enjoys a competitive  advantage  in the production  of milk over most northern 
European  countries.  This competitive  advantage  is due to our grass-based  feeding 
system  for dairy herds,  and is facilitated  by the country  ‘s moderate  climate,  which  makes 
it very suitable  for grass production.  The grass-based  feeding  system  has proven  to be 
more cost-efficient  for producing  milk than the mainly grain-fed  systems  used in 
continental  EU countries.  The pasture-based  feeding  system  also has the advantage  of 
being more environmental  and welfare  friendly  for dairy cows and milk production.
However,  while there are a number  of very positive  factors,  which  should  help secure  a 
viable  future  for Irish milk, this won't  happen  just because  there  are reasonably favourable  
market  conditions.  To secure  this future,  the industry  will have to be market  focused, 
agile, responsive  and efficient  so as to deliver  value  throughout the  supply  chain from the 
dairy farmer,  right through  to the end consumer.  There are fundamental  changes  and 
improvements  that have to happen  in the industry  in Ireland  is to survive  the changing 
market  environment,  and benefit  from an increasing  demand  for dairy  products.
Seasonal  milk supply
In this era of decoupled  direct  payments,  Ireland  will have to arrive  at a situation,  whereby  
milk is produced  as far as possible  in response  to market  needs. Milk supply  will have to 
be matched  with demand  without  discounting  the advantages  of milk from grass. The 
current supply cycle results in huge seasonal  supply peaks. The responsibility  for 
collecting  this milk, processing  and the development  of new products  rests with the dairy 
processors.
While it makes  economic  sense  for the dairy farmer  to maximise  milk output  in the lowest  
cost production  periods,  it is not without  its costs  to the industry  as whole. The seasonal 
supply  glut of raw milk forces  the processors  to look at converting  this milk into longer  life 
commodity  type products,  which have low returns. The seasonality  peak also results  in 
costs associated  with under  utilised  plant capacity  in the off peak periods.  The industry 
must re-examine  these  issues,  as there are enormous  capital  costs involved.
29
There  is a need to tackle  the seasonal  peak supply  issue. Ways  of shifting  some of this 
peak onto the shoulder  periods  at either side of the peak must be investigated.  This may 
involve  some system  of differential  pricing,  or price penalties  for excess  milk supplies  at 
the peak, with bonuses  for suppliers  who follow  an extended  grass production  model  of 
spring  and autumn  calving. A means  of ensuring  that whatever  is put in place is fair to 
the farmer  will obviously  be required.
Dairy  farmers
Starting  with the first link in the supply  chain - the dairy farmer. The policy environment  
going  forward  will be very different  from the one in which  dairy farming  has operated  over 
the last 30 years. The new era is one where  the value of EU export  refunds  and market  
supports  are falling  and may eventually  disappear  altogether.
Product  mix choices
Irish dairy processors  have to process  around  5.3 million  tones  of milk each year. They  
have to decide  which products  can turn this delivered  raw milk into a profitable  return,  
however  modest. The product  type choices  available  to processors  are to produce  a 
range  of commodity  type products  or specialist  products
Product  evolution
To be a successful  commodity  product  provider  in the future,  in a market  environment  of 
reduced  or eliminated  EU supports  and protections,  the processor  will need to be very 
efficient  and price competitive.  A low cost milk production  advantage  will be beneficial  
compared  to some of our EU competitors  who have to operate in higher cost 
environments.  However,  a lower cost of milk production  advantage  alone, will not be 
sufficient to survive  and compete  successfully  as a supplier  of commodity  dairy products.  
Processors  will have to be ruthlessly  efficient  in all aspects  of their business  from raw milk 
collection,  to the delivery  of product  to the end customer. Processors  will have to 
maximise the utilization  and productivity  of their resources  and to minimise  their  costs. All 
resources;  capital, plant, labour, energy,  environmental  and transport  will have to be 
utilised  and managed  effectively  and efficiently.  Large scale is less of an issue for the 
production  of specialist  products,  but the requirements  for efficient  use of resources  
certainly  applies.
For specialist  producers,  the ability to flexibly  and competitively  deliver  product  in the 
quantities  and specifications  required  by their customers  are the key factors  for success.  
They need to develop  strong  long-term  relationships  and supply  partnerships.  They need 
to work with their customers  to improve  the quality,  functionality  and value  of the products  
delivered.  To achieve  this, they need to be close to their customers  to understand  and 
anticipate  current  and future requirements.  They need to build supply  relationships  that 
make it difficult  or costly  for competitors  break into.
Customers
We have seen the retail multiples  exercising  a lot of power  in the market  place, pushing  
down prices, rationalising  the number  of suppliers,  and putting additional  supply  
requirement  costs on dairy companies.  Other key customers  of dairy companies  are 
imposing  similar  type demands  and disciplines.  They require  their suppliers  to be 
proactive  in improving  quality and functionality,  responsive  and agile in meeting  their 
needs  in terms of quantity,  quality,  consistency,  and the competitiveness  of the product  
supplied Dairy companies  have to be close  to their non-commodity  customers  and work
30
with them in meeting  their product  requirements.  In these  types of supply  relationships, 
customers  want  to deal and communicate  directly  with their suppliers  and there is no role 
or value  for middlemen  in the supply  relationship.
A roadmap  for the future
The old prescription  for increased  scale and efficiency  was merger,  acquisition  and 
consolidation.  This has been stated  and restated  regularly  over  the past two decades  and 
no one in the industry  has offered  a different  long-term  solution.  However,  it has not been  
fully embraced  by the industry  for a variety  of reasons.  These  reasons  have as much to 
do with tradition,  as they have to do with the structure  of the industry  itself The key and 
central  role played  by local co-ops  in their communities  over the past century  should  not 
be underestimated.  They played a highly significant  role in the evolution  of Irish 
agriculture  and the ties between  them and their shareholders  and communities  are far 
more than financial,  they exist also at an emotional  level. For the shareholders  and 
managements  of these entities to participate  in a wide scale rationalisation  or 
consolidation  of the industry,  is asking  a lot. There  is also the issue of local rivalries  and 
simple  fear of the unknown.  Merger  with a traditional  rival may be seen by many  involved 
as similar  to asking Cork and Kilkenny  to field a joint hurling team! Also existing 
management  teams and others may fear for their own future in an enlarged  and 
rationalised  business
Where  consolidation  has occurred,  the parties  have generally  been slow to realise  the 
potential  efficiency  gains, again for a variety  of reasons.  Chief  among  these has tended  
to be the terms of the original  merger  or acquisition  under which all parties  involved 
(shareholders,  management,  staff, suppliers  and so on), were assured  that nothing  would  
change.  These  assurances  tended  to be made  to smooth  the merger  process.  Star ting 
from such a position  it is always  going  to be difficult  to realise  the benefits  of a merger  - 
particularly  in the industrial  relations  context.  Probably  the single  successful  exception  to 
this rule was Kerry  Group ’s unapologetic  purchase  of Golden  Vale.
At Dairygold  the painful  process  of realising  the necessary  efficiency  gains has begun.  
Over the past year a root and branch  review  of every aspect  of the business  has been  
instigated.  In each area the formula  of “fix it, outsource  it, sell it, or shut it” has been  
applied. This has resulted  in approximately  1,000 redundancies;  i.e. exit from pig 
slaughtering  and red meat; rationalisation  of the UK cheese operations;  and the 
outsourcing  of yogurt manufacturing  and transport  operations.  This has resulted  in a 
leaner  more  efficient  business,  but there is more  to do. While the  headline  number  of staff 
reduction  was high, most  of this did not apply  to the milk processing  division,  and although 
numbers  were reduced  by 20%, it is still inefficient  due to the number  of sites. The scale  
to compete  successfully  on international  commodity  markets  of the future  is still not there.  
The resources  to compete  as a specialist  product  manufacturer  are also still not there.  
Challenging  targets  for 2007 have been set and to achieve  these, new models  for the 
business  will have to be examined  - models  that will involve  a major  step shift.
The Irish dairy industry  is not one unit, but for the most part a series  of tribes  connected 
only by relative  position  in the milk price league  and ownership  of a trading  and investment  
house  - the IDB. This may seem a healthy  attribute  to those  who see the world through 
the jaundiced  eye of the perceived  failure  of mergers  in this country.  However  the 'divided 
we stand, united  we fall’ mindset  of the cynic cannot  be allowed  to flourish. Stand  for a 
moment  outside  the box and imagine  what would happen  if a change  team was handed  
a clean sheet of paper and told to forget about past failures/rivalries,  forget  about the
31
power  of the interest  groups,  just simply  write down how to maximise  the competitive  
position  of those  who milk cows on this green island.
The change  team
The ‘change team ’ would very likely come back with the following  summary  
recommendations:
• The emergence  of a small number of strategically  placed,  scale commodity  sites with 
their own sales arm;
• The  development  of a number of smaller  sites, strategically  chosen  to cluster  existing  
volume  of non-commodity  products,  should  they not fit best alongside  the commodity  
sites. Sales  and Tech development  would  be aligned  to ensure  these  businesses  are 
positioned  to extend  and defend  their businesses;
• Target  markets  for emerging  products  would  be nominated;✓ Nutrition  - U S;✓ Cheese  flavour/texture  - U.K;✓ Dairy ingredients  - China;✓ Medium  and hard cheese  - southern  Mediterranean;✓ Food service  - US/UK,
• Appropriate sales/R&D teams  would  be constructed  to address  each of these  markets  
and state agency,  dairy orientated,  market  and tech research  would be absorbed  by 
these  entities.
• Non-core  assets  would either be sold to fund change  or given back to the original  
stakeholders  to be managed  outside  of the milk processing  structure.
• Governance  and ownership  would be driven  by how Dairy Ireland  progresses  away  
from commodity  towards  lifestyle  health orientated  ingredients.  There is room for a 
stock  market  and farmers,  if there is a path of growth.  There  is room for farmers  only 
if we remain  in non-growth,  non-intellectual  property  type products.
To speak  of a single  strategy  for the Irish dairy industry  is a fine lofty topic. However,  as 
the industry  is structured  today, it is a complete  waste of time. You cannot  develop  a 
strategy for a series  of fragmented  businesses  with separate  ownership  and management  
structures.
So is there reason  for hope?
Management  of today ’s processing  entities  are progressively  attempting  to examine  
means of working in a pragmatic,  non-threatening  manner  with their neighboring  
processors,  to find the lowest cost means of solving their commodity  processing  
challenges.  This is an important  step. Farmers  today, and the boards  that represent  
them have moved  far beyond  parochial  issues. They are becoming  focused  on ensuring  
that positive  change  occurs  to mitigate  the effects  of reducing  EU supports,  and indeed  
trying  to move Ireland  into the sweet  spot of leading  edge technology  application.
It is very early days yet, however,  the Irish dairy industry  is neither  young nor without 
history  and roots,  and it would  be unrealistic  and indeed  perhaps  unhelpful  if the evolution  
of the industry  was to occur too quickly.
Dairygold  restructuring
As the largest  co-op processing  milk on the Island,  and especially  given its geographic 
position,  Dairygold  will play its role in the future  developments  of the Irish dairy industry.  
A strategy  for dairy processing  has only now been completed.  It will deliver  change,
32
which  will be robust  in the face of the future  evolution;
• One large efficient  commodity  processing  site;
• Repositioning  of current  value-added  products,  either as discreet  clip-ons  to the 
commodity  site or located  on sites where  they have a long term future.
• The creation  of a speciality  ingredients  business  to drive added-value.
To drive this change  will require  funds; the intention  is that these funds  would be put in 
place in a manner  that would  prevent  Dairygold  from becoming  a brake  on Irish milk price  
over the course  of the change  period  - the next 2 to 3 years. It is therefore  vital that non- 
agri foods are managed  in a manner  that ensures  they maximise  their value for the 
business,  and that the assets  built up outside  of the Dairygold  balance  sheet  are unlocked 
e g. in businesses  that are part owned  (such  as lAWS and the IDB).
From a Dairygold  perspective,  it is perfectly  reasonable  to suggest  the IDB can best serve  
Irish dairy farmers  by going back to what it was put in place to do 'Market  Irish Dairy  
Products ’, and release  the extensive  value it has built up outside  this remit to act as a 
catalyst  in the forward  development  of the Irish dairy industry.  A good business  case can 
be made for having a centralised  commodity  clearing  house to dispose  of Irish dairy 
commodity  products,  but it does  not need  to have a large and expensive  infrastructure  and 
overheads.  It has to be lean and efficient  in every aspect of its operations.  This 
requirement  is no different  for the dairy farmer  or the dairy processor.
There  has been only limited  development  of the Kerrygold  brand in recent  years. There  
is a need to examine  if a different  organisational  structure,  and marketing  focus  is required 
to successfully  develop  and expand  the range  and quantity  of branded  Irish dairy products  
sold on international  markets,  at higher  margins.
The IDB going  forward
The new go-forward  structure  of the IDB should  aim to;
• become  a low cost commodity  sales management  operation;
• separate  out it's 'value  added'  branded  business,  and drive it forward;
• give up on being a speciality  ingredients  player,  it's not the role for a trader.
From a Dairygold  perspective,  it is reasonable  to suggest  that the IDB can best serve  Irish 
dairy farmers  by going  back to what  it was put in place  to do - 'market  Irish dairy products ’ 
and release  the extensive  value  it has built up outside this  remit,  to act as a catalyst  in the 
forward  development  of the Irish dairy industry.  A good business  case can be made for 
having a centralised  commodity  clearing  house to dispose  of Irish dairy commodity 
products,  but it does not need to have a large and expensive  infrastructure  and 
overheads.  It has to be lean and efficient  in every aspect  of its operations.  This 
requirement  is no different  for the dairy farmer  or the dairy processor.
Conclusions
A challenging  transition  period  is now upon the Irish dairy industry  as it leaves  behind  the 
era of EU supports.  This paper  has identified  a number  of key industry  strategies  that 
must be addressed  if further  progress  is to be made;
• At farm level, the milk supply  curve  has to be better  managed.
• At the processing  stage,  the asset-sharing  model  must  be embraced  as a realistic  and 
viable  means  of ensuring  low cost commodity  production.
33
At the sales  end, the IDB (which  has served  the nation  well), needs  to look at radically  
transforming  its structures  to ensure it focuses  on being the most cost efficient  
commodity  seller  and the best manager  under the Kerrygold  brand.
There  is a future  for Irish milk, but this future  is by no means  guaranteed.  As an industry  
Ireland  Inc. ’ may not have prepared  as well as possible  for an environment  of significantly  
reduced  EU supports  and increased  international  competition.  To secure  a viable  future,  
tough  but necessary  actions  will have to be taken. The prize is worth  fighting  for, - is the 
resolve  there?
34
strategic  use of nitrogen  in a new environment
J. Humphreys,  K. O’Connell,  A. Lawless  and K. McNamara 
Teagasc,  Moorepark,  Solohead and Johnstown  Castle
Introduction
In recent  times,  the control  of nitrate  losses  from agriculture  to surface  and ground  waters  
have been the focus of attention  pending  the instigation  of a National  Action  Programme 
under  the Nitrates  Directive  (91/676/EEC).  The objective  of this Directive  is “to reduce 
water pollution  caused  or induced  by nitrates  from agricultural  sources  and to prevent 
further  such pollution ”. Pollution  by nitrates  is defined  as concentrations exceeding  50 mg 
nitrate/I, known as the Maximum  Allowable  Concentration  (MAC). However, 
concentrations  of less than 25 mg/I (the guide level) are considered  desirable.
In Ireland the whole country  has been designated  as subject  to controls  under this 
directive,  which  seeks  to limit soil amendments  by N contained  in organic  manures to 170 
kg/ha/year.  Such amendments  include  the direct deposition  of excreta  by grazing 
livestock  and land spreading  of organic  manures.  These  manures  include  that generated  
by ruminant  livestock  housed  on the farm, by intensively  managed  livestock  such as pigs 
and poultry,  and others, such as spent composts,  sludges  etc. Restrictions  are also 
placed  on periods  during  which  these  manures  can be applied,  ranging  from mid-October  
to early January  in the south and east, and the beginning  of October  and the end of 
January  in the north. The main impact  of the limit of 170 kg organic  N/ha is to restrict 
stocking  rates on farms  to around  2.0 LSU/ha  (0.8 cow/acre).
These limits are not yet ‘set in stone' and will be the subject  of intense  negotiation 
between  Irish government  departments  of agriculture  and environment  and the EU 
commission.  However,  this is not an issue that will be dealt with in this paper,  but rather  
the objective  is to outline  some of the factors  that influence  the efficiency  of N use on 
grassland  farms. Improving  efficiency  of N-use  is necessary  to maintain  production  under  
restricted  fertilizer  N regimes,  and also to reduce  losses  to the environment.  This will also 
strengthen  Ireland ’s case for derogation  in future. Improving  efficiency  of N-use is also 
important  from the perspective  of lowering  costs on farms where  incomes  are coming 
under  increasing  pressure  following  the recent  reforms  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy 
(CAP).
Fertilizer  N use on intensive  dairy farms
Surveys  of fertilizer  N use on intensive  dairy farms  indicate  that at similar  stocking  rates,  
there is considerable  variation  in the quantities  used (Figure  1). There  are a number  of 
reasons  for this including  differences  in soil-type  and natural  background  fertility  (see 
below),  differences  in the type of stock being carried  and the extent  to which maize  and 
whole-crop  are grown,  and the extent  to which  concentrates  and other  feeds  are imported 
onto farms. The latter  will tend to lower  fertilizer  N use on farms. Nevertheless  it is clear  
that some  farmers  are using N more  efficiently  on their  farms,  than others. It can be seen  
in Figure  1 that fertilizer  N use on farms  stocked  at 2.5 LSU/ha  ranges  between  225 and 
400 kg/ha. Obviously  the farmer  operating  at 225 kg/ha will be better  able to meet the 
future  requirements  of the Nitrates  Directive  compared  to the farmer  using  400 kg/ha. The 
question  is why is one farmer  so much more efficient  than the other?
35
Figure  1. Fertilizer  N use on intensive  dairy farmers  in the south  west  of ireland.
Factors  influencing  iosses  of N
Available  N for uptake  by the sward
Efficient  management  of N on farms  requires  that N is supplied  to the soil at a time and 
In a manner  that ensures that as much  of that N as possible  is taken  up by the sward  and 
used to grow  grass to feed livestock.  This requires  that losses  between  application  to the 
soil and uptake  by the sward  be minimised.
Nitrogen  is available  in the soil in two forms:  nitrate  and ammonium,  both of which  can be 
taken up and used by the sward. Fertilizers  supply both nitrate and ammonium,  for 
example,  CAN is calcium  ammonium  nitrate. Urea, on the other hand, is broken  down  to 
ammonium  once it is applied  to the soil. Any ammonium  that is not readily  taken up by 
the grass  roots  accumulates  in the soil where  it is converted  to nitrate. This is unfortunate  
because  nitrate  is prone  to being lost from the soil.
Soil particles  are negatively  charged.  Ammonium  in the soil is positively  charged  and 
therefore  ammonium  is held quite  well in the soil. In contrast,  nitrate  is negatively  charged  
and is therefore  repelled  from soil particles.  Thus nitrate  in the soil moves  easily  with the 
flow of soil water,  which  facilitates the transport  of nitrate  to plant roots  when  the sward  is 
taking up soil water. The soil water is drawn to the plant roots by a process  called  
evapotranspiration.  Approximately  4,500 m^ of water/ha/year  (a little less than 400,000 
gals/acre)  is drawn  out of the ground  by this process.
Nitrate  leaching  and denitrification
The mobility  of nitrate  is a disadvantage  under conditions  of high rainfall  because  it leads  
to leaching.  This is a mechanism  by which nitrate  is washed  out of the topsoil  as water 
passes  down  through  the soil profile. Leaching  of nitrate  is mostly  associated  with sandy,  
free-draining  soils. In heavy  soils with impeded  drainage,  nitrate  is lost by an alternative  
mechanism  that is also dependant  on the soil water  status. Under  high rainfall,  the soil 
pores of heavier  soils get increasingly  saturated  with water, which depletes  the soil of 
oxygen.  Under such circumstances certain  bacteria  in the soil are able to take the nitrate  
(NO 3) and detach  the oxygen  (O2) and use it to survive  the waterlogged  conditions.  This 
process  is called  denitrification  and leads to the release  of NjO and N2 gasses  into the 
atmosphere.
36
In Ireland,  there  are high rates  of rainfall  during  the autumn,  winter  and spring  (Figure  2a). 
In contrast,  rates of evapotranspiration  are highest  during  late spring,  summer  and early 
autumn. Average  rainfall in Ireland is around 1000 mm per year, whereas  
evapotranspiration  is around  450 mm per year. The difference  is known as surplus 
rainfall,  which  either  drains  down through  the soil or runs off the soil surface  into drains  
etc. This surplus  rainfall  amounts  to around  5,500 m^ of water/ha  or around  500,000 
gals/acre).
As can be seen in Figure  2b, most of this surplus  rainfall  occurs  between  October  and 
January. These huge volumes  of surplus  rainfall can cause considerable  losses of 
nutrients  either by denitrification  of nitrate,  nitrate leaching  or run-off  etc., and this has 
implications  for the timing  of fertilisers  and slurry.
Figure  2. a) Average  monthly  rainfall  (bars)  and potential  evapotranspiration  (line)  
(mm/month),  and (b) surplus  rainfall  (mm/month)
(a)
Ijj? Mar Ap? V| lijf :\iiH  t-KC0
50(b)
Sfjx .Vftf {‘ift S p \-o* IVr
Volatilisation  of ammonia
The opposing  influences  of rainfall and evapotranspiration  also influence  the other  
important  mechanism  of N loss from grassland,  i.e. volatilisation  of ammonium  (NH 4) to 
ammonia  (NFI 3) gas. This loss of N is generally  associated  with the application  of urea 
fertilizer.  Once urea is applied  to the soil it is broken  down into ammonium  and dissolves  
in the soil water. Ideally  this soil water  seeps  down to the grass roots. Flowever,  under  
good drying  conditions,  the water  containing  the ammonium  can be evaporated  off into the 
air as water  vapour. The ammonium  dissolved  in this water  is like-wise  volatilised  off as 
ammonia  gas. It can be seen in Figure  2b that evapotranspiration  exceeds  rainfall  during 
May, June and July. Flence, these are the months  when there is greatest  risk of 
volatilisation.  For this reason  it is not generally  recommended  that urea fertilizer  be used  
after the beginning  of May.
The greatest  loss of N by volatilisation  occurs  during  the application  of slurry. The N in 
slurry  exists  in two main forms:  (1) ammonium  and (2) organic  material,  which  is the solid 
fraction  of the slurry  (e g. the fibrous  residue  of digested  silage etc ). Ammonium  accounts  
for around  50% of the N in slurry  and the solid fraction  accounts  for the other  50%. Once 
the slurry  is applied  the ammonium  is immediately  available  for uptake  by the sward. The 
N in the solid material  only becomes available  as the organic  material  rots away  over  time.
However,  ammonium  in slurry  can easily  be lost by volatilisation,  in the same  manner  as 
it is lost following  the application  of urea fertilizer.  In fact, virtually  all of the ammonium  in
37
slurry applied  after the beginning  of May can be lost by volatilisation,  particularly  where  
slurry is applied  to bare silage  stubble  under  dry conditions  during  the summer.  This is 
partly because  of weather  conditions,  but it is also due to the method  of application.  
Spraying  slurry  into the air via splash-plate,  promotes  the process  of volatilisation.  These  
losses  occur  during  and immediately  after application  and virtually  all of the ammonium  
in the slurry  can be lost within  a few hours  of the slurry  being applied.  The application  of 
33 m^/ha (3000 gals/acre)  of slurry can contain  around  100 kg N/ha, half of which is 
ammonium  dissolved  in the liquid fraction. Hence,  around  50 kg N/ha is rapidly  lost by 
volatilisation  when the slurry is applied  under  the wrong  conditions.  This represents  a 
significant  loss of N when it is considered  that average  fertilizer  use by the group of 
intensive  dairy farms  presented  in Figure  1 is 300 kg fertilizer  N/ha.
Volatilisation  losses  can be minimised  by applying  slurry under  conditions  that promote  
the rapid infiltration  of the slurry  into the soil. Two factors  facilitate  the achievement  of this 
objective;  (1) applying  slurry under  damp misty conditions  and (2) applying  fairly dilute  
slurry.
Damp  conditions
To get the best response  to slurry, it is necessary  to apply slurry under  cool damp  misty  
conditions,  preceding  or coinciding  with active  grass  growth  and rapid uptake  of nutrients  
from the soil. The most ideal concurrence  of these  conditions  is during  the spring  months  
of February,  March  and April, and to a lesser  extent  the autumn  months  of September  and 
October.  However,  when slurry is applied  in October,  it is being applied  just prior to the 
four wettest  months  of the year (Figure  2a) and at a time of declining  grass growth.  
Hence,  while applying  slurry in October  might lower  ammonia  losses,  there is increased  
risk of P loss in runoff  and nitrate  loss by denitrification  and leaching  over the winter.
The greatest  responses  to applied  slurry  is during  the spring,  when infiltration  is high, and 
there is a huge inorease  in grass  growth;  going from around  5 kg DM/ha/day  in January  
to around  80 kg DM/ha/day  by the end of April. This generates  a huge demand  for the 
nutrients  ensuring  rapid uptake and efficient  utilization  of the nutrients  in the slurry.  
Furthermore,  when slurry is applied  during the spring,  the solid material  gets washed  
down into the soil where it rots away slowly during the summer  months,  releasing  
nutrients  for uptake  by the sward. In contrast,  when slurry is applied  during  October,  the 
solid fraction  rots away during  the winter  months,  when uptake  by the sward is low and 
there is high rainfall causing  the loss of these newly released  nutrients  by run-off,  
denitrification  or leaching.
Application  of dilute  slurry
In Ireland,  the solid fraction  of slurry  generally  accounts  for between  2 - 10% of the total 
volume  of slurry. As this becomes  more dilute  due to rainwater  or mixing  with dirty water,  
there is a dilution  of the nutrients  contained  in the slurry. This creates  greater  volumes  of 
slurry. As slurry  gets more dilute,  the relative  efficiency  of utilization  of the ammonium-N  
increases,  because  more dilute slurry infiltrates  into the soil much more quickly  that 
higher DM slurry. This is particularly  the case for slurry applied  during the summer 
months  when the likelihood  of volatilisation  is greatest.  With high DM slurry, a greater 
proportion  of the nutrient  value adheres  to grass or the soil surface,  where it remains  
exposed  to the air for longer,  leading  to greater  losses  through  volatilisation.
38
Grass  growth  and N uptake  from the soil
Factors  influencing  grass  growth
Sunlight  (day length and intensity),  soil temperature  and soil moisture  are the three 
primary  determinants  of grass growth. Sunlight  provides  the energy  that fuels grass 
growth  through  the process  of photosynthesis.  The extent  of sunlight  depends  on the 
combination  of daylength  and the intensity  of the sunlight.  Daylength  varies  from around  
8 hours/day  in mid-winter  to 16 hours/day  in mid-summer.  However,  the incidence  of 
sunlight  is about 10-times  higher  in mid-summer  than mid-winter.  This is because  the 
intensity  of sunlight  is about  5-times  higher  in mid-summer than in mid-winter.
During the winter and early spring, low soil temperatures  limit grass growth. At soil 
temperatures  of less than 4.5°C there is no net accumulation  of new pasture. Between 
4 5°C and 6.0°C there are small amounts  of pasture  accumulation.  It is only when soil 
temperatures  increase  above  6.0°C that there are substantial  amounts  of grass growth.  
Grass growth increases  rapidly with increasing  soil temperatures  above 6.0°C.  
Winter/spring  temperatures  vary widely  across  the country,  with grass  growing  virtually  all 
year round  at Valentia  (Co. Kerry),  but limited  by low soil temperatures  during  December,  
January  and February  at Clones  (Co. Monaghan).
Soil temperatures  generally  place a greater  constraint  on grass  growth  during  the spring 
than during  the autumn. In the autumn  grass  growth  is constrained  more by decreasing  
sunlight  and by changes  in the physiology  of the sward. During  the late autumn  the sward  
begins  to accumulate  resources  in the stubble  rather  than producing  new leaves  that 
might be burned  off by frost. Also, grass  leaves  are the machinery  that absorbs  sunlight  
for photosynthesis.  The cost of running  this machinery  is respiration,  which  describes the 
energy  used to maintain  the internal  workings  of the grass sward. As sunlight  declines  
during  the autumn  the respiration  cost associated  with a large amount of leaf material  can 
begin to exceed  the level of photosynthesis  that oan be maintained  on the declining 
sunlight. Hence  for the plant, having  a large amount  of leaf material  starts  to become  a 
liability. Under  such circumstances,  energy  loss by respiration  can exceed  the energy 
absorbed  from sunlight,  and grass  starts  to shed some  of its leaf material,  which is often  
manifested  as white-tips  on the leaves  of grass. This process  also leads  to a loss of DM 
when heavy  covers  are carried  into the winter.
A soil temperature  of 6.0°C is generally  considered  an important  threshold  for grass 
growth during the spring It has occasionally  been suggested  that, because  soil 
temperatures  remain above 6.0°C until as late as November,  that this justifies  the 
application  of fertilizer  N during  November.  This is nonsense.  Applying  fertilizer  N during 
November  is a complete  waste of money,  since the possibility  of getting  a worthwhile  
response  in grass  growth  is long gone!. Furthermore,  high rates of surplus  rainfall  will be 
entering  the soil during  November,  December  and January  during  a period  when uptake 
by the sward  will be virtually  zero. Under  such conditions,  fertilizer  N will not remain  for 
long in the soil.
In general,  soil temperatures  in coastal  areas of the south and west are relatively  high 
during  the winter  and spring,  and lower in inland  areas  of the north and east. This has 
implications  for the application  of fertilizer  N during the spring. In contrast  to soil 
temperatures,  the incidence  of sunlight  varies relatively  little in different  parts of the 
country.  Therefore,  while higher soil temperatures  during  the winter  favour  a longer  grass ­
growing  season  in the south,  there  can be much  less of a difference  in the amount  of grass
39
grown  during  the year. As can be seen in Table 1, there is little difference  in the amount  
of grass grown in Moorepark,  Co. Cork compared  to Ballyhaise,  Co. Cavan,  although  
Ballyhaise  is much further  to the north. The implication  is that at colder  locations,  there  
is much the same potential  to grow grass except  that it will be grown over a shorter  
growing  season,  characterised  by a huge surge in grass  growth  during  April and May.
Table  1. The productivity  of permanent  grassland  under  simulated  grazing  around  
Ireland
Site Production  (t DM/ha/yr) SD
Moorepark,  Co. Cork 14.51.2
Kilmaley,  Co. Clare 14.21.8
Solohead,  Co. Tipperary 15,8 1.9
Ballyhaise,  Co. Cavan 14.4 1.5
Grange,  Co. Meath 13.61.0
There  are clear relationships  between  the factors  that influence  grass  growth  and hence  
requirements  for N from the soil, and those likely to result in losses  of N from the soil. 
During  the main growing  season  there is a huge demand  for N from the soil, whereas  the 
risk of loss is limited  to volatilisation  of ammonia.  During  the winter the demand  for N is 
low whereas  the risk of denitrification  and leaching  is high. The important  questions  are 
(1) when to start applying  fertilizer  N in the late winter  or spring  and how much to apply;  
and (2) when to stop applying  fertilizer  N during  the autumn?
Fertilizer  N recommendations  for grassiand
The requirement  for available  soil N
Annual  grass production  rarely exceeds  15 t DM/ha  (Table 1), and is dependant  on the 
uptake  of at least  450 kg N/ha from the soil. The availability  of at least 450 kg N/ha from 
the soil supplies  30 g/kg N in the grass DM - the minimum  required  for optimum  
photosynthesis.  However,  it is not necessary  to supply  all of this as fertilizer  N. This is 
because  soils have the capacity  to supply  a certain  amount  of N, known  as background  
N, each year (Figure  3a).
Background availability of N in the soil
Mineral  soils (as opposed  to peat soils) in Ireland  contain  around  8.5% organic  matter 
(ranging  between  5 and 20%)  mixed  in with the sand, silt and clay particles.  This organic  
matter  has accumulated  in the soil over thousands  of years,  and is made  up of decaying  
grass, roots and other herbage,  organic  material  deposited  in dung and slurry etc. 
Organic  matter  is the glue that holds soil together,  and plays an important  role in water 
retention  and availability.  It is also an important  component  of soil fertility,  regulating  the 
availability  of many nutrients  in the soil. The soil organic  matter (SOM)  contains  around  
7,000  kg of N/ha, Most of this N (SOM-N)  (98%)  is in a form that is not available  for plant  
uptake. However,  the SOM is constantly  being  turned  over by earthworms  and other  soil 
organisms,  and this turnover  makes  a small amount  of N available  for uptake  by the 
sward  each year (Table  2).
The background  availability  of N from Irish grassland  soils is the subject  of an on-going  
study  by Teagasc.  Early results  indicate  that average  background  availability  during  the 
growing  season  (mid-February  to the end of October),  is around 140 kg N/ha/year,
40
ranging  between  56 kg/ha and 220 kg/ha (Table 2). These results are preliminary; 
nevertheless  they Indicate  the range  in background  availability  of N that can be expected  
from Irish grassland  soils. Lower  quantities  are associated  with lighter  soils with shallow  
topsoil. Higher  quantities  are associated  with heavier  soils and soils with deeper  topsoil. 
Soil organic  matter  content  and drainage  status  are also important  characteristics.
The wide range in the amount  of fertilizer  N being used on intensive  dairy farms  (225 to 
400 kg N/ha for farms stocked  at 2.5 LSU/ha  - Figure 1), is largely a reflection  of 
differences  in the background  release  of N on different  farms. On otherwise  fertile  sites,  
there can be a difference  of 100 kg N/ha in background  availability  of N during  the growing 
season  (e g. Clonroche  and Johnstown  Castle,  both in Co. Wexford).  This clearly  has 
implications  for fertilizer  recommendations  and for the requirement of fertilizer  N on farms.
Figure  3. The annual  requirement  for available  soil N by a sward  producing  15 t 
DM/ha/year,  and meeting  that requirement from  background  availability  of N in the 
soil and applied  fertilizer  N
(a) Requirement  for available  soil N
N
reouiremen!
N
reauirement
41
Table  2. Background  availability  of N from grassland  soils in Ireland^
Location Background  availability  (kg N/ha/year)
Ballinamore Co. Leitrim 56
Kilmaley Co. Clare 82
Clonroche Co. Wexford102
Oakpark Co. Carlow112
Kildalton Co. Kilkenny 113
Gurteen Co. Tipperary 113
Moorepark Co. Cork 120
Athenry Co. Galway 136
Clonakilty Co. Cork 141
Solohead Co. Tipperary 142
Tullamore Co. Offaly 162
Grange Co. Meath 190
Johnstown  Castle Co. Wexford 200
Pallaskenry Co. Limerick 205
Ballyhaise Co. Cavan220
Average 140
^K. O’Connell,  unpublished data)
The requirement  for fertilizer  N during  the spring
The release  of background  N continues  throughout  the year, and is influenced  by soil 
temperature  and moisture  status. Highest  rates of availability  are associated  with high 
soil temperatures during  August and September  combined  with a plentiful  supply  of water.  
Availability  is impeded  by drought conditions.  Lowest  rates of availability  occur  during  the 
winter  months,  due to low soil temperatures  and waterlogging.  Nevertheless,  substantial  
quantities  of background  N can become  available  during  the winter,  e g. between  late 
October  and the middle of March the background  release  of 43 kg N/ha has been  
recorded  at Moorepark  (O’Donovan  et al., 2004). This is the equivalent  of 270 g 
N/ha/day. More generally,  estimates  of N release  during November,  December  and 
January  at Solohead  and Moorepark,  range  between  200 and 250 g N/ha/day.
In Figure 3a, the background  availability  of N based on data from Solohead  and 
Moorepark  is presented  in comparison  with the requirement  for 450 kg fertilizer  N/ha by 
a sward producing  15 t DM/ha/year  (close  to maximum  potential  production).  It can be 
seen that the background  release  of N is able to meet the requirements  of the sward  
during  November,  December  and January.  The release  of 200 to 250 g N/ha/day  during  
this period is sufficient  to support  the production  of 600 to 700 kg grass DM/ha  (or a 
growth  rate between  6.5 and 7.5 kg DM/ha/day).
At some  stage  during  January  and February,  sward  demand  for available  N from the soil 
begins  to exceed  the background  supply. At this point there is likely  to be a response  to 
fertilizer  N. This can happen  as early as mid-January  in the southwest  and as late as mid 
March in the north. Over large parts of the country  the point where requirement  for 
fertilizer  N begins  to exceed  background  supply  is likely to be in mid-February.
The next question  that arises  is how much  fertilizer  N to apply  during  the early spring?  At 
Moorepark,  O’Donovan  et al., (2004)  showed  very high production  responses  in terms  of
42
grass  grown  by 18 March  to fertilizer  N input of 90 kg N/ha. For experimental  reasons  all 
of this fertilizer  was applied  in one application.  When  this fertilizer  was applied  between 
mid-January  and early February,  recovery  in the sward was around 50%. Earlier 
application  resulted  in lower  rates of recovery,  due to high levels  of surplus  rain coinciding 
with low rates of N uptake  from the soil (Figure  4). In this example,  around  45 kg N/ha is 
lost before  it ever contributed  to grass production.  Some losses  will be unavoidable,  but 
by splitting  the application;  i.e. 30 kg/ha applied  in mid-January  and the remaining  60 
kg/ha applied  in mid-February,  the risk of loss will be lowered  because  the bulk of the 
fertilizer  will be applied  closer  to the time of high uptake  by the sward. This will vary with 
location. Accordingly,  it is generally  recommended  that 29 kg N/ha (23 units/acre)  is 
applied  in the first application,  and that this is followed  four to six weeks  later by around 
58 kg/ha  (46 units/acre)  depending  on growing  conditions  (Fig. 3b). The initial application 
may need to be as early as mid-January  in the southwest,  mid-February  in the midlands 
and the end of February  in the northeast.  This strategy  will result  in higher  recovery  of N 
by the sward  resulting  in more efficient  use of N on the farm.
Figure  4. 
2004)Recovery  of fertiliser  N (%) during  the grazing  season  (O’Connell  et al.,
I25
Recovery  of 
fertilizer  N (%)
l.'-lcb  I2-Apr  l»-V1ii\ 24-VU:. N-Jun  2fi-Jiil
In Figure 3b, a fertilizer  N application  strategy  to meet the demand  for fertilizer  N is 
outlined.  This is based  on a fairly  typical  approach  where a 0.5 bag of urea/acre  is applied 
in February,  followed  by 1 bag urea/acre  during  March  and April. Subsequently  during 
early May, 1.5 bags CAN/acre  are applied,  followed  by 1 bag of CAN/acre  at four-week 
intervals  during  late May, June, July and August.  A bag or 0.5 bags CAN/acre  is applied  
during  early to mid-September.  The total quantity  of fertilizer  N applied  is around  350 kg 
N/ha.
Strategies  to lower  fertilizer  N requirements  on farms
Matching  fertilizer  N use to stocking  rate
Recent  work at Solohead  has shown  that, with grass-only  swards,  around  170 kg fertilizer  
N/ha is required  to support  a stocking  rate of around  2.0 LSU/ha.  Average fertilizer  N use 
on Irish dairy farms  stocked  at 2.0 LSU/ha  is 175 kg/ha  (Coulter  et al.. 2002). Therefore  
there is good conformity  between  the rate of fertilizer  N being used on farms,  generally,  
and that found  to be necessary  to support  this stocking  rate at Solohead.  Furthermore,  at 
Solohead,  it was found that for every increase  in stocking  rate by 0.1 LSU/ha,  an 
additional  30 kg N/ha was required  (Flumphreys  et al., 2004). These  results  have been  
incorporated  into the Teagasc  fertilizer  recommendations.
43
It can be seen in Table  2 that the soil at Solohead  has the capacity  to supply  around  140 
kg background  N/ha during  the main growing  season  (mid-February  to late October;  a 
further  25 kg/ha is released  during the winter period). This is similar  to the national  
average.  Taking  into account  the range  in background  availability  of N from different  soils,  
it is clear that these fertilizer  N recommendations  are likely to be too low on farms  with 
soils with low levels  of background  availability,  and too high on farms  with high levels  of 
background  availability.  Therefore  the Teagasc  recommendations  serve to indicate  the 
quantities  of fertilizer  N that are likely to be required  in an average  situation.  It is not 
possible  at the present time  to be able to accurately  delineate  the extent  to which  the soil 
on a particular  farm is able to supply  background  N.
Most farmers  have a fair idea of the background  fertility  and production  capacity  of their 
farms. It is fairly obvious  when not enough  fertilizer  is being applied  on the farm; not 
enough  grass is being grown. It is also fairly obvious  when too much fertilizer  is being  
used, when excessive  quantities  of surplus  grass is being baled as wrapped  silage.  
Under  such circumstances  it pays to cut back on fertilizer  N. The saving  in fertilizer  N is 
small compared  to the saving  of not making  bales.
Matching  fertilizer  applications  to 'responsiveness'  to fertilizer  N and demand  for grass  
The best response  to fertilizer N will be achieved  by applications  made  during  late March,  
April and May. During  this time of the year, it pays to apply optimum  rates of fertilizer  N 
on the grazing  area and maximise  stocking  rates, thus making  as much ground as 
possible  available for  first cut silage. Given  the high rates  of grass  growth  during  late April 
and May, it is possible  to make  around  20% more  silage  per ha for more-or-less  the same  
inputs costs compared  to second-cut  silage. Thus making  a large first-cut  lowers  the 
need for second-cut  silage (the economics  of which is becoming  increasingly  
questionable).  Therefore  a smaller  area needs  to be closed  for second  cut. This makes  
a greater  area available  for grazing  providing  substantial  scope  to lower  fertilizer  N inputs  
onto the grazing  area from June onwards.
When it comes to lowering  fertilizer  N input to the grazing  area from mid-summer 
onwards,  a question  that often arises,  is whether  to make a large application  of fertiliser 
at long intervals  (e g. 40 kg N/ha applied  once  every  eight  weeks),  or a smaller  application  
at shorter  intervals  (e g. 20 kg/ha  every  four weeks). Experience  todate  is that small but 
regular  applications  help to maintain  a steady  supply of high quality pasture. Large  
applications  at long inten/als  result  in a boom-and-bust situation  where  grass  starts  to run 
out of control,  often triggering  the decision  to harvest  bales,  and then the grass  begins  to 
disappear  because  there is not enough  N available  in the soil. Applying  rates of 15 to 25 
kg N/ha at four to  six-week  intervals  during  the summer  is recommended  on moderately  
stocked  farms  (Table  3).
Teagasc  has suggested  a general  approach  to fertilizer  N applications  for farms,  where  
first-cut  silage  is maximised  and second  cut silage  is minimised  (Table  4). The basis of 
these recommendations  is to apply fertilizer  in a way that maximises  response  in terms  
of grass  grown,  and that this grass  is supplied  in line with demand  on the fami. On farm 
applicability  can vary because  of issues relating  to farm fragmentation  etc., and also 
because  of different  soil capabilities  to supply background  N. An approach  that has 
worked  well at Solohead,  is to link the application  of fertilizer  N from June onwards,  with 
achieving  target  pasture  covers. At high stocking  rates, if grass supply  remains  above  
target, the application  of fertilizer  N is halved,  for example  from 35 kg/ha to 17 kg/ha.
44
Table 3. Suggested  approach  to fertiliser  N applications  on the grazing  area of 
farms  with different  stocking  rates during  the growing  season
Over-all Jan/ March April May June July Aug. Sept. Total
farm stocking Feb
rate (LSU/ha)(kg N/ha)
1.8 29 29 17 17 17110
19 29 58 19 17 17 140
2.0 29 29 582017 17 170
2.1 29 50 58 29 17 17200
2.2 29 50 58 35 24 17 17 230
2.3 29 58 58 35 23 23 17 17 260
2.4 29 58 58 52 35 24 17 17 290
2.5 29 58 58 52 35 35 35 17 320
2.6 29 58 58 52 52 35 35 31 350
Under moderate  stocking  rates, where small amounts  of N are being applied  at each 
application,  if grass  supply  remains  above  target,  the application  of fertilizer  N is delayed 
for a week. If supply  again remains  above  target,  fertilizer  N application  is again  delayed 
etc. This approach  makes  maximum  use of background  N and can result in savings  in 
fertilizer  N. More importantly  it avoids  the need to make baled  silage. The pasture  cover  
targets  used at Solohead  for moderate  and high stocking  rates (2.0 and 2.5 LSU/ha  
respectively)  are presented  in Figure  5.
Figure  5. Target  pasture  covers  at various  stages  during  the grazing  season
6 T
O^Target  tuppiy ” farms  
■ " S u p p l y  s h o r t a g e "  f a r m s
r 3
2 -
1 -1 Llill I
• 6
Fertilizer  N application  In spring  and autumn
A question  that often arises  is whether  it is better to apply  CAN or urea during  the spring.  
Numerous  experiments  have been conducted  comparing  the two. In no cases  was CAN 
ever found to be better  than urea under  Irish conditions,  but urea was sometimes  better  
than CAN. The reason  for this is that once urea is applied  to the soil during  the spring,  it 
is converted  to ammonium,  and is held reasonably  well by the soil particles.  In contrast.
45
CAN contains  both nitrate  and ammonium,  and the nitrate  is immediately  at risk of being  
leached  or denitrified.  Furthermore,  some  recent  research  has shown  that ammonium  is 
more easily  taken up than nitrate  under  cold soil conditions.  Urea is cheaper than CAN 
in terms of Euro/kg  N applied  in the fertilizer.  Taking  into account  that the N in urea is 
used as efficiently  as the N in CAN during the spring, urea is clearly  the more cost-  
effective  fertiliser  to apply  during  the spring.
It must be noted that while it takes time for urea to break  down to ammonium,  and that 
the ammonium  adheres  reasonably  well to soil particles,  any ammonium  that is not taken  
up by the sward will eventually  be converted  to nitrate in the soil. Therefore  the 
application  of urea fertilizer  does not prevent  nitrate  leaching  or denitrification  during  the 
spring. It just means that the N in urea is likely to be safely  held in the soil for longer  than 
the N from a similar  application  of CAN during  the early spring.
As indicated  earlier,  the responsiveness  to fertilizer  N declines  during  the autumn. In 
general,  research  has shown  that there is no worthwhile  response  to fertilizer  N from 
around  mid-September  onwards  in the southwest  and from around  the end of august  in 
the north. Fertilizer  applied  in mid-September  will be taken up at a rate of around  0.5 kg 
N/ha/day  during  the remainder  of September and October.  Therefore,  it takes  around  60 
days for 30 kg N/ha to be taken up from the soil. By mid-November,  the requirement  for 
fertilizer  N will be very low and will be within  the supply  capacity  of background  N.
The application  of slurry
On most farms, slurry management  is a headache,  and is usually seen as a non­
productive  cost. However,  when it comes  to spreading  slurry, it generally  costs as much  
to ‘make  the best of it’ as it does to 'make  a mess  of it’.
The best response  to slurry  is obtained  during  the spring,  where  half of the N is in the form 
of ammonium,  which is not readily leached  and is more easily taken up under cold 
conditions.  The other half of the N is in the form of organic  matter,  which is effectively  
held in the soil. This material  has to rot away before  the N is made available  for uptake  
by the sward. The rate of release  of the N in the organic  material  increases  with rising  
soil temperatures,  making  N available  in line with increasing  grass  growth. Slurry  can be 
used very effectively  to replace  fertilizer  N for the first application  in spring.
An application  of slurry  @ 28 m^/ha  (2500  gals/acre),  is estimated  to contain  a total of 75 
kg N/ha, around  35 kg/ha  of which  is readily  available  as ammonium  N. The sward  takes  
up around  20 kg/ha, and the remainder  of the ammonium  N is unavoidably  lost. This 
application  of slurry  replaces  the 29 kg N/ha applied  as urea fertilizer  (much  of which  will 
also be unavoidably  lost) recommended  in Table 4. This application  of slurry does not 
seem  to have any detrimental  effect  on the acceptability  of the grass  to the cows.
On intensive  farms,  stocked  at around  2.5 cows/ha,  efficient  management  of slurry can 
directly  lower fertilizer  N used on the farm by around  35 kg/ha (or 10%) and probably  
accounts  for some of the difference  in the efficiency  of fertilizer  N use between  different 
farms  outlined  in Figure  1.
White  Clover
White  clover has the potential  to make  huge savings  in N fertiliser  costs  to Irish grassland  
farms,  but because  of persistency  problems,  little of this potential  has been realised.  The 
use of herbicides  and high rates of fertilizer  N are partly  responsible,  but the fundamental
46
problem  is that white clover  has an average  life expectancy  of around  five years. White  
clover  is not persistent  in the same  way as permanent grassland.  Individual  clover  plants  
die off and need to be replaced  at regular  intervals,  rather  like bringing  replacements  into 
a herd of cows. Ongoing  research  at Solohead  has shown  that this can be achieved  at 
very little cost by mixing  pelleted  white clover  seed with a P & K fertilizer,  and spreading 
onto first-cut  silage stubble. Around  one-fifth  of the farm is over-sown  on a five-year  
rotation,  maintaining  highly  productive  white clover  swards  from year to year.
At Solohead,  white clover  swards  receiving  90 kg N/ha/year  (72 units/acre)  support  a 
stocking  rate of 2.2 cows/ha  producing  6,250  I of milk/cow  (13,750  I/ha). The equivalent  
stocking  rate on grass-only  swards  requires  fertilizer  N input of around  230 kg/ha (Table  
4) This indicates  that white clover  provides  the potential  to lower fertilizer  N input by 
around  140 kg/ha. This N is supplied  through  the fixation  of atmospheric  N by Rhizobium  
bacteria  that live in nodules  in the roots  of white  clover. On a whole-farm  basis,  the annual 
cost of over-sowing  is around €l0/ha,  with a saving in fertilizer  N of approximately  
€110/ha, (an annual net saving of €100/ha).  Although,  this potential  may not be 
achievable  on all farms, it is realistic  to expect  that white clover  will lower fertilizer  N 
requirement  on moderately  stocked  farms by around  90 to 100 kg/ha  with an associated 
net saving  of around  €65/ha.
Teagasc  National  Farm Survey  data indicates  that 70% of the milk produced  in Ireland  is 
produced  on farms  stocked  at less than 2.0 LSU/ha  (Connolly  et al., 2001). Around  98% 
of beef  and sheep  farms  are stocked  at less than 2.0 LSU/ha.  On a national  basis,  around 
93% of grassland  farms are stocked  at less than 2.0 LSU/ha. This indicates  the huge  
potential  of white clover  to lower  fertilizer  N inputs  to grassland  in Ireland.
Conclusions
The Nitrates  Directive  and other  legislation  is creating  pressure  to lower fertilizer  N inputs  
and increase  the efficiency  of N-use on farms. Increases  in efficiency  are possible.  
Improvements  can be made  by;
matching  fertilizer  N inputs  to stocking  rates,
avoiding  the need to harvest  surplus  grass  as baled silage;
maximising  the utilization  of residual  N in soils;
applying  fertilizer  N in the spring  at rates and times that anticipate  increasing  demand 
for N by the sward;
the use of slurry  to replace  fertilizer  N during  the spring;  
make  the last N application  of the season  before  mid-September; 
the wider  adoption  of white clover.
Rcfcronccs
Connolly,  L., Burke, T. and Roche, M. (2001) Teagasc  National  Farm Survey  2000.  
Teagasc,  19 Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin  4. 13 pages,  www.tpagp^dm.
Coulter,  B.S., Murphy,  W.E., Culleton,  N., Finnerty,  E. and Connolly,  L. (2002) A Survey 
of Fertiliser  Use in 2000 for Grassland  and Arable  Crops. Teagasc,  Johnstown  Castle  
Research  Centre.  Wexford.
Humphreys,  J , Lawless,  A., O'Connell,  K. and Darmody,  P. (2004). The development  of 
systems  of milk production  and grazing  management  based on low stocking  rates and 
very low artificial nitrogen  inputs End of Project Report No. 4468, Teagasc,  19 
Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin.
47
O’Connell,  K., Humphreys,  J. and Watson,  C.J. (2004) Apparent  recovery  of fertilizer 
nitrogen  by pasture. Agricultural  Research  Forum,  Tullamore,  1 & 2 March  2004, page  
18.
O’Donovan,  M., Delaby,  L. Stakelum,  G. and Dillon, P. (2004) Effect of autumn/spring  
nitrogen  application  date and level on dry matter  production  and nitrogen-efficiency  in 
perennial  ryegrass  swards.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research  (in press).
48
Grass  watch  - tools  for profitable  dairying
Jack Kennedy
Irish Farmers  Journal.  Irish Farm Centre,  Bluebell.  Dublin  12
Introduction
It Is not until you travel  outside  of Ireland  that you learn to appreciate  just how suitable  the 
climate  is for growing  an abundance  of good quality grass. In March 2003 the Irish 
Farmers  Journal  initiated  Grass  Watch  to stimulate  further  interest  in grass production  and 
improve  readers  understanding  of the measurements  associated  with grass production 
and utilisation.  The aim was to track some  of the best farmers  in the country  and establish  
how they manage  grass throughout  the grazing  year. Combined  with this monitoring, 
there is advice  on the targets  farmers  should  be reaching  - given a certain  stocking  rate 
or demand  on the farm
A primary  objective  was to highlight  the importance  of grazed  grass in the diet of the 
lactating  cow, and that by increasing  the intake  of grazed  grass  in the diet, increased  profit 
on the farm. The Grass  watch  program  is ongoing,  and the second  year  of measurements  
is just about  finished.  Grass  watch  has proven  that farmers  can consistently  measure  and 
manage  grass  throughout  the grazing  year, and that if they are aware  of targets,  can make  
decisions  that will maintain  grass  quality  in the ideal grazing  state
How does grass  watch  work?
In the first year of the program,  four measurements  were recorded  weekly These  
measurements  were identified  as being  crucial  to the farmer  in helping  to make  educated 
decisions  on how best to manage  grass. These measurements  were stocking  rate; 
average  farm cover;  pre grazing  yield; and a calculated  growth  rate.
In the second  year of Grass  watch,  the stocking  rate figure  was changed  to demand,  so 
that farmers  could better  relate  the demand  they had on the farm with the actual  growth 
rate they were achieving  that week.
Figure  1. Details  of the Grass  watch  as it appears  in the Farmers  Journal
49
Method  of calculating  weekly  growth  rate (GR)
Table 1 demonstrates  how the growth  rate is calculated  for each farm on a weekly  basis.  
Each week the farmer  completes  a farm cover. This is the product  of the estimated  
paddock  cover  in the current  week,  subtracted  from that recorded  in the preceding  week,  
divided  by the number  of days since  the cover  was taken. In the worked  example  (Table  
1), it was 7 days since  the cover  was estimated.  In the calculations,  paddocks  that were  
grazed  during  the week  are ignored.  Average growth  rate is obtained  by dividing  the total 
daily growth  rates by the number  of paddocks.
This is a simple  way of calculating  growth  rate, and is probably  the best estimate  that a 
farmer  can make  of the growth  rate on his farm for the previous  week.
Table 1. An example  of the calculations  involved  in determining  weekly  growth  
rates (kg DM/day)
Week  33
PaddockEstimated
coverWeek 34
PaddockEstimated
cover kg DM/day kg DM/day
170011050 1050-700 = 350/7  days 50
27002 10001000-700 = 300/7  days 43
3 650 311001100-650 = 450/7  days 64
4 450 4 650 650 - 450 = 200/7 days 29
5 450 5 700 700 - 450 = 250/7  days 36
6160061700 1700 - 1600 = 100/7 days 14
7 1500 7 200200 - 1500 = -1300/7  days Ignore*
83008450 450 - 300 = 150/7  days 21.5
9 300 9 500 500 - 300 = 200/7 days 28.6
Average  growth  rate for week 36
•Paddocks  that have been grazed  during  the week are not calculated  in the estimation
Method  of calculating  average  farm cover  (AFC)
Average  farm cover  is estimated  by dividing  the total amount  of grass  in each paddock  of 
the farm, by the total number  of hectares  available  for grazing.
Table 2. An example  of the calculations  involved  in determining  average  farm 
cover(kg)
[A]
Paddock[B]
Paddock  size 
(ha)[C]
Estimated  cover  by 
farmer  (kg)[D] = [B X C]
Cover  in paddock  
(kg)
10.99 800 792
21.61 300 483
3 1.78 400 712
4 1.3 20002600
5 1.03 600 618
61.75 1400 2450
7 1.37 2300 3151
81.24 1900 2356
9 1.2920002580
102.31 500 1155
Total 14.67
Average  Farm cover  (AFC)16105
16897/14.67
1151
50
Method  of calculating  pre grazing  yield (PGY)
This is simply  the estimated  yield of grass  in the paddock that the  farmer  is going  into with 
his cows.
Method  of calculating  demand  (D)
Demand  is an estimate  of the amount  of grass required  to grow on the farm in order  to 
satisfy the needs  of the grazing  animal. It is expressed  in kg dry matter  per hectare  (kg 
DM/ha),  and can be directly  related  to growth  rate, which  is also expressed  as kg DM/ha.  
Therefore  if a farmer  has a demand  of 50 kg DM/ha  per day then the farm needs  to have 
3 growth  rate of this amount  to fully feed the herd at grass. If growth  rates are less than 
this, then cows  will be eating  more than the farm is growing  and if no action  is taken,  eat 
into reserves  of grass  on the farm. Therefore  demand  is used as a daily tool to establish 
if supplementation  is needed.  Alternatively,  when growth  rates are higher  than demand 
for prolonged  periods,  surpluses  can arise which  must also be dealt with if sward  quality  
is to be maintained.
There may be more grazing  animals  than just lactating  cows on the grazing  area, and so 
an estimate  of what they are consuming  is necessary.
Table 3. Estimates  of daily allowances  of different  animai  classes.
kg DM/day
Lactating  cow20
Dry cow10
In Calf heifer 9
Weanling  heifer 7
Calves 4
There are many ways to influence  demand.  Supplementation  can be increased  to the 
milking  cows,  which  will lower  the demand  for grass  on the farm. Demand  will increase  if 
dry cows and calves  are on the grazing  area. Depending  on feeding  and age, grass  DM 
intake  for calves  will vary considerably.
Example  calculation:
A farmer  is grazing  second  round  grass and is not feeding  concentrates.  All stock  are out. 
Estimates  of grass DM intake  are as follows;
Animals  grazing;
Milking  cows (63) x 20 kg DM intake;
Dry cows (7) x 10 kg DM intake;
Bulling  heifers  (11) x 9 kg DM intake;
Heifer  calves  (21) X 4 kg DM intake.
= 1260 + 70 + 99 + 84 = 1513 kg DM/day
i.e. 1513 kg DM is required  every  day to feed stock. The farmer  has 19.4 ha available  for 
grazing. Therefore  1513/19.4  = 78 kg DM/ha/day  are required  to fully feed stock. If 
growth  rate was estimated  at 60 kg DM/ha/day,  the farm is not growing  enough  feed to 
meet demand.
A one to one substitution  of concentrate  for grass  is suggested  to account for concentrate  
supplementation,  e g. if total DM intake  is 20 kg grass, and cows are receiving  2 kg of 
concentrate,  then the DM intake  of cow is 18 kg.
51
Demand  - [Number  of cows milking  x DM intake of cow / Total number  of hectares  
available  for grazing]
Lessons  from Grass  watch
At the outset  of this program,  most farmers  were of the opinion  "I don't think I would  have 
the time every  week ”, or “yes I walk the farm, but not every  week  and anyway  I would  be 
right most of the time ” All have learned  that even if they are incorrect  in estimating  how 
much grass is in a paddock  (example  500 instead  of 700) they will not be far out when  
they calculate  the average  farm cover It is not the precision  that is important  but the 
estimation  of an average  so that it can be compared  to a target.
Many  farmers  found  that setting  a time at the start of the week (say Monday  or Tuesday  
morning),  and sticking  to this rigidly, was a great way of disciplining  oneself  to do farm 
covers  each week. These  2 hours  are set aside,  and most now find it the most important  
2 hours  of the week - allowing  them to plan for the week ahead.
There is little point in doing a farm cover if there isn't a farm budget  to see where  you 
should  be. It is important  to have a budget  set out so that you can compare  the results  
from your cover  to where  it should  be and taking  the necessary  action Most  of the Grass  
watch  clients  have the Teagasc  grass  planner  set up and each week  compare  the results  
that they have budgeted  for with what they actually  achieve.
It is good practise  is to calibrate  the 'eye' every now and again. Some participants  in 
Grass  watch  bring a metre  square  and clippers,  and weigh  a cutting  in some paddocks  
More have invested  in a grass  meter.
Once  the farm cover  is completed,  you can plan where  the cows will graze  - maybe  not 
exactly  but very close Decision-making  becomes  very stressful  when you have to do it 
every  day, - when you can plan with measurement,  why not?
What  to remember?  The Journal  is just the messenger,  farmers  drive Grass  watch.
Grass  watch  continued
At the outset,  10 farmers  agreed  to allow  the Journal  print weekly  growth  rates. Most of 
the farmers/managers  were  experienced,  in that they had been doing  grass  measurement 
for a number  of years At the start some were sceptical  about doing Grass watch'  
because  of the work involved.  Most  thought they would  not be able to furnish  the Journal  
with results  on a weekly  basis. In 2004 there were 12 committed  and dedicated  farms  in 
the system,  and it is hoped  with the help of the participating  farmers  to continue  with 
Grass  watch  for the foreseeable  future. Anyone  measuring  grass  on a weekly  basis and 
would like to furnish results to the Journal is asked to contact  
jkennedy@farmersjournal  ie.
Conclusions
Reality:  Most  of out European  neighbours  are jealous  of the profits  that a good Irish dairy  
farmer  can attain simply  by making  the most of grazed  grass. Are you achieving  these  
profits? Our climate  is changing  every year, making  the grazing  year longer  and more  
adaptive  to high utilisation  of grazed  grass.
Without  measurement  you are planning  in the dark. However  without  budgeting  there is
52
no point in measurement.  Measurement  and budgeting  go hand in hand. Set up your 
budget  at the start of each main grazing  period  and do a weekly  grass cover  to monitor  
progress.
In the post Fischler  era, the hidden  costs associated  with intensification  are in danger  of 
pulling Irish dairy farmers  down. This becomes  especially  apparent  in the low payout 
years. The hidden  costs associated  with feeding  include:  production  costs, wastage  at 
feed out, machinery  running  costs and capital  costs  where  feeding.  These  hidden  costs 
do less damage  when the payout  is high, but when the payout  is low and fluctuating, 
IRELAND  BEWARE.
53
Quota  purchasing  - what  can dairy farmers  afford  to pay?
L Shalloo'',  P. Dillon'',  T. Dwyer^,  D. McCarthy^  and B. Fingleton'*  
'^Moorepark  Production  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.  
^Teagasc,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
^Teagasc,  Kildalton.
'^Rural  Economy Research  Centre,  Teagasc,  Dublin
Introduction
Since joining the European  Community  in 1973, Irish milk producers  have enjoyed  
relatively  high milk prices  due to the support  system  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy  
(CAP). However,  dairy farmers  are now facing important  changes  to their economic 
environment.  In particular,  the Luxembourg  agreement  on the reform  of the CAP (Mid 
Term Review)  entails  a fundamental  change  in agricultural  policy  with the decoupling  of 
support  measures  from production.  In Ireland,  full decoupling  will be introduced  from 
2005 and milk price is projected  to fall by 5 to 5.5 cent per litre (c/I) due to reduced  price  
support  for butter and skimmed  milk powder. These changes  mean that many dairy  
farmers  need to reappraise  their business  strategy  and consider  necessary  adjustments 
that will ensure  viability  in the longer  term. The objectives  of this paper  are to examine  
key factors  that will need consideration  for a future  in dairy farming,  and in particular,  what 
might be more appropriate  milk quota exchange  values in a new era of decoupled 
production.
A number  of issues are addressed  in this paper and are structured  in the following  
manner:
(1) Cost  efficiency  at farm level.
(2) Expanding  production  - quota acquisition  and costs.
(3) Scenario  results  and sensitivities
(4) Implications  and conclusions
1. Cost  efficiency  at farm level
Table 1 shows  the evolution  of input costs,  gross  outputs  and margins  from 1990  to 2002  
for specialist  dairy  farms  in Ireland.  The results  show  that total input  costs  have increased  
on average  by 1.75 c/I or less than 1% per annum  from 1990/91  to 2001/02.  Direct  costs  
increased  by 1.16 c/I and overhead  costs  by 0.6 c/I over the period. The CSC  Agricultural 
price index for total agricultural  inputs  rose by 13.6%  between  1990 and 2002 whereas 
total costs for specialist  milk production  (Table 1) showed  an increase  of 11%. This 
indicates  a real decrease  in unit costs or an efficiency  gain of 2.6% over an eleven-year  
period. The results  also indicate  that direct  costs (+1.16  c/I) increased  at twice the rate 
of overhead  costs (+0.59  c/I). The cost: price squeeze  in 2002, mainly  due to reduced  
milk prices,  has resulted  in a major fall in net margins  per litre.
54
Table 1. Itemised  costs, outputs  and net margin  (c/I) of milk 
specialist  manufacturing  milk herds  1990-2001production  for
YearDirect
CostsOverhead
CostsTotal
CostsGross
OutputNet
MarginCost / Output  
Ratio
1990 8.348.2116.55 27.72 11.17 0.60
1991 8.09 7.93 1602 25.60 9.58 0.63
1992 8.27 7.80 16.07 27.43 11.65 0.59
1993 8.87 8.23 17.10 29.80 12.70 0.57
1994 9.36 7.86 17.22 29.63 12.41 0.58
1995 9.87 8.50 18.37 31.02 12.65 0.59
1996 9.84 8.63 18.47 30.00 11.53 0.62
1997 8.628.2016.82 28.50 11.67 0.59
1998 9.12 8.30 17.42 29.3011.880 59
1999 9.088.2217.30 27.85 10 56 0.62
20008.83 8.65 17.49 29.4912.010.59
20019.11 8.76 17.88 30.73 12.85 0.58
20029.63 8.56 18.19 28.47 10.27 0.64
Source:  W. Fingleton  (2003),  Rural Economy,  Teagasc.  Derived  from NFS records
Variation  in input  costs
Table 2 shows  the gross output,  total input costs, direct costs, overhead  costs and net 
margin  (c/I) for the five cost quintiles  and for the average  specialist  dairy farms in 2002.  
The total cost of production  for the lowest  quintile  (20%)  was 13.6 c/I, compared  to 23.4 
c/I for the highest  quintile,  or a difference  of 9.8 c/I; while the average  cost of production  
was 18.2 c/I. The high cost group  was effectively  producing  a litre of milk at 72% higher  
input costs than their more efficient  counterparts  and almost  30% above the overall 
average.  This difference  in cost of production  between  the lowest  and highest  quintiles  
represents  a difference  of 9.2 c/I (14.9 c/I vs. 5.7 c/I) in net margin,  while  the net margin 
of the average  producer  was 10.3 c/I. In 2002, differences  in total direct  costs and total 
overhead  costs contributed  48 and 52% respectively,  to the total difference  in unit costs 
between  the highest  and lowest cost quintiles. Differences  in feed costs (mainly 
concentrate  costs) were responsible  for one-third  of the total cost difference.  Of the 
overhead  cost items,  the major  contributors  to overall  variation  in unit input costs  were - 
hired labour  (10%), machinery  operating  and depreciation  charges  (14%), land rental 
charges  (9%) and interest  payments  on loans (9%).
Table 2. Variation  in unit costs by quintiie  for specialist  dairy farms in 2002  
(population  resuits).
Quintile Q1 (c/I) Q2  (c/I) Q3  (c/I) Q4 (c/I) Q5 (c/I) Average  (c/I)
Gross  output 28.56 27.75 28.46 28.34 28.50 27.82
Total costs 13.58 16.16 17.68 19.35 23.40 18.18
Direct  costs 7.61 8.30 9.28 10.24 12.31 9.63
Overhead  costs 5.97 7.86 8.40 9.1111.108.55
Net margin 14.91 11.59 10.79 8.99 5.67 10.27
Source:  W. Fingleton  (2003),  Rural Economy,  Teagasc.  Derived  from NFS records.
Dairy Farmers  can increase  their efficiency  (i.e. reduce  their costs) by following  the 
principles  set out at the Teagasc  National  Dairy Conference  (Dillon  et al., 2003),  i.e.
55
Selection  of high EBI pasture  based  genetics
• Maximise  utilisation  and performance  from grazed  grass;
• Developing  labour efficient  systems  of milk production;
Expanding  milk production  using low fixed costs systems.
2. Expanding  of production  - quota  acquisition  and costs
Currently,  milk quota  transfer  in Ireland  takes  place  through  an administrated  system  with 
a fixed price and reallocation  based on a priority  system,  which favours  smaller  milk 
producers.  Therefore  the true market  value of milk quota is unknown  in Ireland. The 
Minister  for Agriculture  sets the price of milk quota with advice  from the Milk Quota  
Review  Group. Traditionally  the quantity  of milk quota available  for restructuring  in 
Ireland has been limited. FAPRI-lreland  farm level research,  suggests  that post­
decoupling  (2005)  a larger  amount of milk will be available  for restructuring  when  the dairy 
premium  is decoupled.  In a market-based  system,  the price that a producer  should  pay 
for quota should  be related  to the additional  farm profit he/she  expects  to earn in the 
future  from that additional  quota acquired.
How much  can dairy  farmers  afford  to pay for milk quota?
The amount  any individual  farmer  can pay for milk quota will depend  mainly on the 
expected  milk price and the expected  cost of milk production  for every  year that the quota  
remains  binding. To allow for future inflation  the future farm profit must be discounted  
(adjusted)  to present  day values.  Apart  from the variable  costs  of producing  the additional  
milk, the cost of farm expansion  to produce  the additional  quota  must also be considered.
Three  distinct  stages  of expansion  have been defined;
Stage 1; Increase  deliveries  per cow through longer lactation and better  
feeding/management.
Stage 2; Replace  alternative  grazing livestock  with dairy cows and increase  the 
specialisation  in milk production.
Stage  3: Expand  production  using additional  animals,  housing,  land and labour.
Stage 1 expansion  requires  no capital  investment,  as cow numbers  remain  unchanged  
However  variable  costs of production  (mainly  feed costs)  increase  in line with increased  
milk production.  At this stage  of development  dairy farmers  can afford  to pay a relatively  
high price for milk quota. However,  for the purpose  of this analysis  it was not considered  
as a separate  expansion  scenario  but as part of any expansion  plan It is estimated  that 
milk production  could be increased  by 10% in Stage 1, which is composed  of a 6 to 7% 
increase  through longer lactations,  and a 3 to 4% increase  through better  
feeding/management.
Methodology  used in the economic  analysis
The three  expansion  scenarios  are considered  over the period  2004 to 2008 As there is 
no guarantee  of milk quotas  beyond  2014,  the additional  milk quota  purchased  in all three  
scenarios was depreciated  in value  to zero by 2014. In all three  scenarios  there is a 10% 
increase  in milk production  in 2005 as outlined  above  and 1% in yield per cow in each  
year thereafter.  Based  on the Moorepark  Dairy Systems  Model  (MDSM)  (Shalloo  et al.. 
2004),  the additional  cost associated  with this increase  in milk production  is 5 c/I in 2005  
(variable  feed cost of production).  The farm used in this analysis  is based  on the average  
specialist  dairy farm from the NFS sample  in 2002. In the analysis,  all three scenarios  
are investigated  for low cost producers  (LC), average  cost producer  (AC) and high cost
56
producers  (HC). The LC is the average  of the 40% lowest  cost producers  (average  of 
Quintiles  1 and 2), the AC is the overall  average  of specialist  producers,  while  the HC are 
the average  of the 40% highest  cost producers  (average  of Quintiles  4 and 5).
Table  3 shows  the key herd parameters  used in the economic analysis.  The average  farm 
size (total forage  area) is 52.2 ha, with an ED milk quota of 243,470  litres and 54 dairy 
cows The average  milk production  delivered  per cow is 4643 litres, with a further  310 
litres per cow retained  on the farm. The average  number  of livestock  units of cattle  
(excluding  cows and dairy replacements)  is 32.
Table  3. Key herd parameters  used in the analysis
Average  cost 
(AC)Low cost 
(LC)High cost 
(HC)
Land Area (ha) 52.2 52.2 52.2
Cow number 54 54 54
Quota  size (1) 243,400 243,400 243,400
Milk sold per cow (1) 4643 4643 4643
Average  number  of beef  units 32 32 32
Variable  costs (c/I) 9.63 7.96 11.28
Fixed costs (c/I) 8.56 6.9210.11
Inflation  over  the period  of analysis  is based  on FAPRI  projections  (i.e. 1.25 and 2.5 % per 
year for variable  and fixed costs respectively).  All purchase  of milk quota  is financed  up 
to 2014 at 6% interest  rate. The length of the loan depended  on year of purchase.  All 
price projections  are based on the analysis  carried  out by FAPRI-lreland  (Binfield  et al., 
2003). Over  the period  2004 to 2013, milk price is projected  to fall from 27c/l to 22c/l, cull 
cows from €390  to €290,  and male calves  from €190  to €108. The opportunity  cost of 
land is considered  to decrease  from €471/ha  to €268/ha.  The decoupled  farm payment  
was estimated  on the basis  of the average  premia  drawn  on the specialist dairy  farms  over 
the period 2000, 2001 and 2002. Dairy entitlements  established  in 2005 are also 
included.
It is assumed  that the average  specialist  dairy farmer  had no additional  free labour  
available,  therefore  labour  cost increased  in line with increased  cow numbers.  Data from 
the Moorepark  labour  study (O’Donovan,  2003)  has shown  that as the cow numbers  in a 
herd increase,  the overall  time required  per cow decreases.  Based  on these  findings,  an 
increase  of 35 hours per year for each additional  cow is assumed,  at a cost of 
€12. 50/hour.
In all three  scenarios,  the breakeven  cost of quota  purchased  is calculated  for years  2004,  
2005, 2006, 2007 and 2008 for the LC, AC and HC producers,  using total discounted  net 
farm profit over a 10-year  period. Since  it is possible  to receive  capital  allowances for the 
construction  of farm buildings,  machinery  and milk quota  the three scenarios  investigated 
are compared  net of tax. Capital  allowances  for milk quota purchase,  construction  of 
housing  and improvement  in milking  facilities  are included  at 15% for the first 6 years  and 
10% for the seventh  year (Teagasc,  2003). The 6% interest  rate for quota purchase 
corresponds  to an opportunity  cost of having  additional  money  tied up in milk quota.
57
Scenarios  investigated
Table  4 shows  the key parameters  associated  with the baseline  and the three expansion  
scenarios.  The baseline  situation  is where  the farm remained  static over the 10-year  
period.
Scenario  1(S1):
• 25  dairy cows and 7 replacement  units replace  the 32 Cattle  units;
• The  sale of the cattle financed  the purchase  of the dairy stock;
• There  is an additional  housing  cost of €200/cow  for modification  of beef housing  for 
dairy cows;
• There  is no additional  cost in milking  facilities;
• A new milk bulk tank is purchased  at a net cost of €10,000,  financed  over 10-years  
at 6%, with both interest  and depreciation  (15-years)  considered  an expense;
• Labour  requirement  is increased  by 1,000 hours for the dairy herd (40 hours*  25), 
while labour  for the  beef  operation  is reduced  by 250 hours  (10 hours*  25).
Scenario  2 (S2):
• S2  is similar  to SI in that 25 dairy cows and their replacements,  replaced  the 32 beef 
units and the sale of the beef cattle  finance  the purchase  of the dairy stock;
• However  cow numbers  are further  increased  by 21, purchased  at a unit cost of 
€1320,  financed  over 10-years  at 6%, where  the interest  portion  is considered  an 
expense;
• Milking  facility  is expanded at a cost of €9,600  (an additional  unit per 7 cows)  and
more housing  added at a cost of €33,600  (€1,600/cow),  both investments are
financed  over 20-years  at 6%;
• An additional  10 ha of land is needed  and is rented  at a cost of €268/ha;
• Labour  is increased  by 735 hours  (35 hours/cow).
Scenario  3 (S3):
• S3  is similar  to S2 in all respects  except  that a low cost housing  system.  This includes  
a standoff  pad and earthen  bank to contain  slurry and soiled water, at a cost of 
€262/cow  instead  of conventional  housing  for the  additional  cows in the herd.
Each scenario  is compared  to the Baseline  Scenario  where  no expansion  took place. A 
computer  program  called ‘Solver ’ (Microsoft  Excel) is used to calculate  the milk quota  
purchase  price where  the calculated  total discounted  farm profit over the 10-year  period  
is equal  to the baseline  farm profit (See  Appendix  1).
Table  4. Key physical  data used in the scenarios  investigated
Baseline Scenario  1Scenario  2Scenario  3
Land area (ha) 52.2 52.2 62.2 62.2
Cow number 54 79 100 100
Original  milk quota size (1) 243400 243400 243400 243400
Additional  milk supplied  (1) - 152760 260010 260010
New milk quota  size (1) 243400 396200 503400 503400
Milk sold per cow (1) 4643 5107 5107 5107
Beef cattle units (number) 32 - - -
58
3. Scenario  results  and sensitivities
Table 5 shows  the baseline  10-year  total discounted  farm profit for the LC, AC and HC 
producers  from the NFS for years  2004 to 2008. The baseline  total discounted  net farm 
profit is derived  by adding  10 years  of farm net profit together with each year discounted  
for inflation.  Therefore  the baseline  for 2004 is the 10 subsequent  years  with each year 
discounted  to correct  for inflation  (see Appendix  1). On average  over the 10-year  period  
the difference  in farm profit between  LC and AC cost producers  is €41,944,  while that 
between  the LC and HC is €92,565.
Table 5. Baseline  scenario  10-year  total discounted  farm net profit {*) by 
production  cost variation.
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Low cost (LC)
Average  cost (AC) 
High cost (HC)327,415
286,500
236,257307,346
266,367
214,056291,301
249,365
197,618276,630
233,878
183,420262,868
219,730
171,038
Table  6 shows  the breakeven  price is 86, 52 and 22 c/I (3.90, 2.36 and 1.00 €/gal)  for the 
LC, AC and HC producers  in 2004 respectively.  The corresponding  values  in 2005  are 51 
and 12 c/I (2.31 and 0.54 €/gal)  for the LC and AC producers  respectively.  However  in 
2005, the HC producers  did not achieve  the baseline  profit in SI and would have to 
receive  9.0 c/I with the quota  to reach  the breakeven  farm profit. The results  also indicate 
that the breakeven  price that a farmer  could pay for additional  quota  decreases  over the 
period. This is because  of declining  milk prices and increasing  production  costs.  
Additional  milk quota  will also have to be financed  over a shorter  time period. The high 
cost producers  would  have to get money  when  they bought quota  to reach  the breakeven 
level.
Table 6. Breakeven  quota purchase  price (c/I) by year of purchase  and by 
production  cost level for Scenario  1
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Low cost (LC) 86.0 51.0 43.0 37.0 33.0
Average  cost (LC) 52.0 12.0 5.0 1.0 *-1.0
High cost (HC) 22.0 *-9.0 *-12.0 *-15.0 *-19.0
‘Base farm profit could not be reached  therefore  quota  could not be purchased 
economically
Table 7 shows  that the breakeven  price for additional  milk quota is much reduced  where  
the costs of expansion  are high. For both the AC and HC producers  the breakeven  price  
is not achieved  from 2005 onwards.  There  is a large reduction  in discounted  farm profit 
with the HC producers.
59
Table 7. Breakeven  quota purchase  price (c/I) by year of purchase  and by 
production  cost ievel for Scenario  2
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Low cost (LC) 45.0 14.0 7.0 3.0 •-0.5
Average  cost (LC) 15.0 •-14.0 •-18.0 •-20.0 •-22.0
High cost (HC) •-11.0 •-41.0 •-45.0 •-48.0 •-50.0
•Base farm profit could not be reached  therefore  quota could not be purchased  
economically
Table 8 shows  the influence  of quota purchase  year and producer  cost variation  on the 
breakeven  quota  price for scenario  3. Using a low cost housing  system  (€262/cow)  as 
compared  to traditional  higher cost housing  (€1,600/cow)  the breakeven  price was 
increased  by 5 to 7 c/I.
Table 8. Breakeven  quota purchase  price (c/I) by year of purchase  and by 
production  cost level for Scenario  3
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Low cost (LC) 51.0 19.0 12.0 8.0 4.0
Average  cost (LC) 21.0 •-11.0 •-14.0 •-16.0 •-17.0
High cost (HC) •-6.0 •-34.0 •-39.0 •-41.0 •-44.0
•Base farm profit could not be reached  therefore  quota could not be purchased  
economically
Sensitivity  analysis
Milk price, cost of additional  labour  and inflation  are shown  to have a large effect  on the 
breakeven  milk quota purchase  price. Table 9 shows  the influence  of variation  in milk 
price and year of quota purchase  on the breakeven  quota price for SI for the average  
cost producers.  It indicates  that for every one c/I increase  in milk price the breakeven  
price of quota will increase  by 13.5 cent in 2004 and 16.5 cent from 2005 to 2008.  
Similarly  for a reduction  of 1 cent in milk price, the breakeven  price of milk quota will 
reduce  by 10 c/I in 2004, and from 2005  to 2008 will be impossible  to meet.
Table  9. Effects  of variation  miik price on breakeven  quota  purchase  price (c/I) by 
year of purchase  for average  cost producers  Scenario  1
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
FAPRI  projected  milk price (c/I) 52.0 12.0 5.0 1.0 •-1.0
Increase  of 2 c/ 79.0 45.0 38.0 34.0 30.0
Reduction  of 2 c/ 33.0 •-2.0 •-5.0 •-6.0 •-8.0
•Base farm profit could not bereached therefore quota could not bepurchased
economically
Table 10 shows  the effect  of additional  labour  cost by year of quota purchase  price, on 
the breakeven  quota  purchase  price for SI for the average  cost producers.  In a scenario  
where  no additional  labour  is required,  the breakeven  price increased  by 37 c/I when  
purchased  in 2004 and by approximately  47 c/I when purchased  from 2005 to 2008 for 
the average  cost producer.
60
Table 10. Effects  of variation  in labour  efficiency  on breakeven  quota purchase
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Addition  labour  cost 52.0 12.0 5.0 1.0 *-1 0
No additional  labour  cost 89.0 58.0 52 0 48 0 44 0
•Base Farm Profit could  
economicallynot bereached therefore  quota could notbe purchased
Table 11 sho\ws  the influences  of rate of inflation  and year of quota purchase  on the 
breakeven  quota price SI for the average  cost producers.  When  the rate of increase  in 
inflation  for fixed costs is reduced  from 2.5 to 1.5%, the breakeven  quota purchase  price  
increased  by 2, 4, 4 and 5 c/I when the quota was purchased  from 2004 to 2007  
respectively.  However,  when quota is purchased  in 2008, a maximum  of 3 c/I could be 
paid while  at the higher  inflation  rate the breakeven  quota  purchase  cost could not be met.
Table 11. Effects  of variation  in inflation  on fixed costs,  on the breakeven  quota
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Inflation  at 2.5% (FAPRI) 52.0 12.0 5.0 10 *-1,0
Inflation  at 1.5% (lower) 54.0 16.0 9.0 6.0 3 0
•Base Farm Profit could  
economicallynot bereached therefore  quota could notbe purchased
Therefore  milk price, inflation  associated  with fixed costs and the additional  labour 
required  would  have a large influence  on the price that dairy farmers  can afford  to pay for 
milk quota If dairy farmers  can achieve  expansion  at farm level without  additional  labour 
requirements  (through  increased  efficiency),  this increases  the price they can pay 
considerably.
4. Implications  and conclusions
Dairy farmers  that opt to remain  static under  the Fischler  regime  can expect  a reduction 
of 15% in nominal  terms  in net farm income  (Shalloo  et al., 2004). The Fischler  Reforms 
have made retirement  and exit from dairy farming  more attractive  than before as the 
decoupled  compensation  can be retained  even if milk is not produced  For this reason,  
significant  restructuring  is expected  with dairy farm numbers  projected  to fall very 
substantially  over  the next number  of years. The results  of the present  study  indicate  that:
• A reduced  quota acquisition  price is necessary  to facilitate  expansion  from 2004  
onwards;
• The price that individual  dairy farmers  can afford to pay for milk quota from 2004  
onwards  will vary greatly  depending  on farm cost base, milk price, and the level of 
increased  cost incurred  on the farm to facilitate  the increased  production;
• The results  indicate  that the average  supplier  could pay up to 12 c/I (55 c/gal) for 
restructuring  milk in 2005, but that the more cost efficient  dairy farmers  could pay up 
to 51 c/I (€2.37/gal);
• Where  major additional  expenditures  on extra facilities  and labour  are required,  the 
economic  value of milk quota rapidly  diminishes.
61
Conclusion
Over the next number of years,  policies  to facilitate  change  \will be important  in building  a 
strong  viable  dairy industry.  For many  dairy farmers,  expansion  alone will not solve the 
problem  of falling income  caused  by a decline  in milk price. Sustaining  real incomes  will 
come from a combination  of reducing  production  costs and an increase  in scale. For 
scale  increase  to pay dividends,  dairy  farmers  will need to have below  average  production  
costs, to continue  productivity  gains, to pursue  a low cost housing  option,  and to have 
access  to quota  at an affordable  and progressively  declining  price.
The purchase  of quota will be financially  much more difficult  for above average  cost 
producers.  Increased  labour  costs will have a large effect on the breakeven  purchase  
price for milk quota. The productivity,  availability  and cost of labour  will be one of the 
major restrictions  to expansion  over the coming  years. High cost housing  and slurry  
storage  facilities  likewise  reduce  the breakeven  purchase  price of milk quota. Finally  
quota  transaction  costs influence  profit and therefore  the viability  of expansion.  Quota  
depreciation  and interest  charges  rise rapidly  as quota  purchase  price increases.
Low cost operations  need to increase  in scale by over 40% by 2010 to maintain  or 
increase  income  in real terms  (Dillon  et al., 2003). However,  this is a static model  and 
does not adequately  reflect  expansion  costs. A study  carried  out by Shalloo  et al., (2004)  
showed  that approximately  50% of an increase  in scale  over the period  2004  to 2008 and 
some  efficiency  gains were  required  to maintain  real incomes  in the period  2004 to 2013  
for the average  specialist  dairy farmers. For this to take place the quantity  of milk 
restructured will need to increase  from the current 3% of the national  milk pool per annum  
to over  4% per annum  in the years  ahead.
References
Binfield,  J., Donnellan,  T, Hanrahan,  K. and Westhoff,  P. (2003). The Luxembourg  CAP 
reform  agreement:  - implications  for EU and Irish Agriculture.  Medium  Term Analysis  for 
the Agri-Food  Sector.  Teagasc,  Rural  Economy Research  Centre  Dublin  Pp. 1-69 
Dillon,  R, Horan,  B. and Shalloo,  L. (2003). Pathways  to increase  profit. In. Proceedings  
of the Teagasc  National  Dairy  Conference  12*^ and 13^^ of November.
Fingleton,  W. (2003). The situation  and outlook  for dairying  2002/2003.  In: Proceedings
Teagasc  Situation  and Outlook in Irish Agriculture December  2002, Teagasc,  Dublin  
pp.1-11.
O'Donovan,  K., O' Brien, B., Ruane, D., Kinsella,  J. and Gleeson,  D. (2003). Labor  
consumption  on Irish dairy farms  and the effects  of scale and seasonality.  Irish. Journal  
of Agricultural  Research  (Submitted).
Shalloo,  L., Dillon,  P, Rath, M. and Wallace,  M. (2004). Description  and validation  of the 
Moorepark  Dairy Systems  Model. Journal  of Dairy  Science  87 1945-1959.
Shalloo,  L,, Dillon, R, Rath, M. and Wallace,  M. (2004). The Luxembourg  Common  
Agricultural  Policy  Reform  Agreement:  Irish Dairy Farmers  Development  options. Farm  
Management Journal  (Accepted).
Teagasc  (2003). Management  Data for Farm Planning
62
Appendix  1
Baseline  for 2004 for the low cost producers
Farm net Profit  nominal Discount  factor Real Income
2004 41346 1 41346
2005 38997 0.97 37827
2006 39214 0.94 36861
2007 37921 0.91 34508
2008 37443 0.88 32950
2009 37234 0.85 31649
2010 36723 0.82 30113
2011 36255 0.79 28642
2012 36033 0.76 27385
2013 35801 0.73 26135
Total discounted  net farm profit 327415
Baseline  for 2005 is similar  except  that the start year is 2005 and therefore  the start 
discount  rate is at 0.97 and so on for 2006, 2007 and 2008. The baseline  farm profit is 
therefore  different  for each year and for each cost level. The breakeven  milk quota 
purchase  price is calculated  by setting  the target  cell in the Solver  function  on Microsoft 
Excel  to calculate  the farm profit  when  quota  is purchased  the same  as the baseline  farm 
net profit. The quota purchase  price is set at the changeable  cell and therefore  the milk 
quota  price is altered  in order  to reach  the breakeven  farm net profit.
63
Post Fischler  options  analysis  for the farm of Tim & 
Shauna  Meagher
Pearse  Kelly^  Michael  Gottstein^  and John Crosse^
''Teagasc  Kildalton.  ^^Teagasc  Moorepark.  ^Teagasc  Thurles
Introduction
The Meagher  family farm comprises  a beef and tillage  enterprise  together  with a small  
flock of mid season  lambing  ewes. The beef enterprise  is made up of 35 suckler  cows  
finishing  all of the calves  for the under 12 month  system,  and buying  in 115 weanlings 
each year to finish as steers  at 22 to 24 months  of age The Teagasc  eProfit  Monitor  
(ePM)  was completed  for the farm for the last full financial  year, 2003, Table 1 outlines  
the amount  of land that was used in 2003. Thirty-eight  hectares  (ha) are owned  with a 
further  57 ha leased  from within  the overall  Meagher  family. In 2003 another  53 ha was 
leased  bringing  the total land area farmed  to 148 ha
Table 1. Land used in 2003
Hectares
Owned  Land 38
Land Leased  Within  Family 57
Land Leased  Outside  Family 53
Total148
Current  position
Table 2 shows the ePM enterprise  analysis  generated  for 2003, The gross margins  
excluding  all premia for each enterprise  are given, and expressed  as GM/ha (excl 
premia) For comparison  purposes  the average  gross  margin  (excl. premia)  per ha which  
were collected  on 176 beef farms  and 41 sheep  flocks  in 2003 are also shown.
Table 2. Tim Meagher  eProfft  Mon/for  analysis  2003
Enterprise Area (ha)Gross  Margin  (€) 
(excl. Premia)GM/ha  (€) (excl. 2003 ePM Av. 
(excl. Premia)  GM/ha
Beef 83.1 34,487 415 185*Sheep 8.7 8,491 976 420**Tillage 564 17,653 313
Total 148.2 60,631 409
* Combining  average  beef gross margin  (excl. premia)  from 108 suckler  farms and 68 
non-breeding  farms.
** Average  sheep  gross  margin  (excl premia)  from 41 flocks
As can been seen from the above  analysis,  the Meagher  farm compares  favourably  to 
other  farms  analysed  in 2003 ePM. The beef enterprise  generated  more  than double  the 
gross  margin  (excl, premia)  that was generated  on the 176 beef farms  also analysed.  In
64
order to get a clearer  picture of whether  this margin was coming  from the suckler  
enterprise  or the weanling  to beef enterprise,  a separate  financial  analysis  (using the 
Teagasc  Batch  Analysis  Package)  was carried  out on the weanlings  that were finished  in 
the weanling  to beef enterprise  in 2004 (bought  in autumn  2002). This analysis  showed 
that the weanling  enterprise  returned  a gross  margin  (excl. premia)  of just €7/head.  This 
is similar  to the performance  on the 68 non-breeding  farms that  were analysed  using  €PM  
for 2003, where the gross margin (excl. premia)  per ha was on average  just €17.  
Therefore,  when looking  at the gross margin  (excl. premia),  the suckler  herd on the 
Meagher  farm is compensating  for the weanling  to beef enterprise.
The sheep  enterprise  appears  to be generating  a significantly  higher  gross margin  (excl.  
premia)  than was achieved  on 41 other  flocks  analysed  for 2003. Most of this advantage 
is coming  from very low variable costs  per ewe due to the fact there  is a very small number  
of them compared  to the number  of cattle on the farm and costs are probably  artificially  
low because  of this.
Table 3 gives the Meagher ’s total fixed costs for 2003 as calculated  using ePM. Three  
significant  proportions  that go to make up the total figure are also shown. These  are 
machinery  running  costs,  depreciation  and land lease  costs. Also shown  are the average  
fixed costs  from the 176 beef farms  recorded  in 2003.
Table  3. Fixed  Costs  associated  Tim Meaghers  farm from eProfit  Monitor  {200Z)
Total (€) Per ha (€)2003 ePM 
avg. FC/ha*  (€)
Machinery  Running 15,116 102 84
Depreciation 29,492 199 86
Land Lease 16,894** 114 56
Other  Fixed Costs 26,370 178 219
Total 87,872 593 445
* Combining  average  beef  fixed costs  from 108 suckler  farms  and 68 non-breeding  farms.  
** Land Leased  from non-family  members.
The biggest  difference  between  the two is the depreciation  figure  at €199 versus €86/ha.  
The land lease cost figure given is only for land rented  from outside  the family. It still 
represents  a significant  cost to the farm. Fixed costs in general  are high on this farm in 
comparison  to a lot of other farms.
Looking  to the future
Before  examining  what steps might be taken with regard  to a particular  enterprise,  it is 
worth looking  at what the likely affect  might  be of dropping  the 53 ha of leased  land (the 
land leased  from outside  the family). If the overall  farmed  area was to be reduced  by 53 
ha but the same enterprise  mix retained  (at a reduced  scale), the gross margin  (excl.  
premia)  per ha should  remain  the same. Obviously  this would  not be an option  in reality  
but it is interesting  to see the overall  likely affect  on net profit.
65
Table  4. Affect  of consolidating  entitiements  on overail  net profit  {€)
Overall  farmed  area reduced  by: 53 ha (leased  land)
Lower  gross  margin  (excl. premia) -21,677
Chanaes  to fixed costs
Lower  land lease + 16,894
Lower  machinery  running + 5,406
+ 22,300
Overall  affect  on net profit + 623
Revised  fixed costs 65,571
Fixed  costs per ha (95 ha) 690/ha
Table 4 summarises  what the affect  of this reduction  in farmed  area might  be. The loss 
to the farms  overall gross margin would  be €21,677.  The land lease  payment  of €16,894  
would  be saved  and there would  no longer  be a machinery  running  charge  for this 53 ha 
saving €5,406  (53 ha x €102/ha).  The net benefit  therefore  of dropping  the rented  
ground  would  be €623.
In this scenario,  the farms overall  fixed costs are reduced  in the area of machinery  
running  costs and leased land, but they would still be high at €690/ha  because  they 
would  now be spread  over a smaller area (95 vs. 148 ha). Within  this total figure  for fixed 
costs, depreciation  would rise from €199 to €310 per ha. If this revised  figure is 
compared  against  the average  of €86/ha  already  mentioned  (from the 2003 ePM) the 
contrast  is even bigger.
Irrespective  of what option is chosen  for the future, one aim must be to reduce  the 
depreciation  figure  by investing  less in what has caused  it to rise in the first place,  which  
for the most part was machinery  purchases.  These  may have been needed  in the past 
for the scale of the operation  but might not be needed  in the future on a smaller  area 
farmed. By bringing  the depreciation  cost back to €150/ha,  it would add a further 
€15,200  to the net profit  figure.
However,  if land lease costs  did fall substantially  over the next couple  of years,  the farm 
would  be in a position  to considerably  increase  scale in a short  period  of time because  of 
the infrastructure  that has been put in place. Therefore  ‘offloading ’ machinery  without  
seeing  what will happen  in the land rental market  first is not a consideration  at this point  
in time.
Assumptions  used
When examining  what options  might be suitable  in the future, assumptions  have to be 
made about  a number  of the key variables  that are needed  to calculate  the likely gross  
margins  that will be achievable  from these options. Table 5 outlines  the assumptions  
made. Fertiliser  usage on this farm is low and the cost per tonne of purchased  
concentrates  is also below  what is typically  being paid. It is assumed  that these lower 
than average  costs  will remain  into the future. Contractor costs per hectare  are also low 
because  most of the work Is done  with owned  machinery.  It is also assumed  that this will
66
remain  the case for the foreseeable  future.
As can be seen in Table  2, the gross  margins  generated  on this farm in the past compare 
favourably  with that achieved  on other farms. Gross margin  (excl. premia)  is a good 
indicator  of the level of efficiency  that a farm is being run at. It is assumed  that this high 
level of efficiency  will be continued  into the future.
Table  5. Assumptions  used when  assessing  future  margins
Suckler  calving  date Early  autumn/spring
Weanling  purchase  date Late  autumn
Weanling  purchase  price (€/100kg) 180
Sales  dates  (months)
Heifers Summer  (20)
Steers  (home  bred) Summer  (22)
Steers  (bought  in) Spring  (22)
Bulls Spring  (15)
Carcase  weights  (kg)
Heifers 290
Steers 380
Bulls 350
Beef selling  price c/kg carcase
Spring 300
Summer 280
Autumn 260
Lamb  weaning  rate 1.5
Lamb  sale value (€/head) 80
Options  for the future
Six different  options  were examined  for the farm and these are detailed  in Table 6. 
Options  one to five are all based  on dropping  the 53 ha of outside  rented  land with option 
six holding  onto it. Options  one and six are on the basis that the REPS  scheme  is not 
entered  into. In the other four  options  REPS  is embraced.
Table  6. Future  systems  analysed  for Tim Meagher
Land (ha) REPS System
Option  1 95 No 120 autumn  suckler  cows 
Finishing  steers  & heifers
Option  2 95 Yes 100 autumn  suckler  cows 
Finishing  steers  & heifers
Option  3 95 Yes 110 autumn  suckler  cows 
Finishing  bulls & heifers
Option  4 95 Yes 40 autumn  suckler  cows
110 weanling  steers  to beef
Option  5 95 Yes 1000 mid-season  ewes
Option  6 148 No 100 autumn  suckler  cows
85 spring  suckler  cows
67
Gross  margin  analysis
When  comparing  the gross margins  that might be possible  from each of the six options  
analysed  the single  farm payment  is not included  but the REPS  payment  is so that one 
system  can be compared  fairly with another.
Table  7. Projected  gross  margin  (excl. premia)  but including  REPS
Gross  margin/ha  (€) Gross  margin  (€)
Option  1 €798 75,851
Option  2 €750 71,209
Option  3 €709 67,348
Option  4 €655 62,263
Option  5 €821 78,000
Option  6 €789 116,840
Table 7 shows the possible  gross margins  calculated  using all of the assumptions 
mentioned  above.
The gross  margin  per hectare  that each system  has the potential  to generate  is a return  
for the labour  that is involved  with a system. Table 8 gives  an estimate  of the man work 
units (MWU)  that would be involved  with each of the six options. Also if a system  can 
generate  enough  of a gross margin  to cover a farms fixed costs then the single farm 
payment  will be fully retained.  For a farm to retain  the single  farm payment  it will have 
to have a gross margin  of close to €66,000  if it is farming  the 95 ha or €88,000  if it 
continues  to farm the 148 ha (with no reduction  in land rental  or machinery  running  costs).
Table  8. Man work units (MWU)  required  for each system  analysed
MWU Gross  margin/MWU  (€)
Option  1 1.9 39,922
Option  2 1.6 45,506
Option  3 1.6 42,093
Option  4 1.4 44,474
Option  5 3.1 25,161
Option  6 3.1 37,690
When  looking  at the possible  gross  margins  from each of the options  analysed  it is worth  
noting  a number  of points. Comparing  option  one and two, the only difference  between  
these options  was farming  within REPS or farming  an extra 20 cows with the progeny  
brought  through  to beef The extra margin  generated  is €4,500  for an extra 0.3 of a MWU  
needed.  On the 95 ha farm the option  that gives  the highest  gross  margin  is the all sheep  
enterprise  (option  five). This may well be the case in the future but the extra income  
generated  from having  all sheep  instead  of cattle  would  be got at the expense  of labour.  
As can be seen in Table 8, an extra 1.2 MWU's  would be needed  for this option over 
option  one. Option  four gives  the lowest  gross margin  of all. This is because  it still has 
a significant  proportion  of bought  in cattle in it. It also has the lowest  number  of MWU ’s 
associated  with it, but this will be at the loss of having  a reduced  margin  overall.
68
Comparing  Options  1 and 6
The only real difference  between  options  one and six is the scale  they are carried  out at. 
Neither  is in REPS  and both involve  suckler  herds  with all the progeny  brought through  to 
beef. Table 9 shows  that the difference  in the gross margin  would be approximately  
€41,000
Table 9. Option  1 (120 cows)  vs. Option  6 (185 cows)
Option  1 Option  6
Land area (ha) 95 148
Suckler  cows 120 185
Labour 1.9 MWU 3.1 MWU
Gross  Margin  (excl. premia)  (€) €75,851 116,840
Gross  margin  difference +€41,000
No saving  in fixed costs -€20,000
Net Benefit  (rental  & return  on labour) +€21,000
OR /ha (on 53 ha) +€396
OR /ac (on 131 ac) +€160
As the scale of the farm will not be reduced  it can be assumed  that there  will not be any 
saving  possible  in overall  fixed costs. This is a loss of approximately €20,000  (from  Table  
4). The real benefit  therefore  of farming  to this greater  scale is €21,000.  From this 
€20,000  the land rental  cost for this extra 53 ha. will have to be deducted  to give the real 
return on labour. Land rental costs will fall over time but until this happens  it will not be 
possible  to say whether  option six will be worthwhile  or not. Apart from the land rental  
costs  of the future,  the time commitment  that would  be involved  with option  six would  also 
make it much less attractive  in comparison  to options  one to four.
Conclusions
This farm has a significant  proportion  of rented land and consequently  has built up 
considerable  fixed costs  that cannot  be reduced  overnight.  Unless  the purchase  price of 
weanlings  falls below  what has been assumed  and the sale price of finished  beef rises 
substantially  above  what was assumed,  the weanling  to beef enterprise  on this farm will 
have to be seriously  questioned  into the future. The value of joining  REPS  will almost  
outweigh  the financial  benefits  of not being in it, but more importantly  it would mean a 
reduced  workload  into the future.
If land rental prices  drop substantially  over the coming  years  the fixed costs on the farm 
could be spread  over a much larger  area by renting  land. The level of the drop in rental  
prices  will determine  whether  this will be a worthwhile  option  or not, especially  taking  into 
account  the extra workload  that would  be involved  in going to this level of scale. If land 
rental  costs  do not reduce  and the area farmed  remains  at 95 ha the fixed costs will have  
to be reduced  overtime  to a more realistic  level for the size of farm involved  and the type 
of enterprise  farmed.
69
70
