Irish Grassland 
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal  
1982
NO OTHER  PAPER  
gives the Farmer  so much ... 
as THE
IRISH  \
FARMERS
JOURNAL
THE VOICE  OF IRELAND S BIGGEST  INDUSTRY
Week after week over 100.000  farmers  read through  tht pages  
of the Journal.  They find it full of up-to-the-minute  
facts, features,  prices  and market  trends. It employs  the 
finest feature  writers,  leading  farming  experts,  skilled  
vets and legal and income  tax brains  to give Irish farmers  
a first-class  Newspaper.
Nowadays,  no wise farmer  would  be without  it. . . that's  why 
more and more you’ll hear the Journal  quoted  in farming  
circles. If you arc not a reader  you’re missing  a lot.
ONLY  40p
(including  tax)EVERY  THURSDAY
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 17 1982
edited by 
Sean Flanagan
Printed  by Lithographic  Universal,  Dargle  Vale, Bray
R. J. Fallon  and 
F. J. Harte
P. J. Caffrey
D. B. R. Poole  
F. Raymond
F. Mulcahy
A. J. Brereton  and 
O. T. Carton
J. D. Leaver  
J. M. Sreenan
J. F. Cunningham
R. A. Collins
S. Churms
V. Flynn,  J. O’Connell  
and P. MooreCONTENTS
Calf rearing  principles  and standardsPage
Nutritive  value of feeds for beef 
production  11
The mineral  requirements  of cattle  21
Intensive  beef production  from conserved  
grass in France  26
Possible  future  trends  in cattle production  
and marketing  35
The growth  of grasses  and how it
responds  to management  38
Grassland  research  and development  at 
Crichton  Royal  Farm  51
The role of embryo  transfer  in cattle
breeding  57
Dairy bull selection  for AT. 63
Establishing  net income  from farming  
systems  70
Financial  trends  in British  dairying  79
NINTH  EDWARD  RICHARDS-ORPEN
MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The Potential  for Production  and
Marketing  of Irish Bull Beef 83
Abstracts  108
COUNCIL  1982/1983
President : M. Murphy  
Vice-President : P. MacCanna
Council  Members :
M. Barlow,  D. Browne,  S. Brophy,  D. Cashman,  J. Dardis,  M. Drennan,  
D. Fay, J. Flood, V. Flynn, P. Gleeson,  J. Jennings,  J. Leeson,  P. 
MacCanna,  D. MacCarthy,  P. McFeely,  O. Manly, "W. Murphy,  P.
O’Keeffe,  J. Roche.
Hon. Secretary  / Treasurer :
Dr. S. P. Flanagan.
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
2
Calf Rearing  Principl  es and Standards
R. J. FALLON  and F. J. HARTE  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Introduction
Calf rearing is primarily  concerned  with supervising  and controlling  
successful  transition  from a non-ruminant  digestive  system  dependent  on 
a liquid diet to a ruminent  digestive  system  where the calf is capable  of 
utilising  a roughage  diet. At the same time the rearer  must have satis­
factory  calf performance  with a minimum  of disease  or mortality.  This 
paper  proposes  to examine  a number  of important  considerations  in the 
rearing  period  to 12 weeks.
Growth
The amount  of milk replacer  fed and the total concentrate  input will 
determine  calf growth  rate in the period to 12 weeks. The following 
growth  pattern  (Table  1) is suggested  for calves  reared  within  the frame  
work of a 24 month  calf to beef system  or for heifers  calving  down at 
2 years.
Table 1
Growth  pattern  0-12 weeks
Age in weeks  
Liveweight  in kg0
404
518
6812
91
A number  of recent experiments  from Grange indicate  that any 
difference  in calf liveweight  present  at 12 weeks  due to different  levels  of 
feeding  will remain  subsequently  when the calves  are fed a common  diet 
with little evidence  of compensatory  growth  (Table  2).
Table 2
Effect  of normal  and high levels  of feeding  in the period  to 12 weeks  on 
subsequent  liveweight  (kg)
Level of feeding Day 1 12 weeks 36 weeks 60 weeks
Normal 43 95 213 324
High 43 109 230 346
Difference 0 -1-14 + 17 + 22
Calf mortality
Colostrum  feeding u • ^With reference  to calf mortality  it is necessary  to emphasise  the 
importance  of providing  the new bom calf with an adequate  antibody  
defence  against  diseases  by feeding  colostrum  which is rich m immuno ­
globulins  (Ig) in the early  hours  of life. A survey  conducted  on purchased  
calves at Grange  found that 45% had insufficient  antibody  protection  
when Ig values  were determined  on blood serum  samples  using  the Z.inc 
Sulphate  Turbidity  Test (ZST). It was found that mortality  increa^d  
when the ZST value decreased  and low blood serum Ig values  resulted  
in a high incidence  of mortality  (Table  3).
Table 3
Ig status Poor Fair Good Very good
ZST value (0-7) (8-14) (15-21) >21
Mortality  % 12.5 6.8 4.0 3.0
Calf weight  , . , . , , •Another  study at Grange  found  a positive  relationship  between  weight
of calf at purchase  and subsequent  survival  (Table  4)
Table 4
Effect  of weight  of purchased  calf on mortality
Purchase  weight  (kg) <36 36-40 41-45 >45
Mortality  (%) 14 10.5 6.5 2
These results  strongly  suggest  that in order to minimise  losses in the 
rearing  of purchased  calves  the stronger/heavier  calf must be obtained.  
Such calves  are also likely to be older.
Calf rearer  . , • j c* »An extensive  survey  for calf rearing  practices  in the united  States  gave
the following  ranking  to calf rearers  (Table  5).
Table 5
Effect  of calf rearer  on calf mortality  (U.S. Survey)
Ranking Rearer Mortality  %
1st Farmer ’s wife 6.5
2nd Children 8.4
3rd Owner or manager 8.9
4th Hired help 12.5
4
This survey  indicates  the importance  of individual  attention  for the young  
calf. In addition  to transition  of its digestive  system,  the calf develops  its 
own active immunity  system  against  pathogenic  organisms.
Feeding  programme
The feeding  programme  is concerned  with ensuring  satisfactory  calf 
liveweight  gain with the minimum  disease  risk during  the transition  phase  
from dejjendence  on a liquid  diet to a phase when the calf has capacity  
to utilise  a concentrate  and roughage  diet. The calf’s feeding  programme  
may be divided  into three phases  :
Phase 1 
Phase 2 
Phase 3Liquid  
Liquid/Solid  
Solid0 - 28 days  
28 - 56 days  
56 - 84 days
In the selection  of a feeding  programme  the rearer  has little choice  except  
to feed a concentrate  ration  ad libitum  to 84 days. However,  the rearer  
has considerable  choice  in the selection  of a milk replacer  feeding  pro­
gramme  with respect  to the quantity  of milk replacer  fed and the method  
of feeding. The final selection  of a milk replacer  feeding  programme  
will depend  on the availability  of labour,  housing  facilities,  age and type 
of calf available  and the production  system  to which  the calf is destined.
Bucket  feeding  system
Bucket  feeding  systems  for milk replacers  are concerned  with feeding  
restricted  quantities  of milk replacer.  The milk replacer  is normally  fed 
warm (38"C) in one or two feeds daily. The quantity  and duration  of 
feeding  will depend  on whether  calves  are to be weaned  on the basis of 
age or early weaned  based on concentrate  intake. The milk replacer  
feeding  programme  for the two systems  is detailed  in Table  6.
Table 6
Milk replacer  feeding  schedule  for bucket  fed calves  from 7 days of age
Days
1-5 6-10 11 to weaning
Early weaning  (gms/day) 250 375 375 wean  after 35 days*
8 week weaning  (gms/day) 250 375 500 wean  after  49 days
* Concentrate  intake 750 gms/day
In the feeding  programme  the milk replacer  is reconstituted  at the 
rate of 125 gms/litre  and fed warm (38°C)  in one feed daily. The above  
levels of milk replacer  provide  the calf with a diet slightly  in excess  of 
maintenance.  It is essential  therefore  that the calves have ad libitum
access  to a palatable  calf concentrate  ration from the start. Clean fresh 
water  should  also be available.
A bucket  feeding  system  based  on the above  feeding  schedule  gives  the 
calf rearer  very good control  of fluid intake and minimises  the risk of 
diarrhoea.  Feeding  limited  quantities  of milk replacer  discourages  solid 
food intake and results from Grange  show the following  concentrate  
intake pattern  for calves fed milk replacer  according  to the 8 week 
weaning  schedule.
Week
Concentrate
(kg/day)1
0.12 3 4
0.2 0.4 0.65
0.86
1.27
1.58
2.09 10
2.2 2.4
The 8 week weaning  system  is particularly  suited to the rearer  using  
group pens of 4 or 6 calves  or the person  with little experience  in calf 
rearing. The early weaning  system is appropriate  for the specialist  
contract  calf rearing  where  the calves  are individually  penned  and where 
daily intakes  of concentrates  can be measured.
Automatic  calf feeding  system
A series of experiments  over the past 6 to 7 years at Grange  has 
examined  various  aspects  of automatic  feeder  use. Two important  aspects 
have emerged.  Firstly,  in the initial introduction  of purchased  calves  to 
automatic  feeders  dispensing  a warm 10% dry matter  solution,  it was 
found  that 45% of the calves  required  veterinary  treatment  for diarrhoea  
within  14 days of arrival.  Following  a series  of experiments  it was found  
that the diarrhoea  problem  could be minimised  by introducing  the calves 
initially  to a dilute solution  and then gradually  increasing  the dry matter  
of the solution  fed.
It was concluded  that in order  to minimise  digestive  upsets,  purchased  
calves  should  be initially  introduced  to automatic  calf feeders  dispensing 
a 5% dry matter  solution  and the concentration  should  be increased  by 
1% unit every three days until a 10% dry matter  solution  is on offer  
after 15 days. Secondly,  when calves  have ad libitum  access  to warm  
milk replacer  from an automatic  feeder  there is no pressure  or urge on 
the calf to consume  solid food. Lack of intake  of solid food at weaning  
has resulted  in severe losses in performance  immediately  after weaning. 
Results  from experiments  at Grange  have found  that successful  weaning  
is dependent  on having  an average  intake of 0.5 kg of concentrates  per 
head daily in the week before  weaning.  The data presented  in Table 7 
shows  that the mean  daily  concentrate  intake  for a group  abruptly  weaned 
after consuming  30 kg of milk  replacer  was only 0.45 kg daily in the week 
after weaning.
In summary  it was found that automatic  feeder  use can result in sub­
stantial reductions  in labour inputs, provide  increased  rates of daily  
liveweight  gain and provide  particular  rearers  with a successful  calf 
rearing  system. The success  of the system is dependent  on minimising
ITS  AS SIMPLE  
ASTHIS-
laFERTlUSERS
GIVEABETTER
RETURN.
The moment  you ^read  an ICI fertiliser,  it 
gets to work ... earning  its keep,  putting  goodness  
mto the land,  bringing  more  grass  to the surface  to 
give you heavier  cattle  and extra  milk. . .making  
profit  for you.
They're  better  fertilisers,  so they  give a 
better  return
FARMING  INVESTMENT  THERE  IS.
*TTIE RIGHT  BALANCE.  Id’s complete  
compound  fertilisers  (C.C.F.)  have  
the light  amount  of Nitrogen,  
Phosphate  and Potash  (N.P.K.)  
in every granule,  in every  bag 
you buy.^ CONSISTENT  SPREAD.  It's because  
of this correct  balance  that Pasture  Sward,  
Cut Sward, Graze  Sward  and Hay 
Sward  always  ensure  a consistent  and 
even  spread,  giving  you more  
grass  in every  field.
ICI FERTIUSER-QUAUTY  YOU  CAN COUNT  ON
Table 7
Effect  of concentrate  intake  at weaning  on calf performance
Treatment
A B
Milk intake to weaning  (kg) 30 50
No. of days to weaning
Cone, intake (gms/day)33 50
7 days before  weaning 100 450
7 days after weaning 450 1300
Initial wt. day 1 (kg) 44 44
Daily gain 1-70 days (gms/day) 490 690
the risk of digestive  upsets  initially  by calibrating  the feeder correctly,  
feeding  the correct  concentration  and maintaining  a high level of hus­
bandry. It is also essential  to ensure  that the average  daily concentrate  
intake  is 0.5 kg per head daily in the 7 days before  weaning  in order  to 
avoid a post-weaning  check in calf performance.  Increased  concentrate  
intake in the 7 to 10 days period  prior to weaning  can be achieved  by 
restricting  the flow of milk replacer  in the pipe line such that the amount  
of liquid diet consumed  will not satisfy  its appetite.  When batch rearing  
with the automatic  feeder  an effective  method  of encouraging  solid food 
intake is to reduce the temperature  at which the milk replacer  is dis­
pensed  from 38°C to ambient  temperature  and at the same time reduce 
the dry matter  concentration  from 10% to 5%.
When automatic  feeders  are operated  efficiently  it is expected  that the 
average  milk replacer  consumption  will be 50 kg per calf over a 49 day 
period  and that calves  reared  on the automatic  feeder  will be on average 
10 kg heavier  at 84 days compared  with calves  reared  by a bucket  system  
feeding  25 kg of milk replacer  over a 49 day period. The automatic  
feeding  system  is ideally  suited  to preparing  male calves  for sale off dairy  
farms at 4 to 6 weeks  of age.
Acidified  milk replacer  feeding  system
The cold acidified  feeding  system  whereby  acidified  milk replacer  is 
mixed  cold and fed cold at ambient  temperatures  via a nipple  and pipe 
line from a plastic  container  has generated  considerable  farmer  interest  
in the past 3 to 4 years. Studies  have included  various  aspects  of acidified  
milk replacer  feeding. Initial studies  found that acidified  and normal  
milk replacer  fed by bucket  gave similar  calf performance.  It was found  
that acidified  cold (12.5%  dry matter  ad libitum  from plastic  containers)  
gave calf performance  similar  to normal  milk replacer  warm (5% dry 
matter  increasing  to 10% ad libitum  from an automatic  feeder).
Recent studies have examined  two important  aspects of acidified 
feeding.  In experiments  where we measured  the effect of restricting  the
availability  of acidified  milk replacer  between  the ages of 3 and 6 weeks  
we found that by limiting  the calf’s access  to the milk replacer,  or by 
diluting  the milk replacer,  milk replacer  intake was reduced  without  
having  any major  effect  on calf liveweight  gain (Table  8).
Table 8
Effect  of restricting  the quantity  of cold acidified  milk replacer  fed on calf
performance
Control Limited  access Dilution
Initial wt. day 1 (kg) 43 44 43
Av. daily gain 1-84 days (gms/day) 640 580 640
Milk replacer  1-42 days (kg) 44.0 33.5 36.7
Concentrate  1-42 days (kg) 6.1 10.5 10.1
In the limited access treatments  calves had 16 hours access in the 
fourth  week, 12 hours in the fifth week and 6 hours in the sixth week to 
12.5% dry matter  solution.  In the dilution  treatment  calves  were offered  
9.5% dry matter  solution  in the fourth  week,  6.5% in the fifth week and 
3.5% in the sixth week. Reducing  the milk replacer  intake  in the period  
to 42 days had the desired  effect  of increasing  solid food intake  (Table  8).
Both methods  can be used to restrict  the total quantity  of milk replacer  
consumed  on the cold acidified  system  and allow the rearer  to have an 
ad libitum  system  of milk replacer  feeding  without  having  to feed 50 kg 
of milk rep'.acer  to each calf.
A series of four experiments  comparing  acidified  milk replacer  and 
normal  milk replacer  fed ad libitum  warm  from automatic  feeders  found  
that in all four experiments  the acidified  milk replacer  reduced  the 
incidence  of diarrhoea,  increased  average  daily liveweight  and improved  
feed conversion  efficiency  (Table  9).
Table 9
Effect  of ad libitum  feeding  normal  and acidified  milk replacer  warm  on calf
performance
Normal Acidified
Initial wt. day 1 (kg) 43 43
Av. daily gain 1-42 days (gms/day) 640 860
Incidence  of diarrhoea  (no.) 24 9
Milk replacer  1-42 days (kg) 44 50
Concentrate  1-42 days (kg) 3.1 3.0
F.C.E. 1.76 1.42
Acidified  milk replacers  fed cold from plastic  containers  via pipe line 
and nipple  provide  a suitable  ad libitum  system  for small or large groups
of calves. Initial training  of the calves is an important  aspect of the 
system. The acidified  system provides  the rearer with an ad libitum  
system  to reduce  labour,  and provide  accelerated  gain in the early weeks 
of the calf’s life without  the expense  of the automatic  feeder. Reducing  
the quantity  of milk replacer  fed by restricting  access  and/or  by dilution  
add an important  dimension  to the system,  providing  similar  calf per­
formance  on reduced  quantities  of milk replacer.
Calf Housing
Calf requirements
The calf must be provided  with :
4. A warm  dry lying area. A three week old calf spends  80% of its time 
lying down. It is therefore  necessary  to avoid wet or draughty  lying 
areas.
2. Draughts  at calf level must be avoided.  Air movement  close to calf 
level,  which  can be felt on the back of the head,  constitutes  a draught.
3. Adequate  air change— it is essential  to remove  moisture,  pathogenic  
organisms  and toxic gases rapidly  out of the calf house and replace  
with clean fresh air. The temperature  in naturally  ventilated  calf 
houses  is often similar  to the temperature  in sheltered  areas outside  
when the system  is operating  correctly.
Basic  design  requirements
* Reduce  the risk of air borne infection  by not allowing  more than 50 
calves  to share a single air space.
* Widths  greater  than 40 ft reduce  the effectiveness  of natural  ventilation.
* Cubic  air space allowance  of 250 cu.ft./calf —increasing  the number  of 
air changes/hour  reduces  the density  of pathogenic  organisms,  there ­
fore a large cubic air space reduces  the number  of air changes/hour  
and therefore  the speed of air entering  the building.
* Floor area allowance  of 25 sq.ft./calf  (including  passage) —avoid over 
crowding  and reduce  the risk of disease  build-up.
* Pen area allowance  of 18 sq.ft./calf —comfortable  for the calf, reduces  
area requiring  bedding  material  and allows  for a wide service  passage ­
way.
* Air inlet area of 0.8 sq.ft/calf  when calf house  is located  on a sheltered  
site and 0.5 sq.ft./calf  when the calf house is located  on an exposed 
site.
* Air outlet area of 0.8 sq.ft./calf  on an exposed  site and 0.5 sq.ft./calf  
on a sheltered  site.
* Height  of building  at eaves 8 ft. minimum —allows  for outlet  location  
at a suitable  height above calf level and ensures  adequate  cubic air 
capacity  in the house.
* A height  difference  of 5-8 ft. between  the air inlet and air outlet  pro­
vides ventilation  on windless  days.
* The calf house should  be built with its long axis at right angles  to the 
prevailing  wind, so that ventilation  will be mainly  by the wind effect  
which  is the predominant  factor  which governs  natural  ventilation  in 
Ireland.
10
Nutritive  Value  of Feeds  for Beef  
Production
P. J. CAFFREY
Department  of Agriculture,  University  College,  Dublin.
Since feed is the major  cost in production  much of the effort to improve  
efficiency  in beef production  must be directed  to judicious  feeding.  Even 
when the best husbandry  practices  are applied  to the grass crop, in terms  
of output,  utilization  and quality  there may still be a need for supplemen ­
tary feeding. The supplementary  feeding  may have the objective  of 
correcting  some specific  nutrient  deficiency  in the grass (e.g. minerals,  
protein)  but usually  it will be provided  to supply  additional  energy. If 
the overall  feeding  programme  is to be approached  on a rational  basis, 
it is necessary  to have reliable  information  on the nutritive  value (feeding 
value) both of the basal diet (grass, silage, hay, straw) and of the 
supplementary  feeds available.
Nutritive  value
The nutritive  value of a feed as a source  of any nutrient  is a measure  
of the extent  to which the nutrient  is available  to the animal  for main ­
tenance  or production.  Nutritive  value is therefore  a biological  response  
and it is not necessarily  valid to equate  nutritive  value with the total 
amount  of a nutrient  in the feed : some nutrients  may be apparently  
present  in liberal  amounts  in the feed but completely  unavailable  to the 
animal.
Although  nutritive  value in the broad sense may refer to any nutrient,  
feeds are often compared  on the basis of their energy  content  for the 
following  reasons :
(i) Shortages  of dietary  energy  are more important  causes  of low pro­
ductivity  than dietary  deficiencies  of other nutrients.  This should  
not be taken to imply that we should  not be concerned  about pro­
viding a balanced  diet; in fact it is only when a balanced  diet is 
provided  that optimum  use is made of energy.
(ii) Energy  is derived  from protein,  fat and carbohydrate —quantitatively  
the major  part of the diet and also the most  expensive.
(iii) With the range  of feeds  normally  available  for beef cattle,  providing  
adequate  energy  often has the effect of also providing  a balanced  
diet.
Thus the fractionation  of dietary  energy  is considered  in the following  
diagram.
Gross  Energy  (GE)  
vj/— faecal  energy  
Digestible  energy  (DE)
4/— urinary  and methane  energy 
Metabolisable  energy  (ME)
4/ — heat increment  
Net energy  (NE)
GE = heat of combustion  of the feed
Gross  energy  bears little or no relationship  to the energy  available  to 
the animal. For example,  wheat straw and maize grain yield similar  
values  for gross  energy  although  their nutritive  values  are vastly  different.
DE = GE minus  heat of combustion  of the faeces
Digestible  energy  is usually  a good indieator  of nutritive  value. It is 
relatively  easily  determined  and in recent  years  the in vitro version  of this, 
whereby  the feed is subjected  to fermentation  under  controlled  conditions  
in the laboratory,  has found wide acceptance  as a reliable  indicator  of 
the nutritive  value of roughages  (O'Shea,  1970; Flynn, 1978). In vitro 
vhlues are usually  referred  to as DMD (dry matter digestibility)  or 
DOMD  (digestible  organic  matter in the dry matter). The expected  
relationship  between  animal  performance  and silage DMD  values  under  
ad libitum  feeding  is given in Table 1. The values  in Table 1 envisage 
good silage preservation —with poor preservation  performance  is often 
disappointing  due to low intake  and poor utilization.
Table 1
Relationship  between  in vitro DMD  of well preserved  silages  and animal
performance
% DMD400 kg 
store 
kg/day200 kg 
weanling  
kg/day
52 0.04 loss
62 0.38 0.13
72 0.72 0.48
Although  the data on the evaluation  of concentrates  through  in vitro  
fermentation  are not as extensive  as in the case of roughage,  it appears  
that this method  may give reliable  results  in the case of concentrates  also 
(O’Shea, 1981).
ME = DE minus  heat of combustion  of urine  and methane
Since the publication  of Bulletin  33 (MAFF,  1975), metabolisable  
energy  values  for feeds have been widely  quoted  in Ireland.  In the Irish 
context  the ME system  of evaluation  suffers  from the following  limita-  
tations.
(i) Metabolisable  energy  is rarely  if ever directly  determined —the values 
quoted  are usually  computed  from digestibility  or chemical  analysis  
data and are not subject  to verification.
(ii) The prediction  of IVffi from chemical  analysis  can have a large 
potential  error; some materials  with attractive  analyses  have low 
feeding  values.
12
NE = what appears  in animal  products  such as meat,  milk,  work and the 
heat of combustion  of body substance  which  would  be lost without  
feed.
Expressing  the energy  value of feeds in terms of net energy  has the 
obvious  advantages  of:
(i) representing  that portion  of the feed which is completely  available  to 
the animal;
(ii) being  open to verification  (and revision  if necessary)  through  com­
parative  trials.
It is therefore  not surprising  that many countries  have adopted  net 
energy in their feeding  standards  and feed evaluation.  The rationale  
behind  the net energy  standards  recently  adopted  in the United  States, 
The Netherlands,  France  and Switzerland  have been reviewed  elsewhere  
(Caffrey,  1981). In many countries  barley is used as the standard  with 
which  other feeds are compared.  In Table 2, feeds commonly  available  
in Ireland  are compared  in terms  of Barley  Feed Units  (BFU).  One BFU  
is defined  as the net energy  value of one Kilogram  of standard  barley.  
The values  quoted  in Table 2 are in the writer ’s view likely to apply to 
the feeding  situations  which normally  obtain in Ireland. The monetary  
values  attributed  to feeds in Table 2 relate to energy  only and assume 
that barley  costs £120 per tonne.
In the Netherlands  the Feed Unit is set close to the net energy  of 1 
gram of barley.
FEEDINGSTUFFS
Grass  and grass  products
The importance  of high quality  grass and grass products —mainly  hay 
and silage —in efficient  l^ef production  has been the subject  of numerous  
communications  to the Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Associa ­
tion and will not be discussed  in detail here. Instead  feedingstuffs  which 
are usually  used to supplement  or replace  grass and grass products  in 
feeding  programmes  will be briefly  considered.
Straw
In the absence  of winter fodder  shortages  little attention  is paid to 
straw as a potential  feed. It should,  however,  be appreciated  that straw 
fed ad lihitum plus about 2 kg of a suitably  balanced  concentrate  
(Caffrey,  1973) will provide  a maintenance  type diet for most classes  of 
beef cattle.  When  high levels  of performance  are required,  untreated  straw 
can only make a minor  contribution  to the feeding  programme.
In recent  years there has been renewed  interest  in alkali treatment  of 
straw as a means  of increasing  digestibility.  Sodium  hydroxide  and am­
monia  have been the chemicals  most widely  tested and both have given  
consistent  improvements  in digestibility,  when properly  applied.  Of the 
two, ammonia  appears  to have the greater  potential  since it not only 
improves  digestibility  but also increases  the crude protein  content  and 
is unlikely  to be associated  with excessive  output  of urine which is a 
feature  of animals  fed sodium  hydroxide  treated  material.  The ammonia  
treatment  may also have considerable  application  in improving  hay 
quality.
13
Table 2
Feeding  value in barley  feed units (BFU)*  and monetary  value  of selected  
feedstuffs  assuming  barley  costs £120/ton
BFU/kg  feed Value
£/tonne
Barley 1.00 120
Wheat 1.00 120
Milo 1.00 120
Maize 1.06 127
Oats 0.90 108
Pollard  (good quality) 1.00 120
Pollard  (imported) 0.8 to 1.0 96-120
Molassed  beet pulp 0.90 108
Molasses —cane 0.67 80
Brewers  grain —20% DM 0.18 22
Distillers  dark grains —90% DM 1.00 120
Fodder  beet— 16% DM 0.16 19
Swedes 0.12 14
Potatoes  (sound) 0.25 30
Grassmeal  (good quality) 0.80 96
Hay (excellent— 65% DMD) 0.66 79
Hay (medium —58% DMD) 0.55 66
Hay (poor —50% DMD) 0.43 52
Silage (excellent— 72% DMD,  20% DM) 0.19 23
Silage (medium —62% DMD,  20% DM) 0.15 18
Silage (poor —52% DMD,  20% DM) 0.11 13
Straw (good —45% DMD) 0.35 42
♦ One BFU is the net energy  of 1 kg of standard  barley  (86% DM)
Cereal  grains
Barley  is the main cereal  used for cattle  feeding  in Ireland —usually  as 
a supplement  to roughage.  It is used as the ‘yardstick ’ with which  other  
feeds are compared  in Table 2.
In general  cereals  have a crude protein  content  of 10 per cent and are 
highly  digestible.  They are low in calcium,  sodium,  some trace minerals  
and fat soluble  vitamins.  When used at low level as a supplement  for 
high quality  roughage  these specific  deficiencies  in the cereal are often 
balanced  by the basal diet. When  used at high levels  or with unbalanced
14
roughages  (e.g. straw) care should be taken that the overall diet is 
balanced.
Roots  and potatoes
Swedes,  fodder  beet and potatoes  are sometimes  used as a replacement  
for cereals.  Compared  with cereals  they tend to be lower  in true protein  
and in the case of swedes  and fodder  beet the storage  carbohydrate  is 
present  as sugar  rather  than starch. In feeding  trials  at Grange  (Drennan,  
1981) where  fodder  beet and barley  were compared  on a dry matter  basis  
as silage supplements,  animal  performance  from the fodder  beet supple ­
ment was only 57% that obtained  from barley  in the absence  of protein  
supplementation.  However,  when soyabean  was included  with the fodder  
beet (0.5 kg soyabean  per 3.6 kg fodder  beet dry matter)  the value of 
fodder  beet increased  to 91% that of barley. Thus in the case of fodder  
beet, and probably  also in the case of swedes  and potatoes, the desirability  
of including  supplementary  protein  is obvious.
Molasses
Molasses  is often used to control  dustiness  and to improve  the palat-  
ability of diets. In energy value it is about two thirds that of barley  
(Table  2) but it is low in protein  and unbalanced  in minerals.  From  work  
carried  out at the Agricultural  Institute  5 kg barley  had roughly  the same 
feeding  value of 6 kg molasses  plus 1 kg soyabean  meal. Thus  at current  
prices (barley  £120 per tonne,  soyabean  meal £180 per tonne)  the value  
of molasses  as a roughage  supplement  is about  £70 per tonne.
Cereal  by-products
Included  here are products  from the flour milling  industry  (bran and 
pollard),  brewing  and distilling  (brewer ’s and distiller ’s grains)  and maize  
by-products  such as corn gluten feed and com gluten  meal. In general  
they are lower in starch than the parent  cereals  and higher  in virtually  
all other nutrients.  They are potentially  high quality  feeds but can be 
variable  and each batch should  be considered  on its merits. Apart  from  
the contribution  which they are likely to make on the energy  side they 
are also useful  sources  of protein.  In this respect,  it is worth  noting  that 
brewer ’s and distiller ’s grains  have always  enjoyed  a high reputation  in 
dairy rations. The reason  for this is not always  clear but it is possible 
that the protein  fraction  may be involved.  The protein  in dried grains  
is fairly resistant  to degradation  in the rumen  and theoretically  at least 
might have advantages  over readily  degradable  protein  as a silage sup­
plement.  In view of the responses  which  are at times  claimed  for the use 
of fishmeal  in ruminant  diets (Pike, 1981) presumably  because  of the 
low degradability  of fishmeal  protein,  it is possible  that dried  grains  might  
have a similar  effect.
Citrus  pulp and molassed  beet pulp
Citrus  pulp and molassed  beet pulp have about 90% of the feeding  
value of barley. Compared  with barley they tend to be lower in phos ­
phorus,  protein  — 1 percentage  unit in the case of beet pulp and 4 per­
centage  units in the case of citrus pulp—and higher  in ealcium.  These
15
differences  in composition  must obviously  be considered  when they are 
fed as a cereal  replacement.  In composition  they tend to complement  the 
composition  of cereal by-products  in nutrient  make-up.  At prices  which 
normally  obtain  on the Irish market  it would  appear  that a combination  
of citrus pulp, beet pulp and pollard  could often form the basis of an 
economically  priced  supplement  for beef cattle.
Vegetable  proteins
Of the vegetable  proteins,  soyabean  meal has been the most widely 
used in Ireland  in recent  years  and enjoys  a high reputation.  It is usually  
a reliable  material  but in recent years considerable  variation  has been 
observed  between  different  consignments.  Therefore,  vigilance  is required  
to ensure  that the particular  batch meets  the required  specification.
Other vegetable  proteins  such as cotton  seed, groundnut  or sunflower 
may be used to replace  soyabean  meal in beef rations,  depending  on price 
and quality  considerations.  In the case of cotton  seed and ground  nut in 
particular  it is important  that they are free of aflatoxins.
Animal  protein
Animal  proteins,  such as fish meal and meat-and-bone  meal,  can make  
a useful contribution  to beef rations  not only as sources  of protein  but 
also as sources  of minerals.  It is sometimes  claimed  that these proteins  
may have distinct  advantages  in providing  ‘by-pass  protein ’; protein  which 
escapes  degradation  in the rumen  but is digested  in the intestine.  Theoret ­
ically at least the ‘by-pass  protein ’ concept  would  have more application  
in the case of the high yielding  dairy cow where the requirements  for 
protein  are higher  than in beef cattle feeding  where protein  requirements  
are moderate.  It should  be appreciated  that both fishmeal  and meat-and-  
bone meal are extremely  variable  in composition  and quality. The fact 
that an economic  response  may be obtained  from a specially  prepared  
fishmeal  product  (Pike, 1981) does not mean that the results  are applic ­
able to all products.
Urea
In many parts of the world urea is a common  constituent  of beef 
cattle rations. Normally  it should  not be considered  as a substitute  for 
preformed  protein except in situations  where the feeds and feeding 
programme  is conducive  to the efficient  utilization  of urea. In the writer ’s 
view such feeding  programmes  rarely  obtain  in Ireland  and the topic will 
not be discussed  further.
PROTEIN  SUPPLEMENTATION
Weanlings
The nutritive  values  attributed  to feeds in Table  2 imply  that the feeds 
are incorporated  into adequately  balanced  diets. Because  of cost con­
siderations  the level of protein  in the diet requires  specific  mention.  In 
a series of experiments  involving  weanlings  carried  out at Lyons  Estate  
(Table 3), replacing  part of the barley in the supplement  by a protein  
concentrate  resulted  in a significant  improvement  in liveweight  gain. From
16
Where  
there ’s growth  
—there ’s 
Greissland  
Fertilizers
Grassland  Fertilizers  Ltd. The Pound Road, Slane Tel. (041) 24124 & 24160
17
the data presented  it would  appear  that replacing  part of the barley  sup­
plement  by a protein  concentrate  is economically  justified  in most feeding  
situations  where  low levels  of concentrates  are fed to weanlings.
Table 3
Effect  of supplementary  protein  on the performance  of weanlings
A. Basal Diet : BARLEY  STRAW
Concentrate  supplements
Diets  : Barley Barley/Soyabean  Barley/Soyabean
Straw ad lib. ad lib. ad. lib.
% C.P. in concentrate 8.90 13.60 19.10
Concentrate  (kg/head/day) 1.36 1.36 1.36
Performance  :
Number  of animals 10 10 10
Initial weight (kg) 270 261 278
Days on trial 112 112 112
ADG (kg) -0.23 -t-0.05 -1-0.05
B. Basal Diet : HAY  . “Gool ”65% DMD, 10% CP
“Poor ”50% DMD,  6% CP
Concentrate  supplements
Barley Barley/  Barley Barley/
Diets : Cotton Cotton
% CP in concentrate 10 16 10 16
Concentrate  (kg/head/day) 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36
Hay type Good Good  Poor Poor
Performance  :
No. animals 12 12 12 12
Initial weight  (kg) 199 200 197 196
Days on trial 126 126 126 126
Average  daily gain (kg) 0.59 0.68 0.19 0.25
C. Basal Diet : WELL  PRESERVED  SILAGE  72% DMD,  12.2% CP
Concentrate  supplements
Diets  : Barley Barley/Soyabean
Silage ad lib. ad lib.
% CP in concentrate 9.5 14.0
Concentrate  (kg/head/day) 1.6 1.6
Performance  :
Number  of animals 24 24
Initial weight  (kg) 218 226
Days on trial 126 126
ADG (kg) 0.56 0.64
18
Finishing  cattle
The results  of two experiments,  in which part of the barley in the 
concentrate  supplement  of silage-fed  finishing  cattle was replaced  by 
soyabean,  are summarised  in Table  4. In general,  there was a tendency  
for the liveweight  gain to be improved  on the protein  supplemented  diets  
but the differences  failed to reach significance.
Table 4
Effect  of supplementary  protein  on the performance  of finishing  cattie
A. 15% soyabeans  in supplement  
Silage  : DMD 72%, CP 12.2%
Concentrate  supplements
Diets  : Barley Barley/Soyabean
Silage ad lib. ad lib.
Concentrate  (kg/head/day) 2.5 2.5
% CP in concentrate 9.5 14.0
Performance  :
Number  of animals 24 24
Initial weight  (kg) 401 408
Final weight  (kg) 527 538
ADG (kg) 1.05 1.08
Carcase  weight 271 275
K.O. % 51.4 51.1
B. 40% soyabeans  in supplement
Silage  : DMD 67.4%,  CP 15.6%
Concentrate  supplements
Diets  : Barley Barley/Soyabean
Silage ad lib. ad lib.
Concentrates  (kg/head/day) 2.5 2.5
% CP in concentrate 10.6 24.4
Performance  :
Number  of animals 16 16
Initial weight  (kg) 510 502
Final weight  (kg) 608 610
ADG (kg) 0.87 0.96
Carcase  wt. (kg) 317 315
K.O. % 52.1 51.7
It should be appreciated  that the basal silage diets fed in these 
experiments  were well preserved  and this may have contributed  to the 
apparently  poor response  from protein  supplementation.  A number  of
19
years  ago (Murphy  and Caffrey,  1972)  we obtained  a large and significant 
response  from protein  supplementation  with a poorly  preserved  silage as 
the basal diet. In the writer ’s view the response  to protein  supplementa ­
tion is more dependent  of the quality  of preservation  of the silage than 
on the level of protein  in the diet. Although  experimental  evidence  on 
the topic is not convincing,  it is probable  that replacing  some of the 
barley by protein  in the concentrate  supplement  of silage-fed  finishing  
cattle is economically  justified  in most feeding  situations.  In this context  
the ingredient  cost of replacing  50 kg of barley by 50 kg of soyabean  
would amount  to £3 which would be equivalent  to the price of 1.5 kg 
of carcase.  Differences  in carcase  gain of this magnitude  are unlikely  to 
show up as significant  in conventional  trials.
CONCLUSIONS
In this communication  the rationale  behind  some of the systems  of 
feed evaluation  and nutritive  value of selected  feeds has been briefly  
considered.  Although  energy  is the primary  nutrient  usually  considered  
in feed evaluation,  care must be taken to ensure  that the diet as fed is 
adequately  balanced  with respect  to all essential  nutrients.
In practice  if the feeding  programme  is to be approached  on a rational  
basis, it is necessary  to have realistic  estimates  of the nutritive  value of 
available  feedingstuffs.  In the case of roughages  (silage,  hay, straw)  the 
in vitro digestibility  technique  (Tilley  and Terry, 1963) has proved  to 
be a reliable  laboratory  method  for the prediction  of nutritive  value.  This 
technique  has been extensively  used in Ireland  and close relationships  
have been observed  between  in vitro digestibility  and animal  jjerformance  
(Flynn,  1978). To date similar  developments  have not taken place in the 
evaluation  of concentrate  feeds. In view of increasing  importance  of 
concentrate  feeds in beef production —both in terms  of cost and quantity  
—there is urgent  need for the development  of reliable  laboratory  methods  
for their  evaluation.  It is possible  that the in vitro fermentation technique  
will prove  reliable  in this respect  but further  work  is needed.
In conclusion,  it is stressed  that since nutritive  value is essentially  a 
biological  response  the merits of ‘laboratory  predictors ’ can only be 
assessed  by animal  feeding  experiments.
References
Caffrey,  P. J. (1973).  Ir. Grassld.  An. Prod. Assoc.  J. 8 : 16-23.
Caffrey,  P. J. (1981).  Special  Commemorative  Issue of Agric. Record.
Drennan,  M. J. (1981).  Calf to Beef, An P'oras Taluntais.
Dutch  Tables  (1980).  Centraal  Veeoederbureau  in Nederland.
Flynn,  A. V. (1978).  Ph.D. Thesis,  N.U.I.
MAFF  (Ministry  of Agriculture,  Fisheries  and Food).  (1975).  Technical  Bull., 33. 
H.M.S.O.,  London.
Murphy,  D. and Caffrey,  P. J. (1972).  Beef Open Day, U.C.D.
O’Shea, J. (1970).  Ir. J. Agric. Res. 9: 119-125.
O’Shea, J. (1981).  Personal  communication.
Pike, I. H. (1981).  The Feed Compounder,  January.
Tilley,  P. M. A. and Terry,  R. A. (1963).  J. Brit. Grassld.  Soc. 18 : 104.
20
The Mineral  Requirements  of Cattle
D. B. R. POOLE
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.
In this paper  I will attempt  to answer  a two-fold  question  ;
(a) How much  of each mineral  does the animal  require,  and
(b) How much does the standard  ration supply.
The difference  between  these two is the amount  which  must be given  
as supplement,  whether  as a feed ingredient,  a voluntary  access  lick, or 
block, or in some other way. The question  is complicated  by the fact 
that teth during  absorption  and metabolism  the minerals  can interact  
with each other, sometimes  beneficially  and sometimes  antagonistically.  
It is therefore  desirable  to know not only the actual quantity  of a par­
ticular  mineral  but also what the rest of the diet is composed  of. If 
high production  is expected  from a highly  digestible,  concentrate  feed,  
then a more generous  mineral  supply  will usually  be required  than for a 
maintenance  store period.
Again,  if one is dealing  with young  growing  animals  they will have 
particular  requirements,  for instance  for calcium  and phosphorus,  to 
ensure good bone growth,  whereas  an adult lactating  cow will have a 
much higher requirement  for magnesium  and sodium  (related  to milk  
production)  than the young  animals.
Classification  of elements
Firstly,  one should  define a major element.  It is a mineral  which is 
required  by the animal  in considerable  quantity  in the diet, to an extent  
that it is usually  expressed  as a percentage  of the feed dry matter. Major  
elements  can be classified  arbitrarily  into structural  or functional.  Those  
that have a structural  role include  calcium  and phosphorus  as the major  
components  of bone; sodium  and potassium  are required  to maintain  the 
structure  of the soft tissues,  while the functional  elements  would be 
magnesium  (affecting  nervous  transmission  and brain function),  calcium  
with similar functions,  possibly  sulphur. Thus, it is seen that such 
classification  contains  overlaps.
Minor  trace elements  are essential  for full health  and production,  but 
are required  in very small amounts —so much so that they are expressed  
as parts per million  of the feed. Their  role is very much  functional,  acting  
as integral  components  in enzymes,  hormones  or even vitamins.
Major  elements
There  are seven  well recognised  essential  major  elements,  viz. Calcium,  
Phosphorous,  Magnesium,  Sodium,  Potassium,  Sulphur  and Chlorine.  
How are these elements  supplied  in usual foods ? Obviously  we must  
consider  grass  as the basic food and whether  it be in the form of grazing,  
silage,  or hay, won ’t greatly  affect  the situation.  Table 1 gives what  could
21
be typical  values  for major  elements  for an Irish pasture.  These  values  are 
my ‘norms ’ based on experience,  not on any statistical  survey  or study.
Table 1
Typical  Irish pasture  (major  elements)
Calcium 0.8% Sodium 0.2%
Phosphorus 0.4% Potassium 3.0%
Magnesium 0.25% Chlorine 0.5%
Sulphur 0.3%
How do these levels  match  up to actual  requirement  ? Again,  we must  
consider  the question  in general  terms,  recognising  that in both supply  
and demand  there will be obvious  exceptions  to the general  rule. Table  
2 gives guideline  figures  for major  element  requirements  for cattle. It is 
clear, that good quality  pasture  usually  is adequate  in major elements  
for all but very high production.  What is the effect of ensiling  ? The 
effect is not large if the process  is good, and the same applies  to hay. 
However,  two points  must be borne in mind. As a sward  matures,  there  
will be considerable  change  in mineral  levels (both major and minor)
Table 2
Usual  requirement  for major  elements  (% of diet)
Ca P Mg Na
Calf 0.27 0.21 0.07 ?
Fattening  bullock 0.20 0.21 0.10 0.02
Pregnant  cow 0.27 0.24 0.11 0.05
Lactating  cow (1,200 gall) 0.60 0.45 0.23 0.16
and in most cases levels  will be much  lower  in a sward  at seed time than 
at an earlier stage. Thus, one should not expect  to have as good a 
phosphorus  value in hay cut in July as in a grazed  sward. Also, there  
can be losses  during  conservation —in silage particularly  as run-off  from  
wet materials  when soluble  components  such as magnesium  and sodium 
can be lost.
What happens  when concentrates  are introduced.  Firstly (Table 3), 
calcium  is very low whilst  magnesium  and sodium  are suboptimal.  Thus,  
a significant  amount  of barley  added  to the diet will reduce  calcium  intake  
considerably.
22
Table 3
Typical  Irish Barley  (major  elements)
Calcium 0.09% Sodium 0.02%
Phosphorus 0.47% Potassium 0.63%
Magnesium 0.14%
Soya tends to correct  this situation  (Table  4). It is a good source  of 
phosphorus  and adequate  in other  major  elements.  Some soya meals  are 
very low in sodium.
Table 4
Major  elements  in other feeds
Soyabean  meal Ca 0.36% P 0.75%
Pollard Ca 0.16% P 1.01% Na 0.02%
Beet pulp Ca 0.75% P 0.11% Na 0.3%
Maize Ca 0.02% P 0.03%
Table 4 also gives values  for Pollard,  Beet, Pulp and Maize. Pollard  
is low in calcium,  high in phosphorus  and low in sodium.  Beet pulp is 
high in calcium,  but very low in phosphorus.  The level of magnesium  
in mollassed  beet pulp can be quite variable  depending  on the industrial  
process  used in the production  of molasses.  It can vary from adequate  
to very high. While the latter are contra-indicated  for fattening  lambs,  
they could be an advantage,  for instance  for lactating  cows.
Minor  elements
There is an increasing  list of minor elements  which are accepted  as 
being essential,  but of these the following  are possibly  of practical  
importance  : Iron, Iodine,  Zinc, Copper,  Manganese,  Cobalt  and Selen­
ium. Table 5 gives typical  values  for an Irish sward. In recent  years  it 
would appear  that copper  values  are falling— 8 ppm now seems much
Table 5
Typical  Irish pasture  (minor  elements)  ppm
Iron 250 Cobalt 0.10-0.20
Zinc 40 Iodine 0.10
Copper 8- 12 Selenium 0.12
Manganese 50-150 Molybdenum 0.2 -1.5
23
more usual than 12 ppm, and on peat soils 6 might be a more usual 
value. Molybdenum  is included  because  of its interference  with copper  
particularly  at levels in excess  of 5 ppm. Levels  of minor  elements  are 
related  both to the pasture  species  and to the soil conditions.  The latter  
includes  the influence  of parent  material  and the effect of management  
and fertilizer  use. Thus, the level of cobalt,  given in the table as the 
optimum  value, may on many soils of low cobalt or high pH or high 
manganese  level fall far below this value. In Table 6 I have attempted  
to define trace element  requirements  for cattle. This is even more ten­
tative than for major elements  as the magnitude  of interference  from 
other  minerals  etc. is even larger.
Table 6
Trace element  requirements  for cattle  (ppm)
Iron 30 (calf) Cobalt 0.07
10 (adult)Iodine 0.05
Zinc 30Selenium 0.10
Copper 10
Manganese 10-25
However,  it is again seen that the supply  usually  meets the demand.  
Because  plant minor element  requirement  can be very different  from 
animal  minor  element  requirement,  it is common  nowadays  to see more 
serious  minor  element  problems  in cattle than major  element  problems.  
Copper  deficiency,  partly  because  of falling  pasture  values  but principally  
because  of molybdenum  and possibly  sulphur  antagonisms,  is now com­
mon. Cobalt  too may be a problem,  as may selenium.  These  are subjects 
large enough  for a separate  paper and cannot  be fully discussed  in this 
presentation.
Table  7 shows  the minor  element  supply  of barley. It should  be noted 
that proprionic  acid-treated  wet storage  of barley  will destroy  vitamin  E, 
and therefore  place a much higher dependence  on adequate  selenium. 
Manganese  can be quite low.
Table 7
Minor  elements  in barley  (ppm)
Iron 60 Manganese 18
Zinc 17 Cobalt 0.1
Copper 8 Zinc 20
24
Some of the minor interesting  element  levels in other foodstuffs  are 
given in Table 8. The low values  for copper  and cobalt in maize and 
high copper  value in soyabean  meal should  be noted  especially.
Table 8
Other  feedstuffs  : minor  elements  (ppm)
Maize Fe 20 Cu 2 Mn 6 Co 0.02
Pollard Cu 24 Mn 132 Zn 50
Beet pulp Fe300 Cu 14 Zn 1
Soyabean Cu  41 (±)
Summary
In conclusion,  I wish to summarise  my attitude  to supplementary  
minerals  for animals.  For lactating  cows on pasture  (yielding  up to 800 
or 900 gals), provided  the sward is well fertilized  and well managed,  
there should  be very little need for additional  minerals —possibly  a salt 
lick. On silage and on hay, one has to recognise  that cutting  date and 
harvesting  techniques  will play a part and one would generally  like to 
see a good quality  mineral  mix available,  preferably  as a feed supplement  
or alternatively  some “free access ” system. This should contain  the 
essential  major  and minor  elements  in roughly  the same proportions  as 
the animal ’s requirements.  The addition  of concentrate  should be 
matched  by a suitable  supplement,  e.g. barley  with a high calcium,  beet 
pulp with a high phosphorus.
(Obviously,  one has to be aware  of certain  specific  circumstances,  e.g. 
grass tetany  on spring  swards,  copper  deficiency  on shale soils, etc., but 
these should  be diagnosed  and treated  as special  farm problems  requiring  
specific  remedies.
One can justify  a certain  amount  of extra mineral  feeding  in a sort of 
‘insurance ’ approach.  But in my opinion,  nearly as much damage  to 
production  is done by excessive  use of mineral  supp'ements  as can result  
from possible  shortage.
25
Intensive  Beef Production  from  
Conserved  Grass  in France
F. RAYMOND
Service  Utilisation,  I.T.C.F.,  Boigneville,  91720 Maisse,  France.
Intensive  beef production  in France  is based on the production  of young 
bulls slaughtered  at 15-18 months  of age. Calves  from the dairy herd 
are reared  from 15 days to 3 or 4 months  of age in a nursery,  after which 
the fattening  period  commences.  They are generally  slaughtered  at 15-17  
months  giving  carcasses  weighing  340 kg (Normand)  or 360 kg (Mont-  
beliard,  Charolais  crossbred  cattle). Sucklers  are weaned  at 6 to 9 
months  of age and slaughtered  at 18 months,  giving carcases  weighing 
360-380  kg (Charolais,  Limousin,  Charolais  crossbred).
The more usual feeding  system  is based on maize silage (80% of total 
dry matter  intake)  with 1 kg of soyabean  cake, minerals  and vitamins,  
and 1 or 2 kg of cereal depending  on breed type and expected  carcass  
weight. In recent years the production  of maize silage, particularly  in 
Bretagne  and Normandie,  has been questioned  and interest  in grass  
silage  is increasing.  Following  the big expansion  in maize  silage  recently,  
grass silage has exploited  the techniques  of direct harvesting  with a 
precision  chop machine.
26
The most widespread  diet using grass silage for young  bulls is shown 
in Figure  1. Concentrates  (cereal,  soyabean  cake and minerals)  account  
for 40% of total dry matter  intake  (Table  1). It may be necessary  to add 
1 to 2 kg/d of additional  cereal one or two months  before slaughter  
depending  on the degree  of finish of the animals.
From a calf of 150 kg liveweight  to a 
carcass  of 350 kg
ZiLIVEWEIGHT  GAIN 1 kg per DAY7
with
2600 kg of DM of gr ass silage  
1100 kg of maize grain
(or 1200 kg of barley!
250 kg of soja bean cake  
70 kg of minerals  and vitaminst 5 »
Table 1
Another  feeding  system  is the use of grass silage at the beginning  of 
the fattening  period  (150 to 350 kg liveweight)  and of maize silage from  
350 kg liveweight  to slaughter.  In addition  to maize silage during  the 
fattening  period 1-3 kg of maize,  0.7 kg of soyabean  cake and 0.15 kg 
of minerals  are fed daily per animal.
The choice between  a full grass silage or a mixed grass-maize  silage  
feeding  system  depends on the suitability  of the area for maize  production  
and the breed of animal. Late maturing  breeds,  such as the Charolais,  
need a higher  level of energy  particularly  towards  the end of the fattening  
period than earlier  maturing  breeds such as Normand  or Charolais  x 
Normand  crossbred  cattle.
Effect  of level of energy  supplementation  of grass  silage  on the 
performance  of young  bulls
Several  trials were carried  out in France  to study the effect of concen ­
trate supplementation  on the performance  of young  bulls  fed grass silage.
Control  diets were generally  supplemented  with 1 or 2 kg of maize  (0.3 
to 0.6% of liveweight)  while experimental  diets involved  an additional  
1 or 2 kg per day. The increment  of cereal  supplementation  ranged  from  
0.15 to 0.4% of liveweight  with an average  of 0.3% of liveweight.
27
Responses  in liveweight  gain by growing  (150 to 350 kg liveweight) 
and fattening  cattle  (after  350 kg liveweight)  to concentrate  supplementa ­
tion of grass silage are illustrated  in Figure  2. The extra daily gain used
ADG of animals  fed supplemented 
silages  (g/d)
Figure  2 : Relation  between  average  daily gain (ADG)  of animals  fed supplemented  
silages  and that of control  animals  (grams/day).
# Growing  bullocks  fed direct cut silage  
X Growing  bullocks  fed wilted  cut silage  
■ Fattening  bullocks  fed direct  cut silage  
I I Fattening  bullocks  fed wilted cut silage  
A Sucklers  fed wilted silage
to plot the points  was calculated  on the basis of a standard  supplement  
of concentrate  at 0.3% of liveweight  (1 kg/d) in each trial. There was 
no significant  effect of type of animal  or type of silage on the response
28
CBF
IRISH LIVESTOCK  AND MEAT  BOARD
NEVER  MORE  
VITAL  ...
The livestock  and meat industry  is at a stage where  regrowth  and 
readjustment  are essential.
The future  of Irish meat in a deadly  keen market  place,  will depend  
on its quality  image.  The role of CBF in promoting  that image  was  
never  more vital.
The future  of the whole  industry  will depend  more than ever on its 
ability  to assess  changes  and react to them.  Again,  CBF's  role in 
monitoring  the market  and informing  the industry  was never more  
vital.
A national  priority  for 1982 and after is the regrowth  of our 
livestock  here. We look forward  to profitably  expanded  growth  on 
Irish farms  and to full participation  in the support  and promotion  of 
a growing  meat and livestock  industry.  It is Ireland  s greatest  asset  
and it deserves  no less than the highest  national  priority.
CBF — The Irish Livestock  and Meat Board,  
Clanwilliam  Court.  Lower  Mount  Street.  Dublin  2. 
Telephone;  (01) 685155.  Telex; 24440.
29
in daily gain (ADG)  to concentrate  supplementation.  The regression  line 
which may be calculated  is parallel  to the diagonal,  indicating  that the 
average  response  was also independent  of the level of ADG  which  ranged  
from 900 to 1400 g/day. The difference  between  the mean ADG of the 
control  group (supplemented  with 1 or 2 kg maize)  and that of the 
experimental  group  (additional  1 kg of maize)  is approximately  100 g/day  
as shown  in Table 2.
OR/ISS S/LAG£
2 kg cereals
I
/!kg/day  /3kg cereals
I
fj kg/  day /
Table  2
Concentrate  supplementation  led to an increase  in total DMI with a 
significant  decrease  in silage DMI. Feeding  an additional  1 kg of con­
centrate  daily increased  daily DM intake  by 0.34 kg and decreased  silage  
DM intake  by 0.66 kg per day. Feeding  additional  concentrates  depres ­
sed the intake  of unwilted  silage to a somewhat  greater  extent  than that 
of wilted silage. The level of concentrate  in the diet had no effect on 
killing-out  percentage.  However,  fat content  of the 11th rib cut and 
kidney  fat were greater  for animals  fed the higher  level of concentrates.
Effect  of additive  treatment  and wilting  of grass  silage  for intensive  
bull beef production
Fourteen  trials were carried  out by the Technical  Institute  of Cereals  
and Forages  and the Technical  Institute  of Bovine  Husbandry  to deter ­
mine the effects  of additives  and wilting  in silage making  for bull beef 
production.
Preservatives  used were mainly  formic  acid, sulphuric  acid/formalin  
mixture  (sylade)  and a mixture  containing  malt and lactoserum  (Acosil), 
all of which  were applied  at the rate of 3 1/t of fresh weight.
In the various  trials wilting  increased  DM content  by 4-14 percentage  
points. No investigation  has been made of the interaction  between  pre­
servative  and wilting.
30
TOTAL ACIDS  
(in% of DM)
15%
13%-t
without
additive(? comparisons)
VmCT  CUT
s with
I *
(A D D I T I V E  D E C R E A S E S  
OF FERMENTATIONCONCENTRATIONS
ACIDS )
Figure  3 : Effect  of additives  on the content  of fermentation  acids.  
Fermentation  quality
Average  pH values  were 4.1 for both untreated  and additive  treated  
silages,  and for both unwilted  and wilted silages. The total content  of 
fermentation  acids was reduced  by additive  from 16% to 13% of DM 
(Figure  3). Wilting  reduced  the content  of fermentation  acids from 15% 
to 11% DM (Figure  4). However,  lactic fermentation,  expressed  as a
TOTAL  ACIDS  (% DM)
15%-
11%-(7 comparisons)
\
direct cut
(19%DM)
A
WILTING  DECREASES  tHE 
CONCENTRATION  OF FER ­
MENTATION  ACIDS♦
wilted
(27%  DM)
Figure  4 : Effect  of wilting  on the concentration  of fermentation  acids.
31
percentage  of total acids,  was increased  to a greater  extent  by wilting  than  
by additive  treatment.
Ammonia  content  expressed  as a percent  of totaly  nitrogen  is markedly  
affected  by additive  (reduced  from 12% to 9%), while wilting  had no 
effect. This means  that additive  decreases  rate of proteolysis  to a greater  
extent than wilting. Additive  decreases  storage  DM losses by about 2 
percentage  points only, while wilting  decreases  it by about 4 points  
(Figures  5 and 6). Gabon and Mosnier  (unpublished  results)  have re-
TOTAL LOSSES  
,%DM
40
30 -
20 -(on ^ comparisons)
^........~?.. p?ints
t
without
Figure  5 : Effect  of additives  on storage  losses.
TOTAL LOSSES  
^%DMt
with
40-
30-
20 -ik'-00 © eompangoos
direct cut wilted
Figure  6 : Effect  of wilting  on storage  losses.  
32
corded under farm conditions  (81 observations)  that additives  did not 
affect total DM losses during  storage. The lower the DM content  the 
greater  the storage  DM losses (Figure  7).
With silos opened in summer,  DM losses of wilted silage increase  
dramatically  as the duration  of utilisation  increases.  With silos opened  
in winter,  the most important  factor affecting  DM losses is the crude  
protein  content. Losses  decreased  as crude protein  content  increased,  
although  this is not a direct protein  effect but a reflection  of the type of 
material  ensiled. The earlier  the date of harvest,  the greater  the crude  
protein  content  and the better  the compaction  in the silo.
Animal  perfonnance
Additives  tend to increase  DMI ( + 3% on average)  but the difference 
was not significant  in our studies. Wilting  had a marked  effect on DMI  
(+ 1% on average  in our studies).  Only in three of the six trials  reviewed 
did additive  enhance  average  daily gain but the mean increment  in ADG  
(+ 4%) was not significant.  Wilting  reduced  mean ADG of animals  by 
about 3%. This reduction  occurred  when ADG of control  animals  was 
greater  than 1083 g/d.
With the exception  of one of the six trials reviewed,  the use of 
additives  led to a feed conversion  ratio equal to or slightly  better than 
that obtained  with the control  silage. Wilting  increased  the DM required  
per kg ADG  by 9% on average  but this difference  was not significant.
33
The poor response  to additives  in terms  of DM intake  and daily gain 
in the experiments  reviewed  is contrary  to a number  of studies. We must  
bear in mind that the control  silages  were generally  well preserved.  On 
the other hand, the level of concentrate  in the diet may reduce the 
difference  which  would  occur  in lower  energy  diets. Growing  heifers,  for 
instance,  respond  fairly well to additives  in grass silage.
The conclusions  drawn  on wilting  are in full agreement  with the review  
recently  prepared  by Wilkins  and the Eurowilt  group.
Cheveley  Johnston  & Company
Agricultural  Consultants  & Land Agents
Farm Reports  and Feasibility  Studies  
Management  Accounts  and Enterprise  Costings  
Farm and Estate  Management  
Staff Selection
Budgetary  Control  and Cash Flow Forecasts  
Land and Stock  Valuations —Farm Sales  and Purchases
26/27 WELLINGTON  ROAD,  CORK  
(Cork 501109)
34
Possible  Future  Trends  in Cattle  
Production  and Marketing
F. MULCAHY
A.C.O.T.,  Mullingar.  Co. Westmeath.
Ccunty  Westmeath  is primarily  a cattle county  with :
3,000 beef farmers
1,200 dairy farmers
5% agricultural  land in tillage.
Approximately  12,000 calves are brought  into the county annually.  
In my area there are about 350 farmers  v/ith cattle production  as the 
major enterprise.  The scale of enterprise  varies but a high proportion  
are engaged  in intensive  or semi-intensive  wintering.  Approximately  40 
intensive  beef producers  sell mo.st of their cattle in the January  to June  
period. The output  from these farms would be in the region  of 10,000  
cattle per annum.
The top producers  are aware  of the value  of gcod  performance  and will 
always  work and plan to achieve  this aim. They must obtain  high per­
formance  with an awareness  of keeping  costs to a minimum.  The farmers  
achieve  high performance  by having  :
1. Top Quality  Silage —3 to 4 cuts per year of leafy material  harvested  
mainly  with their own equipment.
2. High Throughput  of Cattle —Cattle  are fed on a high plane of nutrit ­
ion and the ration consists  of silage/barley  plus protein  supplement.  
The target liveweight  gain is 1 kg/day.  Normally  2 batches  of cattle  
are finished  each winter  and sold from January  to June.
3. High Stocking  Rate —Rate of stocking  is 18 cwt. plus per st. acre 
from April/June,  reducing  to 12 cwt. later in the season. Fertilisers  
are applied  according  to standard  recommendations.
5. Careful  Management  of Cattle —This includes  the grouping  of cattle  
on liveweight  basis,  lice control  on two occasions,  dosing  if necessary,  
copper  injection  once if required,  adequate  feed and water and ob- 
■serving  cattle in pens for lameness.  Machinery  for feeding  requires  
careful  consideration  and reduction  in feeding  time allows  more time 
for management.  Feeder  wagons  or mixer  wagons  are used on these 
farms,  e.g. Kidd Feeder  Wagon,  Movement  Diet Feeder  and Howard  
Mixer  Wagon.
6. Buying  and Selling —Purchases  of cattle commence  in June and they 
are sold out from January  onwards.  The large producers  can usually  
obtain  the top market  price either  as a bonus  or commission.
Future  developments
What  is the next stage of development  for these farmers ?
In my view, “group ” participation  is the next logical  step. If a group  
is formed  it will require  a team effort  on the part of ACOT,  meat factor ­
35
ies, research,  veterinary  personnel.  Department  of Agriculture  and C.B.F.  
to promote  and service  the needs  of the group. With such a group  it will 
be necessary  to monitor  animal  performance,  feeding  systems,  class and 
type of animals.  To service  this demand,  weighing  scales  and computer  
systems  as an aid to management  will be necessary.  The commercial  
interests  may have to provide  these and the local adviser  could interpret  
and select  the clients  who would  use the various facilities.  All the services  
will have to play vital roles in this development.
Other  farmers  will also have to consider  group  participation.
The group  “idea” has existed  in France  for the past 20 years  with rapid  
progress  in the number  of groups  in the last 10 years  especially  in Brittany  
and Normandy.  The aim of the group  system  is to organise  groups  of 
producers  along certain  lines of production,  to co-ordinate  the purchase  
and sale of animals  and to provide  technical  advice to farmers  on all 
aspects  of production.
Production  groups  in Brittany  and their members  receive  significant 
state and E.E.C.  aid. In order to qualify  for these aids, it is essential  to 
be a member  of a producer  group.
All beef produced  by group  members  must be on a basis of a written  
contract  between  the farmer and the group. This is the core of the 
producer  group  idea. The number,  sex, breed and system  of production  
is known  and so marketing  arrangements can be made in advance.  Sellers  
from one group go to Italy to make  contracts  for young  bulls.
Groups  also operate  a very useful and successful  calf supply  scheme, 
whereby  calves  from the dairy  herd are purchased,  transported  and resold 
to members  of their beef group. The co-optratives  and S.I.C.A.S.  have 
become  associated  with the whole  development  of the beef industry  from 
the dropped  calf to the marketing  of the finished  animal.
A typical  French  beef producer  group  comprises  of 600-800  farmers  
pursuing  a number  of different  systems  of production  such as bull beef, 
stores  to beef, cull cow finishing,  veal production  and weaned  calves  (3-4 
months  age). There are very few groups  specialising  in one system  of 
production  and the majority  of farmers  have more than one system  of 
production.
If groups  are formed  here the aim must be :
1. To improve  income  of beef farmers.
2. Promote  better  systems  of production.
3. Improve  quality  of the animats.
4. Improve  the supply  of animals.
36
Ireland's  dairy  industry  
has  come  a long  way  since.
The days of dairymaids  and horse-drawn  creameries  ^ 
have passed.  In their  place  has emerged  one of the world's  
most  modern  and dynamic  dairy  industries.  Today  Ireland  turns  
the greenest  grass in Europe  into a diverse  range  of the best- 
known  dairy  products  in the world.
From Honduras  to Hong  Kong,  from  Trinidad  to 
Tokyo  you will find Irish cream,  milk  powder,  chocolate  crumb,  
cheese,  casein  and a great variety  of other  products,  many  of 
them  sold under  the Kerrygold  brand  name.
Irish dairy  exports  this year are expected  to be 
worth  well over  £600m.  Which  gives  you some  idea  just how  far 
the industry  has come  since  the days of the dairymaid.
The Growth  of Grasses  and How it 
Responds  to Management
A. J. BRERETON  and O. T. CARTON  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
Stocking  rate is the most important  factor  in determining  the output  of 
animal  product  per hectare  in grazing  systems.  But the stocking  rate that 
can be achieved,  and consequently  the levels  of animal  output  j^r hectare,  
depends  on the amount  of feed available.  A brief account  is given  in this 
paper  of the weather  factors,  crop factors  and management  factors  that 
determine  the amount  of feed available.  But firstly,  let us consider  how 
animal  output  and dry matter  are inter-related.
A diagrammatic  illustration  of the relationship  between  stocking  rate 
and the level of output  of animal  product  per hectare  is given in Figure  1. 
The upper  curve refers  to a situation  where grass is abundant.  At low 
stocking  rates, where the feed available  per animal  is greater  than the 
amount  required  for maximum  voluntary  intake,  an increase  in stocking  
rate gives a proportional  increase  in output  simply  as a result of the 
increase  in the number  of production  units (animals).  Proportional  in­
creases  in output  with increasing  stocking  rate continue  to the stocking 
rate where the amount  of feed available  per animal  is only sufficient  to 
give maximum  voluntary  intake. When  stocking  rate is increased  beyond 
this (at B in Figure 1)—intake per head, and consequently  output  per 
head,  decreases.  At first this decrease  in output  per ahimal  is more than 
offset by the accompanying  increase  in animal  numbers  and output  per 
hectare  continues  to increase,  though  at a lower  rate. When  stocking  rate 
is further  increased  the fall in output  per animal  increases  to the extent  
that it is no longer  offset by the increasing  number  of animals.  As a 
result  output  per hectare  increases  to a maximum  and then declines.  The 
lower  curve in Figure  1 shows  how a similar  curve applies  when grass is 
less abundant.  In this case, output  per animal  begins  to decline  at a 
lower stocking  rate (at A). The maximum  output  per hectare  is lower  
and the stocking  rate at which  it occurs  is also lower.
In order to achieve  maximum  output  per hectare  in a grazing  system, 
stocking  rate must be progressively  adjusted  according  to the amount  of 
grass available.  The amount  of grass available  shows  a marked  seasonal  
pattern. The pattern  is determined  by the seasonal  pattern  in tempera ­
ture and radiation  and by changes  in the physiological  state of the crop. 
The weather  patterns  and the changes  in physiological  state are predict ­
able in a general  way and in the same way the pattern  of grass growth  
is predictable.
38
Fig. 1 : The relationship  between  animal  output  per hectare  and stocking  rate. 
Physiological  factor
In mid summer  of each year there is a general  replacement  of the 
tiller population  in the grass sward. The tillers which have become 
reproductive  in spring  die after flowering  or are killed at grazing  during  
May and June. These are replaced  by a new crop of young  vegetative 
tillers  which  form the flowering  tillers  of the following  year. The growth  
potential  of the vegetative  tillers formed  in mid-summer  is about half 
that of the tillers  they replace.  As a result  summer  and autumn  swards 
never achieve  the growth  rates of spring  swards. The growth  potential  
of the summer  crop of vegetative  tillers is approximately  doubled  after  
they have been subjected  to low temperature  during  winter —this phen ­
omenon  is called vernalisation.  Following  vernalisation  the tillers'sub ­
sequently  become  reproductive  when exposed  to the appropriate  day 
length in spring. Unvemalised  tillers cannot respond  to day length 
in this way. These population  changes  are illustrated  diagrammatically  
with the parallel  changes  in sward  growth  potential  in Figure  2. Growth  
potential  is high from vernalisation  in mid winter  until after flowering  in 
June, and for the remainder  of the year growth  potential  is at least 
halved.  The observed  pattern  of seasonal  change  in grass  growth  is quite  
different  from this pattern  of potential  growth.  This is mainly  due to the 
fall in radiation  levels  and temperature  in autumn,  winter  and spring.
39
Growth
Potential
V
Fig. 2 ; Annual  replacement  of tiller population  and corresponding  change  in
growth  potential.
Weather  factors
The rate of dry matter  production  by the crop depends  on the amount  
of radiation  energy  received  and on the efficiency  of energy  conversion  
to dry matter —which  is controlled  by temperature.  The level of radiation  
varies  with day length  from about 200 Joules/cm “/day in December  to 
about  2000 Joules/cm^/day  in mid summer.  Mean  daily air temperature  
varies  from about  5°C in mid winter  to about 15°C in mid summer.  The 
efficiency  of conversion  of radiation  energy  in the grass crop increases 
sharply  in response  to increasing  temperature  in the range 4.5-9.0°C 
(Figure  3). At higher temperatures  the conversion  is less sensitive  to 
changes  in temperature.  In Figure 3, the upper curve refers to the 
vernalised  crop in the period  from mid-winter  until flowering  is complete.  
The lower curve refers to the summer  crop of vegetative  tillers in the 
period  from June to mid-winter.
40
Efficiency
Fig 3 : Effect  of air temperature  on radiation  use efficiency  in grass swards.  
Seasonal  pattern  of growth
From the published  records  of radiation  and temperature  we know 
how much radiation  is available  (on average)  for growth  in a particular  
period  of the year. From  the corresponding  average  temperature  we know 
how efficiently  the radiation  is used and so we can calculate  a rate of 
dry matter production  for the period. Figure 4 shows the calculated  
pattern  of grass growth  rate across  the year for the Wexford  area. The 
pattern  would  be very similar  for other areas.
Grass  supply  and demand
In Figure  4 the daily feed requirement  of the grazing  herd (at maximum  
voluntary  intake)  is superimposed  on the grass growth  curve. The feed 
requirement  is that of the dairy herd at an overall  stocking  rate of 3.1 
cows/ha.  The diagram  illustrates  how the seasonal  adjustments  in 
stocking  rate, associated  with closing  of paddocks  for silage,  change  the 
feed requirement  roughly  in line with changes  in grass growth.  A more 
detailed  picture  of the balance  between  supply  and demand  is given in 
Figure  5. In this case the calculated  amount  of feed available  day-by-day  
in successive  21-day  rotations  is compared  with the amount  required  to 
give 90% of maximum  voluntary  intake. This level of feed requirement  
was chosen  for the comparison  because  it seemed  to give a good overall 
match between  supply  and demand  for the season. At the start of the 
first rotation  400 kg/ha  are available  and over 800 kg/ha  are required  
but at the end of the first rotation  1000 kg/ha  are available  when the 
feed required  is still just over 800 kg/ha. On the first day of the
41
DM kg/ha/day
Fig. 4 : Seasonal  pattern  of grass growth  compared  with seasonally  adjusted  
herd feed demand.
DM ke/ha/day
Fig. 5 : Daily  availability  of feed compared  with demand  during  each rotation
(21>day  rotation).
42
rotation,  regrowth  since the last grazing  amounts  to about 500 kg/ha.  
This falls short of the feed required  which is still over 800 kg/ha  but 
again towards  the end of the second  rotation  the available  feed (1400  
kg/ha)  is greater  than the amount  required.  This fluctuation  in the 
balance  between  supply  and demand  occurs  in each following  rotation.  
In the last four rotations  the feed demand  is falling  but the available  
feed falls more rapidly.  The diagram  is based on a 21 ha farm divided  
into 21 X 1 ha paddocks.  The overall  stocking  rate is 3.12 cows/ha  and 
management  follows  the recommendations  given in the 1978 edition  of 
Dairy Herd Management.  The purpose  of Figure 5 is to illustrate,  in 
broad  terms,  the complexity  of the task facing the  grazing  manager  as he 
attempts  to maintain  a good balance  between  feed supply  and demand.  
In preparing  Figure  5 the effects  of management  on grass growth  have 
not been taken into account  (these effects  will be discussed  later). As a 
result the yield of grass available  is overestimated  for some parts of the 
season in Figure 5. Similarly  there is an overestimate  in mid-season  
because  drought  effects  are not included.  Even when growth  rates are 
overestimated  in this way, the diagram  indicates  that the system  does 
not allow the herd to achieve  maximum  voluntary  intake. This agrees  
with research  at Moorepark  which has shown that, at 3.1 cows/ha  a 
high output  of milk per hectare  is accompanied  by a reduction  in output  
per cow. Throughout  the season  the wide variation  in level of available  
feed per day suggests  that there is a corresponding  variation  in the 
severity  of grazing  between  paddocks  but there is no indication  that grass  
will accumulate  to excess anywhere  in the system. Between  mid-April  
and mid-September  the overall  level of grass available  is sufficient  to 
feed the herd at about 90% of maximum  voluntary  intake. Outside  of 
this period  the feed situation  is difficult.
Grazing  management  effects
It is in such a context  that grazing  management  work has been carried  
out at Johnstown  Castle. The work has been directed  towards  quantify ­
ing the effect on grass production  of grazing  swards  at the times when  
the available  feed falls substantially  short of requirement.  We have  
therefore  examined  the effect  of severe  grazing  compared  to lenient  at all 
stages  of the season. We have examined  the effect of grazing  in autumn  
on overwinter  regrowth.  We have also examined  the effect  of early  spring  
grazing  on subsequent  grass production  in the period up to mid-June.  
Because  early spring grazing  is necessarily  accompanied  by grazing  of 
the silage paddocks,  we have examined  the effect  of early spring  grazing  
on first cut silage production.
Grazing  severity
In Table I dry matter  production  in spring  in swards  grazed  at 21 day 
intervals  to a height  of less than 5 cm is compared  with production  where 
swards  were grazed  to about 8 cm. At the severe  grazing  about  66% of 
the total leaf per tiller was removed  leaving  approximately  8 cm per 
tiller after grazing.  At the lenient  grazing  about 50% of the leaf was
43
removed  leaving  about 12 cm per tiller. Dry matter production  was 
consistently  depressed  by severe  grazing.  The effect  was most pronounced  
where  turnout  was early.
Table 1
Effect  of severity  of grazing  on cumulative  herbage  dry matter  production  (kg/ha)  
in spring  1979. Perennial  ryegrass  (cv. Vigor)  grazed  at 21-day  intervals.
Turnout  25/3 Turnout  15/4
Lenient Severe (%) Lenient Severe (%) LSD
25/3-15/4 666 443 (67) — — 303
25/3- 6/5 2241 1893 (84) 2590 2543 (98) 608
25/3-27/5 4203 3075 (73) 4463 4305 (96) 1058
25/3-17/6 6762 5252 (78) 7647 6453 (84) 1321
The same comparison  is made in Table 2 for swards  grazed in the 
summer/autumn  period. These swards had previously  been cut for 
silage. There  was a 23% depression  due to severe  grazing  (averaged  for 
swards  grazed  at 14, 21 and 28 day intervals).  The effect was consistent  
throughout  the period  mid-July  to mid-October  and there was no appar ­
ent effect  of rest interval  on the magnitude  of the effect. In the summer/  
autumn  experiment  the post grazing  leaf length per tiller in the severe  
and lenient  grazed  swards  was about  5 cm and 15 cm and the proportion  
of leaf removed  at grazing  was 66% and 50% respectively.
Table 2
(a) Effect  of grazing severity  on dry matter production  (kg/ha) in summer.  
Perennial  ryegrass  (cv. Vigor) average  for swards  grazed at 14, 21 and 28 
day intervals.
(b) Ratio of dry matter production  lenient/severe  grazing in successive  rest 
intervals  from 15/7 to 9/10.
(a)
Lenient Severe (%)
15/7-9/10 2897 2241 (77)
(b)
Length  of Intervals
rest interval 1 2 3 4 5 6
14 days 0.71 1.81 1.54 1.28 1.79 0.95
21 days 1.44 1.37 0.67 1.67
28 days 1.00 1.86 1.31
44
Tillering  rate was not affected by grazing severity in the spring  
experiments  except  at the end of the experimental  period  when the early  
turnout/severe  grazed  swards  appeared  to be tillering  more actively  than 
the other treatments.  In the summer/autumn  experiment  severe grazing  
consistently  stimulated  tillering  (at all rest intervals).  The increased  
tillering  did not appear  to compensate  for the depressing  effect of severe  
grazing  on production.
The analysis  of the balance  between  feed supply  and demand  (Figure  
5) has shown that supp ’y falls substantially  below demand  at times  
throughout  the season. The results  here indicate  that hard grazing  at 
these times  will depress  production  of grass significantly.  Overall  annual  
feed production  will be maximised  where over grazing  is avoided.
Autuiiui  management
There  are two aspects  of autumn  management  of grazed  swards  to be 
considered.  Firstly,  during  October  sward growth  rates fall below the 
rate required  to provide  adequate  feed for the grazing  herd. From mid- 
October,  growth  rates are less than 20 kg/ha/day —providing  at most  
420 kg/ha after 21 days growth. This quantity  is only sufficient  to 
provide  about 50% of the maximum  voluntary  intake of the herd. 
Secondly,  grazing  in autumn  significantly  affects the amount  of grass  
available  at turnout  in the following  spring. The effect of grazing  in
Table 3
The effect  of grazing  in autumn  on grass yield in following  spring.
Autumn
closing  dateYield after 
last grazingYield following 
15/3spring
5/4
15 September 1160 2280 2840
940 1720 2520
15 October 600 1240 2120
308 1080 2120
15 November 440 1000 1860
318 820 1760
15 December 460 800 1760
315 600 1600
LSD between  closing  dates
= 240
autumn  until mid-September,  mid-October,  mid-November  and mid-  
December  on the yield of grass in the following  spring  is shown  in Table  
3. As the autumn  closing  date is delayed  the grass available  in spring  is
45
reduced.  The September  closing  date gave the highest  yields in spring  
but these swards  contained  a high proportion  of dead material  (from a 
visual observation).  The effect of autumn  closing  date on turnout  date 
in the following  spring was calculated  from the results for the hard  
grazed  swards  (Figure  6). Taking  the herd feed requirement  at maximum  
voluntary  intake  as 850 kg/ha/day  and allowing  that 1000 kg/ha  of the 
grass present  is not grazed,  then the yield required  at turnout  is 1850 
kg/ha  in this case where  the herd spends  one day on each paddock.  It is 
2700 kg/ha  in the case where  the silage paddocks  are not grazed  and the 
herd spends  2 days on each paddock.  In Figure  6 the turnout  dates are 
given for the first paddock  where the above yields are obtained  on the 
10th day of the 21-day rotation.
Turnout date I98O 
(first paddock)
Closing Date 1979 
(last paddock)
Fig. 6 : Effect  of autumn  closing  date on turnout  date following  spring.
Where  the silage paddocks  are not grazed  in early spring,  turnout  date 
is delayed  by 2 weeks  compared  with the system  where  all paddocks  are 
grazed. In both systems  a delay  of 5 days in closing  in autumn  results  in 
1 day ’s delay in turnout  date in spring.
The main objectives  in autumn  should be to leave the sward clean  
grazed at closing and to close the last paddocks  before the end of 
October.  In this way the swards  can recover  before growth  ceases in
46
AUvou 1ever  wantedinaBank
Allied  Irish  Banks
Banking  fora  hetterfiitnre
47
winter  but there is not an excessive  accumulation  which would suflFer  
winter  burn and lead to poor quality  herbage  in the following  spring.
Turnout  date
The effect of turnout  date in spring  on dry matter  production  in the 
following  weeks  was examined  in 1979 (Table  4) and in 1980 (Table  5). 
In both years, dry matter production  was greater  where turnout  was 
delayed.  The effect  was greatest  under  severe  grazing  in 1979 and at the 
shorter  rest interval  in 1980. The results  Indicate  that potential  produc ­
tion in the grazed sward may be reduced  by over 1000 kg/ha where  
turnout  is early. This reduction  represents  approximately  10% of total 
annual  production.
Table 4
Effect  of turnout  date on dry matter  production  in spring  1979 (dm kg/ha).
Perennial  ryegrass  (cv. Vigor)  grazed  at 21 day intervals.
Lenient  grazing
25/3 15/4 (%)Se
25/3vere grazing
15/4 (%) LSD
25/3-15/4 666 907 (136) 444 907'''(204)303
25/3- 6/5 2241 2590 (116) 1893 2543 (134) 608
25/2-27/5 4203 4463 (106) 3075 4305 (140) 1058
25/3-17/6 6762 7648 (113) 5253 6453 (123) 1321
Table 5
Effect  of turnout  date on dry matter  production  in spring  1980 (dm kg/ha).  
Perennial  ryegrass  (cv. Vigor).
7 day rest turnout  
date21 day rest turnout  
date LSD
25/3 15/4 (%) 25/3 15/4 (%)
25/3-15/4 663 1352 (204) 938 1563 (167) 371
25/3-27/5 2937 4734 (161) 3472 4564 (131) 1365
Silage
Where  turnout  is early it is necessary  to graze the silage paddocks  in 
early spring. This practice  inevitably  results  in a reduction  in first cut 
.silage yield (Table  6 and Figure  7). The yield reduction  is greater  as the 
closing  date is delayed  and where the severity  of grazing  before  closing  
is greater. When the amount  of grass removed  before closing  is added  
to the silage  yield there is still a significant  loss in production.
48
Firct Cut 
Ellagc Kid 
(DM t/ho)
Fig. 7 : Effect  of date of closing  for silage  on first cut silage  yield.
Table 6
(a) Effect of closing  date in spring  on first cut silage yield (t/ac at 20% dm) on 
June 1st. Perennial  ryegrass  (cv. Vigor).
(b) Effect  of closing  date in spring  on total recovery  of herbage  (t/ac at 20% dm) 
up to June 1st. Perennial  ryegrass  (cv. Vigor).
(a)
Closing  date Grazed  lenient Grazed  severe
25/3 15.6 12.4
15/4 12.0 11.0
5/5 9.7 7.3
Ungrazed 17.6
(b)
Closing  date Grazed  lenient Grazed  severe
25/3 16.3 13.7
15/4 13.2 13.3
5/5 12.3 10.6
Ungrazed 17.6
4Q
In the system  where  the silage  paddocks  are grazed  before  closing  and 
turnout  is early, the winter  indoor  feeding  period  is shorter. Therefore  
less silage is required.  A reduction  in first cut silage yield from grazing  
in early spring  is acceptable  as long as the amount  of silage produced  is 
up to target.
Summary
The level of output  of animal  product  per hectare  is basically  depend ­
ent on the amount  of dry matter produced.  The output/dry  matter  
relationship  interacts  with stocking  rate. In practice  changes  in stocking  
rate are used to adjust the balance  between  feed supply and demand.  
Seasonal  variation  in temperature,  radiation,  drought  and crop physiol ­
ogy, cause continuous  changes  in the level of available  dry matter. It is 
difficult  to maintain  a strict balance  between  feed supply  and demand  at 
all times because  stocking  rate cannot  be adjusted  continuously.  In the 
rotational  grazing  system  periodic  adjustments  in stocking  rate are made  
which  only succeed  in giving  a very general  balance  between  feed supply 
and demand. The situation  is further complicated  by year-to-year  
weather  variations.  Whereas  the seasonal  pattern  of change  in growth  is 
predictable  for the average  year, the year-to-year  variation  is much less 
predictable.  In these circumstances  output  will depend  on the adoption  
of a flexible  approach  to management.
This paper is primarily  concerned  with dry matter  production.  The 
results  given show that, where the sole objective  is to maximise  grass  
production  (at an overall  high stocking  rate), dry matter  production  will 
be increased  where steps are taken to avoid grazing  when the balance  
between  supply  and demand  is low, early and late in the season,  and to 
avoid overgrazing  when the balance  is low during  the season.
50
Grassland  Research  and Development  
at Crichton  Royal  Farm
J. D. LEAVER
The West of Scotland  Agricultural  College.  Crichton  Royal  Farm.
Dumfries.
Introduction
The Crichton  Royal Farm was taken over by the West of Scotland  
Agricultural  College  in 1975 to study systems  of dairying  with particular  
reference  to the efficient  utilisation  of grassland.  It is a lowland  farm of 
253 ha situated  in a moderate  rainfall  area (1052  mm per annum).
Between  1975 and 1978 a herd of 180 Friesian  cattle was formed  
(Crichton  herd) and this is used for trial work mainly  concerned  with 
winter  and summer  feeding  management.  In 1979 a new dairy unit was 
set up (Acrehead  Unit) which  is split into two herds  of 90 and 70 cows 
to study the profitability  of high and low concentrate  systems.
The objectives  of the work are to evaluate  current  developments  in 
dairying  under commercial  farm conditions.  This is important  because  
many  ideas  which  appear  attractive  in the narrow  sense,  e.g. when  exam ­
ined on an individual  cow basis, subsequently  are found to be unprofit ­
able on a farm basis.
The importance  of grassland  utilisation
If the contribution  of grassland  to profitability  is to be estimated,  a 
suitable  measure  of grass  utilisation  has to be found. One measure  which  
is being used increasingly  is the utilised  metabolisable  energy  per hectare  
(UME).  The physical  results  obtained  from any costed  farm —the annual  
milk sales per cow, the annual  concentrate  input  per cow and the annual  
stocking  rate per hectare  can be used to calculate  the UME.
The UME  value  represents  the amount  of grass  produced  minus  all the 
losses occurring  in the field during  the grazing  season,  and minus the 
additional  losses  in the silo and during  feeding  in the winter. To achieve 
high UME  values  therefore  requires  good management  in growing,  graz­
ing, conserving  and feeding  the grass crop.
Table 1
Effect  of UME  (GJ/ha)  on carrying  capacity  and relative  margins  *
UMEStocking  rate 
(cows/ha)Relative  margin 
over purchased  feed/ha
60 1.54 100
80 2.05 133
100 2.56 166
120 3.08 200
51
In Britain  the average  UME  of costed  farms  is about 60 GJ/ha,  with 
a range from under  40 to over 90. The UME  of a farm relates  closely  to 
the margin  per ha as illustrated  in Table 1. At Crichton  Royal Farm  
with nitrogen  fertiliser  inputs  over 330 kg/ha,  UME values  of over 100 
have been achieved.
Grass  utilisation —grazing
Good grassland  management  during  the grazing  season involves  op­
timising  grass production,  matching  this with utilisation,  whilst at the 
same time achieving  satisfactory  dairy cow performance.
As herd sizes increase  in Britain,  there is a tendency  to separate  the 
grazing  area (particularly  in early and mid season)  from the conservation  
area, in order  to keep the grazing  close to the farm. Associated  with this 
has been a trend towards  set-stocking  from rotational  grazing. This 
system,  whilst  simple  in concept  (no intermediate  fencing  and less water ­
ing required),  is very sensitive  to changes  in stocking  rate.
It is essential  to stock highly  in early season  with any grazing  system  
to prevent  heading  and the subsequent  development  of rejected  areas. 
This is shown  in Table 2. In this trial, increasing  the stocking  rate in 
early season  from 4.7 to 6.4 cows/ha,  did not result in any reduced  cow 
performance  due to the increased  utilisation  of grass (UME).
Table 2
Stocking  rate in early season  for set-stocked  dairy cows (Baker  et al, 1980)
Early season 4.7Stocking  rate (cows/ha)
5.5 6.4
Grass height  (cm) 7.3 5.9 4.8
Milk yield (kg/day) 25.0 25.5 25.0
Whole  seaeon 4.0 4.3 4.6
Grass height  (cm) 8.8 6.5 6.2
Milk yield (kg/day) 20.8 21.9 21.8
UME (GJ/ha) 80 86 94
Measurements  of grazing  time at Crichton  Royal have shown that 
dairy cows are unlikely  to graze for longer  than 9 hours per day. The 
amount  of grass eaten daily is therefore  dependent  on the rate of intake.  
As cows become  more selective  in their grazing  habit as the season 
progresses,  due to the increased  treading,  fouling  and poor quality  grass, 
the rate of intake declines. As a result, daily grass intake and the 
potential  milk yield from grass  declines  as outlined  in Table 3.
52
Table 3
Potential  milk yield of grazed  grass
Milk yield  
(kg/day)DM intake 
required  (kg/day)Required  grazing  time (h/day) 
early  mid late season
5 II 6 7 9*
15 14 8 9 11
25 17 9 11 14
35 20 11 13 16
* cows generally  will not graze for longer  than 9h/day
One method  of maintaining  intakes  during  the grazing  season is to 
offer a buffer feed. This should be a feed with an energy  value high 
enough  to make a significant  contribution  to energy  intake,  but not high 
enough  to be eaten in preference  to grass. In the trial shown  in Table  4, 
hay was offered  as a buffer  feed for 45 minutes  in a feeding  passage  after  
the morning  milking.  When  grass was in short supply  and after adverse  
weather  conditions,  up to 3 kg of hay were eaten.  The average  milk yield  
response  to hay over the season was economically  worthwhile.  This 
approach  to buffer  feeding  at grass may be more beneficial  than feeding  
concentrates  as forages  are approximately  half the cost of concentrates  
per unit of metabolisable  energy.
Table 4
Hay supplementation  of set-stocked  dairy cows (Phillips  and Leaver,  1982)
Control Hay fed
Hay intake (kg/day) 0 2.0
Cone intake (kg/day) 3.3 3.3
Milk yield (kg/day) 19.5 20.7
Fat % 3.80 3.83
LW gain (kg/day) 0.3 0.3
UME (GJ/ha) 108 104
Grass  utilisation —silage
Comparisons  of different  silage qualities  tend to show that on an 
individual  cow basis, higher  quality  silages  are eaten in larger  amounts  
and this gives an economic  response  in milk yield. However,  a large
53
amount  of research  work shows  that earlier  and more frequent  cutting  
resuHs  in less silage produced  per hectare. Also the greater  intakes  of 
high qua'ity  si'age mean that greater  amounts  have to be conserved.  For 
the production  of high quality  silage  therefore,  more  hectares  are required  
per cow, or there has to be an increase  in grass  production  and utilisation  
(UME)  through  increased  fertiliser  usage. It is therefore  important  to 
measure  the advantages  of higher  quality  on a per hectare  rather  than 
on a per cow basis.
In Britain  most dairy cow silage is taken from first cuts. The advan ­
tages of not cutting  too early are illustrated  in the trial work in Table 5. 
Cutting  medium/late  perennial  ryegrasses  10 days  later resulted  in a 48% 
increase  in cow feeding  days i)er hectare,  with no detrimental  effect on 
cow performance.  The extra silage produced  by the late cutting  system  
was not recovered  in subsequent  cuts on the early cut system,  i.e. the 
UME  over the whole  season  was lower  on the early cut system.
Table 5
Early  and late (plus 10 days) cutting  of silages  (Moisey  and Leaver,  1980)
Early Late
Silage  yield (tonnes,  DM/ha) 4.2 6.0
D value 69 66
CP % 18 15
DM % 21 27
Silage DM intake (kg/day) 9.3 9.0
Cone DM intake (kg/day) 6.9 6.9
Milk yield (kg/day) 20.7 20.6
Cow feeding  days/ha 384 567
The use of concentrates
The response  in milk yield per cow to increasing  concentrate  levels is 
often shown  to be uneconomic.  Where  good quality  silage is offered  ad 
libitum  it normally  requires  at least 1 kg concentrates  to produce  an 
extra kg of milk. However,  the energy requirement  for 1 kg milk is 
provided  by only 0.45 kg of concentrates.  In judging  the economic  
benefits  of concentrates  therefore,  one must consider  what happens  to the 
0.55 kg concentrates  which is not converted  to milk. Some of these 
additional  concentrates  go on to the cow ’s back which  has an economic  
value,  and the remainder  substitutes  for silage.
54
The short-term  economic  response  to concentrates  is therefore  meas ­
ured by : value of additional  milk + value of additional  liveweight  + 
value of silage saved.
In the longer  term a better  measure  of the response  to concentrates  is 
the margin  per hectare,  because  the substitution  of concentrates  for silage  
allows  more cows  to be carried  on the farm. This  is illustrated  in Table  6.
Table 6
Relationship  of milk sales, purchased  feed and stocking  rate
Milk sales 
(litres/cow)Cone  per cow 
(tonnes)Stocking  rate 
(cows/ha)Relative  margins*  
(/cow)  (/ha)
5000 0.5 2.02 100 100
5500 1.0 2.17 99 106
6000 1.5 2.34 98 113
6500 2.0 2.54 96 121
♦ based on a UME  of 90 GJ/ha  and a milk ; concentrate  ratio of 0.9 : 1.0
At Crichton  Royal  a long-term  study of two herds is being  carried  out 
on high or low concentrate  systems.  Each herd has a similar  land area 
with the same grass varieties  and fertiliser  inputs,  and both herds are 
looked  after by the same man. The objective  of the study is to examine  
over about 5 years,  the profitability  of the two approaches  and to record  
the effects  on cow health and culling  rate. An outline  of the study is 
shown  in Table  7.
Table 7
Crichton  Royal  study of high and low concentrate  systems
High cone Low cone
herd herd
Land area (ha) 32 32
Average  cow numbers 90 72
Concentrate  input (tonnes/cow) -b 2 1
Conclusions
The system  of milk production  practised  in good grass growing  areas  
must have as a primary  objective  high levels of grass utilisation.  The
55
UME  estimate  for a farm gives a useful measure  of the grass utilisation,  
and it relates  closely  to the profitability  per hectare.
The amount  of concentrates  or other  purchased  foods  used is a separate  
question  and for a particular  farm should  be determined  by the resources  
available  to the farmer  (land, labour  and capital),  because  one of the 
most profitable  aspects  of any purchased  feed is that it allows  more cows  
to be kept on the farm. The full implication  of this type of intensification 
must therefore  be carefully  considered.
References
Baker,  A. M. C., Chalmers,  J. C. and Leaver,  J. D. (1980).  Crichton  Royal Farm 
Report  1980. pp. 27-28.
"^^ 1**12’ ^ ^ Leaver,  J. D. (1980).  Crichton  Royal Farm Report 1980. pp. 
Phillips,  C. J. C. and Leaver,  J. D. (1982).  Anim.  Prod. (Abstract).  In press.
56
The Role of Embryo  Transfer  in 
Cattle  Breeding
J. M. SREENAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
While the cow normally  produces  an average  of six calves per lifetime 
she has in fact an inherent  potential  to produce  many more than this. 
The reproductive  capacity  of the cow is limited  because  normally  only 
one egg is shed every cycle and if a pregnancy  follows  a successful  
breeding,  gestation  length  is 280-290  days.
Embryo  transfer  is the term for a series of procedures  that involve  
hormonally  stimulating  the cow to shed more than one egg at the end of 
each cycle and following  breeding  and fertilization  in the normal  way, 
these eggs are flushed  from the uterus as one week old embryos  and 
transferred  into recipient  cows that are at a similar  stage of oestrous  
cycle. This allows  an increase  in the reproductive  rate, firstly by increas ­
ing the ovulation  rate in the donor  cow and secondly  in some situations  
by inducing  a proportion  of the recipient  cows to carry twin calves.  
This procedure  of course  also allows  the transfer  of embryos  from one 
breed to another  or from pedigree  or elite cows to commercial  cows.  
Because  the procedures  used for flushing  and collecting  embryos  from 
the donor  cow ’s uterus  are of a non-surgical  nature,  repeated  treatments  
may be carried out on the same cows thus allowing  for substantial  
increases  in the number  of calves  produced  per cow lifetime.
Current  level of technology
1. Production  of embryos.  Hormones,  Pregnant  Mares  Serum  Gona ­
dotrophin  (PMSG)  or Follicle  Stimulating  Hormone  (FSH)  are adminis ­
tered at mid-cycle  to the donor  cow followed  48 hours later by prosta ­
glandin  (PG). In 95% of cases the cow will stand in heat about  48 hours  
after the PG and will shed an average  of 15 eggs. The main limitation  
to this part of the technology  is the variation  (0 - >20) in the number  
of eggs shed from individual  donors. Because  of this variation  it is not 
possible  to predict  the response  in the case of any individual  cow.
2. Collection  of embryos.  The procedure  is non-surgical  and consists 
of introducing  a flexible  catheter  into the uterus. Sterile physiological  
medium  is flushed  through  and the flushings  are examined  under the 
microscope  for the presence  of embryos.  Alxrut  60% of the shed eggs 
should  be recovered.
3. Storage  of embryos.  Storage  for periods  of up to 24 hours is 
normally  at 24-37°C.  For periods  exceeding  this the embryos  must be 
frozen and stored at — 196°C (liquid nitrogen).  At the present  time 
storage  in liquid nitrogen  is quite successful  but limited  to embryos  of 
specific  age and developmental  stage.
57
4. Trailer  of embryos.  Presently,  there are two main transfer  pro- 
ce ures, viz.. Flank or Cervical.  The flank transfer  is carried  out with 
minimal  surgery  under  local anaesthesia  with the recipient  standing  in a 
crush. It IS a veterinary  procedure  and reserved  for high priced  donor  
cows. Non-surgical  cervical  transfers  are similar  to a normal  A.I. and 
are used where  the embryo  cost is not high as in twinning.
Current  overall  success  rates
, On the basis of current  technology  the following  data (Table 1) rep­
resents  normal  expectation  in the case of fertile cyclic donor  cows that 
transferred ”°^*^ superovulation  and whose  embryos  have been flank
Table 1
Current  success  rates in cattle  embryo  transfer
Average  no. of eggs collected  per donor10
Average  no. of eggs fertilized  per collection7.5
Average  no. of viable embryos  per collection6.0
Average  no. of pregnancies  per collection4.0
No. of collections  per donor per year3
Range in pregnancies  per collection0-20
Role of embryo  transfer
tr> the  greatest  role that the embryo  transfer  procedure  has played
t^date  has been m a research  context. This is true for all the farm  
species.  Commercial  application  has so far been limited  but the develop- 
procedures  and the continued  refinement  of the procedures  will no doubt  see an expansion  in it’s use.
Tab°e  2 potential  uses for embryo  transfer  are outlined  in
Table 2
Current  and potential  uses for embryo  transfer  in cattle
1. Research  Programmes:  Reproduction;  Production;  Breeding;  Disease.
2. Acceleration  of Genetic  Improvement : Increasing  the reproductive  rate allows  
an increase  in selection  intensity.
3. Breed  Expansion  : Increasing  the number  of progeny  from valuable  animals.
4. Increasing  Litter  Size : Induction  of twinning  allows  an increase  in the 
biological  efficiency  of the cow.
5. Import/Export  of Cattle: It is likely that there will be much international  
cattle movement  m the future at the embryo  stage.
58
GastoGrass
NET
iscomeiling  
NatmalGas  
into
■....Ammonia  lUO  tomamifacture  
fertlsers  to
service  agriodtinai  ireiand  
to benefit  the 
Nation's  economy,
NET
NmOCIN  EIREANN  TEORANIA
59
Two of these uses are aimed at increasing  production  efficiency,  viz..
acceleration  of genetic  improvement  and increasing  litter size and these  
two are briefly  discussed.
Acceleration  of genetic  improvement
Since the introduction  of A.I., cattle breeders  and in particular  dairy  
cattle breeders,  have realised  that the use of progeny  tested bulls will 
increase  their production  much faster than by using non-tested  bulls.  
Because  a bull in A.I. can breed large numbers  of cows it means  that 
only a small number  of bulls are required  thus allowing  a high selection 
intensity.
On the fema'e  side, little selection  is possible  because,
a) each cow produces  one calf per year,
b) half of all calves  will be male, and
c) about  20% of the herd will need to be replaced  in each year.
In the dairy herd where the emphasis  for the most part is on milk 
yield, increasing  the reproductive  rate of the top 10% (based on yield) 
of the herd and breeding  all replacements  from these cows would give 
the maximum  selection  intensity  possib'e  through  the use of embryo  
transfer.  For a herd with an average  yield of 1,000 gals, the top 10% 
wou ’d yield an average  of about 1,400 gals. These  cows with an average  
yield of 400 gals above the herd average  would then be used as donor  
cows and embryos  would be transferred  from them to the rest of the 
herd. The expected  increase  in milk yield in the resulting  female  progeny  
can be calculated  at 400 x 0.5 x 0.25 = 50 gals because  such progeny 
will have received  only half its genes (0.5) from the selected  cow and 
because  the heritability  of milk yield is about  25% (0.25). This expected  
increase  of 50 gals is measured  against  a zero rate of selection  intensity. 
In the normal  course  of events,  however,  about two-thirds  of the cows  
will be selected.  If these top two-thirds  produce  on average  100 gals 
more than the herd average  the expected  increase  in yield in their female 
progeny  can be calculated  at 100 x 0.5 x 0.25 = 12.5 gals. The net 
expected  increase,  therefore,  from using  embryo  transfer  on the top 10% 
of cows to produce  all the replacements  is 50-12.5  = 37.5 gals. In this 
ca'culation,  it is assumed  that the selection  of the top 10% of cows is 
based on available  milk records  adjusted  for calving  date, cow age, 
lactation  number  and other production  information.  In addition,  it must  
be remembered  that nearly  half of all the variation  in milk yield is due 
to unknown  factors  as shown  in Table 3.
While  the foregoing  considerations  are based on cow selection,  it must  
be remembered  that most of the genetic improvements  either on a 
national  or individual  basis arises  from the use of proven  sires. The top 
proven  dairy bulls in Ireland  have a potential  to increase  milk yields by 
about 100 gals per lactation.
Increasing  litter size—Twinning
Output  and profitability  in a beef cow enterprise  is dependent  solely  
on the weight  of calf weaned  or produced  per cow. Twin-calving  cows
60
Table 3
Variation  in milk yield
Due to : % of variation  in milk yield
Calving  date 10
Cow age 18
Cow breed 6
Sire 2
Herd 19
Other factors 45
would be biologically  more efficient  than single calving  cows and pro­
vided the management  and other inputs  were not much greater  than that 
required  for single calving cows, they would be economically  more  
efficient.
The potential  effect of twin-calving  on calf output  per cow is shown  in 
Table 4.
Table 4
The potential  effect  of twinning  on calf production  (100 cow herd, with 20%  
heifer  replacements)
Current  weaning  rate
50% twinning  -t- 12% overall  calf loss
50% twinning  + 6% single calf loss 
12% twin calf loss0.88 calves/cow  calving
1.23 calves/cow  calving 
(+.35)
1.28 calves/cow  calving  
(+.40)
The currently  achievable  twinning  rate of 50% combined  with current  
calf loss of about 12% would  still yield an extra 35% in calf output.  Any 
reduction  in calf mortality  would of course increase  this. From recent  
farm trials carried  out from Belclare,  the effect of embryo  transfer  on 
calf production  is shown in Table 5. The result was an increase  in 
weaning  rate of 35%. Data from these trials relating  to single and twin 
births  are shown  in Table 6.
61
Table 5
Embryo  transfer  effect on calf crops
A.I. only A.I. + embryo  transfer
Nofl of cows 104 125
Twin calving  rate 0% 45%
No. of calves/cow  calving 1.0 1.45
Calves weaned/cow  calving 0.9 1.25
Table 6
Single  and twin-calf  production  data
Single  births Twin  births
Mean birth wt. (kg) 45 + 3.2 32 + 4.2
Calf wt/cow  (kg) 45 64
Calf mortality 4% 18%
After birth retention 2% 6%
Gestation  (days) 288+1.6 277+0.9
Calves  weaned/cow  calving 0.9 1.63
While  the twin calf mortality  in this first farm trial was high, most of 
this mortality  was due to an absence  of supervision  at calving  time. Even  
with this high mortality,  output  was nevertheless  significantly  increased.  
It has been calculated  that induced  twinning  could increase  the revenue 
in a dairy  herd by about  12% and in a beef suckler  herd by 60%.
Embryo  transfer  has already  been of enormous  economic  benefit in 
research  pro^animes,  though  this is difficult  to quantify.  In terms of 
breed  expansion  it has already  been applied  successfully  in a commercial  
context.  It seems  very likely  that in the future  the economies  to be made  
from international  transportation  of cattle as embryos  will dictate a 
widespread  use of the technique  in this context.
62
Dairy  Bull Selection  for A.I.
J. F. CUNNINGHAM
Claltee  Cattle  Breeding  Station,  Mitchelstown,  Co-op.,  Co. Cork.
The basis of cattle breeding  programmes  throughout  the world is the 
identification  of sup)erior  individuals  and their widespread  use within  the 
cattle population.  This is a two stage operation  in which the superior  
individuals  are first identified  and are then used as seed stock for future  
generations.  Diagram  1 outlines  the steps  which  are common  to breeding  
programmes  world wide. The first decision  which must be made is to 
identify  which  traits are considered  of most importance.  The more traits  
one attempts  to improve  simultaneously  the slower  the rate of progress  
will be with any individual  one. There  may also be negative  correlations  
between  a number  of different  objectives  which  make simultaneous  im­
provement  in both extremely  difficult.
Selected  bull sires\Selected  bull dams/
Male calves (40) 
Performance  test (20)
Semen evaluation  (20)
Calving  survey  ^
Progeny  test
I
Selected  sires
Diagram  1
Breeding  objectives
Dairy  cattle  breeding  in Ireland  for the last number  of years  has mainly  
aimed at increasing  the total fat and protein  production  of daughters  of
63
the bulls selected.  This is an important  point  to bear in mind for instance,  
in relation  to the recent  report  from An Foras  Taluntais  on the “Chemical  
Composition  of Milk in Ireland ”. This report rightly points out that 
selection  in the Irish breeding  programme  has been for total yield of fat 
rather  than fat percentage  but I think it has not been emphasised  enough  
that this was a deliberate  policy  to breed,  not for increased  percentage  
of fat, but for total yield. As Table 1 shows,  selection  of bulls on the 
basis  of fat and protein  yield would  only be expected  to maintain  present  
percentage  levels  of these constituents  in the milk and this is in fact what
Table 1
Response  to selection  for a single  trait
Trait Milk yield  
(kg)Fat yield  
(kg)Protein  yield 
(kg)Fat
%Protein
%
Milk yield 159 5.0 4.1 -.04 -.02
Fat yield 132 6.4 4.5 -I-.02 4-.01
Protein  yield 146 5.9 5.0 -f.Ol 0
Fat percentage 59 0.0 0.5 -I-.12 4-.05
Protein  percentage -4.5 0.9 0.5 -I-.07 4-.08
Within  the group  of bulls selected,  the improvement  in
fat and protein  yield may come from improvement  in milk yield or in 
composition.  There are many other important  factors  from the point of 
view of the commercial  farmer  and these relate to such things  as udder  
quality,  temperament  and aspects  of conformation  which  have economical  
importance.  Table  2 shows  the type of information  which  is made avail-
Table 2
Information  normally  given in relation  to Friesian  Sires
1. Name and code letters of bull.
2. Herd  Book number.
3. Relative  Breeding  Index (R.B.I.).  This is the estimated  Breeding  Value of the 
bull for yield of fat and protein  as a percentage  of a fixed base. This base 
IS the average  merit of Friesian  bulls born in the mid-sixties  with daughters 
in the herds used for Progeny  Testing  in the pre-1977  period. For example,  a 
bull with an R.B.I. of 125 is estimated  to be 25% better for fat and protein 
production  than this base population.
Visual Assessment  of Daughters.  This is calculated  in the same way as the 
R.B.I. and indicates  the percentage  by which the bull ’s daughters  are superior  
for a particular  trait such as height, udder conformation,  etc., to the heifers  
in the base population.
Beef Merit. Bulls are ranked on both the growth  rate and conformation  of 
their progeny.
6. Calving  Difficulty.4.
5.
64
able to herdowners  in relation  to individual  bulls and they can make a 
choice between  different  bulls of the same merit for fat and protein  
production  but with different  levels  of merit for other  traits.
Identification  of superior  dams
In the case of the selection  of sires for future generations,  however,  
most emphasis  is placed on level of production,  with all other factors  
being given a secondary  importance.  Our first problem  arises in the 
accurate  identification  of superior  dams  for the production  of young  bulls.  
In Ireland  a good identification  programme  of potential  bull/dams  has 
been virtually  impossible  to date for a number  of reasons.
1. The small population  of females  in the country  with a known  pedigree.
2. The extremely  low level of milk recording  in herds  with these females.
3. The absence  of a milk recording  programme  which will permit  the 
objective  identification  of cows  with superior  levels  of production.
4. The tendency  for pedigree  breeders  to concentrate  on traits other  than 
production  in their breeding  programmes.
It has been possible  through  the co-operation  of the British Milk 
Marketing  Board for a certain number  of potential  bull/dams  to be 
identified  in the U.K. and a limited  contract  mating  programme  has been 
operated  by a number  of the A.I. societies  using this facility.  To a very 
large extent,  however,  bull purchases  by Irish A.I. centres  have up to now 
been based on the information  available  on the sires and dams as they 
appear  in sales catalogues  or through  individual  contact  with breeders  
rather  than on a planned  basis by the identification  and contract  mating  
of superior  females. In practise,  bulls entering  the A.I. programme,  
particularly  over the last few years are almost  invariably  from the very 
best sires available  but the merit  of the dams  is less accurately  quantified.  
The assessment  of an individual  breeder  of the relative  merits  of his cows  
is not always  an accurate  guide to the identification  of superior  females. 
An objective  measure  of the animals ’ potential  is essential.  This is a 
weakness  in the present  programme  of which all the A.I. centres  are 
conscious  and is one which  we hope will be gradually  overcome.  In this 
context  it is interesting  to note that the bull which has come out in the 
test of young bulls for 1981 with the highest  rating is a bull called  
“Ty-Deri  Bird Griff ” which was purchased  in exactly  this way by the 
identification  of his dam through  the British Milk Marketing  Board  
records  and his subsequent  purchase  directly  off farm.
Performance  tests
The next point in the process  of dairy bull selection  is the purchase  of 
the bull calves  resulting  from the contract  matings  of top sires and top 
dams. A problem  arises  with regard  to the number  of these calves  which 
are available  because  of the difficulty  already  mentioned  in identifying  
suitable  dams. In spite of this it has been the practise  for the last few 
years in the Munster  Group  of A.I. centres  to purchase  approximately  20 
calves  each year for performance  test at our unit in Bandon.  The present
65
intention  is that a performance  centre  for 50-60  bulls is to be constructed  
this year for the use of the Munster  centres  and a similar  unit will be 
built for the use of the centres  in the northern  half of the country.
Because  of the difficulties  in procuring  adequate  numbers  of calves 
from this contract  mating  source,  other bulls have been purchased  at a 
later date to enter the third phase of the selection  programme,  namely,  
progeny  testing.
Progeny  tests
The total number  of bulls which  enter the progeny  testing  programme  
is another  matter  which has occasioned  considerable  discussion  over the 
last few years. Ideally  the larger  the number  that can be accommodated  
for progeny  testing the better, since it will allow a greater  selection 
differential  in choosing  the final sires to enter  the proven  stud. In practise,  
however,  there are a number  of factors  which  would  restrict  the number  
of bulls which  can be accommodated.  Firstly,  there is the fact that from 
a purely  economic  point of view the law of diminishing  returns  puts an 
upper  limit on the number  of bulls which should  be tested. The number  
of Friesian  bulls entering  the test programme  each year is approximately  
40. While  there are difficulties  of opinion  regarding  the optimum  number  
to put under test there is general  agreement  that this number  should  be 
doubled,  in order  to make the Irish programme  comparable  with that in 
other major  dairying  countries  and to allow for a selection  ratio of 1 : 8 
to 1 : 10. The reasons  why this has not happened  are largely  as follows :
1. As already  mentioned  the difficulty  in identifying  suitable  bull/dams  
limits  to some extent  the number  of young  bulls which  become  avail ­
able for progeny  testing. This, however,  is not a major  restriction  and 
could be overcome  if it were not for other constraints  in the system.
2. There is reluctance  on the part of herdowners,  particularly  herdown ­
ers who are interested  in breeding  and milk recording,  to use the 
young bulls under test. This is in spite of incentive  programmes  of 
various  types operated  by the different  centres. In this context  it is 
important  to note that most European  countries  have not only incen ­
tives for the use of young  bulls but severe penalties  for people  who 
do not use young  bulls and participate  fully in the progeny  testing  
programmes.  This has not been adequately  emphasised  and it is 
essential  that, if progeny  testing  is to be expanded,  farmers  must be 
prepared  to play a more active role than in the past in assisting  with 
the testing  of young  bulls.
3. The level of milk recording  in this country  is still at an abysmal  
level. Undoubtedly  there are very strong  arguments  that other man­
agement  practices  can be much more important  in raising  the level of 
productivity  on most farms,  but the value of milk recording  both to 
the individual  herdowner  and to the national  breeding  programme  
has not been adequately  emphasised.  It is simply  not possible  to test 
the optimum  number  of young bulls at the present  level of milk 
recording  in this country.
66
Use of selected  sires
The next stage is the selection  of a certain  number  of bulls from those  
under  test to be used more widely  in the proven  stud. Here again there  
has been considerable  discussion  on the selection  ratio which should  
apply.  The basic criticism  of the Irish programme  at this level is that the 
number  of bulls tested  per year is too low, and consequently  the selection 
ratio is not sufficiently  intense  (Table  3). On the other  hand,  a particularly  
strong  point in the Irish A.I. service  is the relatively  high usage  of proven  
bulls in the stud. This is running  at an average  of 50,000  inseminations  
per bull over the last few years but is gradually  increasing  and is con­
siderably  higher  for the top sires. Prof. E. P. Cunningham,  Agricultural  
Institute,  Dublin,  has shown  that irres^ctive  of the testing  programmes  
the two most important  factors  determining  the rate of genetic  improve ­
ment are the selection  ratio and the intensity  of usage  of the selected  sires.
Table 3
Comparative  data on dairy bull selection
Ireland U.K. Denmark Holland N. Zealand
Total dairy 
cows (’000) 1600 3100 1000 2400 2000
Percentage 
milk recorded 4% 40% 70% 70% 35%
Percentage 
bred to A.I. 60% 65% 90% 80% 50%
No. of bulls  
tested/year 40 150 280 440 160
Selection  ratio 1:4 1:7 1:7 1:7 1:7
Having  examined  the programme  and pointed  out the deficiencies  in it, 
it is important  to note that the genetic  potential  of black  and white cattle  
in this country  is not a limiting  factor  at present  in level of production.  
The lack of individual  milk recording  within  individual  herds  does mean  
that inferior  cows are not being identified  and are not being removed  or 
avoided  in the breeding  of replacement  heifers. The population  as a 
whole,  however,  is genetically  very similar  to the British  population.
There  have been a number  of comparative  trials  devoted  to the relative  
genetic  merit  of different  strains  of Friesian  cattle. The most comprehen ­
sive trial of this type is presently  in progress  in Poland.  The experiment  
began in 1974 and will continue  until 1984. Semen  from Friesian  strains  
in ten different  countries  was imported  to Poland  and used on Polish
67
Friesian  cows Thirty  young  A.I. bulls of each strain were used Results
oil atom  6 000 milked  through  first lactation,  and
on about  6.000 first generation  bulls reared  to slaughter  are available.
Dairy  results
"'h “mpleting  first lactalions
was ijbl kg at 4.06 /G fat, producing  153 kg of fat. The relative  oer- formance  of the different  strains  is shown in Table 4. The results  stow
Im Zealand  strains  are clearly  superior
to all others  in terms  of butter  fat, with the American  and Israeli  strains
yield a„"d “ “"■bination  ot
Table 4
Friesian  heifer  comparisons
Country
StrainMilk Yield
(relative)Fat Yield  
(relative)Fat % 
(relative)
U.S.A. 109 105 98
Poland89 90 101
Canada 104 103 99
Denmark 96 97 101
Britain100100 100
Sweden101101 100
Germany 96 96 100
Holland96 97 101
Israel106 105 99
New Zealand 104 106 102
Mean (Actual) 3764 kg 153 kg 4.06%
superior  sires from these outside  populations  can thus be expected  to produce  an additional  improvement  wer and above 
the progress  being made through  the normal  breed improvement  om/  
ramme. There will also be some extra benefit  associaTed  whh heteS
by relSd"S ’?;.u^e  ""
I^Jbufis'L^SI'fhrophlrth
gh, bearing  m mind the deficiencies  pointed  out in the breeding  pro-
68
gramme.  Table  5, which  is taken  from The Agricultural  Institute ’s Rej^rt  
on the “Chemical  Composition  of Milk”, shows the progress  that has 
been made over the last few years. The information  from the progeny  
testing  programme  on bulls imported  from the U.K., together  with the 
information  on comparative  trials carried  out with New Zealand  and 
Canadian  semen  would also indicate  that the genetic  merit of the bulls  
available  in this country  is as good as those available  in the U.K.
Table 5
Daughter  production  of bulls approved  for use in A.I.
Milk (kg) Fat (kg) Protein  (kg) Fat % Protein  %
1975 2974 110 96.1 3.7 3.23
1976 2978 112.6 98.9 3.78 3.32
1977 3048 116.1 100 3.81 3.28
1978 3292 123.8 107.3 3.76 3.26
1979 3145 119.2 103.2 3.77 3.28
1980 3248 122.1 109.1 3.76 3.36
Any programme  can be improved  and there is certainly  room for 
improvement  in the Irish programme.  Progress  has been made,  particu ­
larly in the last ten years. But in order to continue  this progress  in the 
future,  those deficiencies  in the programme  which have been identified 
should  be eliminated  as soon as possible.
It is important  to record  that the biggest  single step which could be 
made at present  in improving  the genetic  merit of Irish cattle would  be 
to increase  the usage  of A.I. from its present  level to the level applying  in 
the Netherlands  or Scandinavian  countries.
69
Establishing  Net Income  From  
Farming  Systems
R. A. COLLINS
Farm Business  Advisers  Ltd., Cork Road,  Fermoy.  Co. Cork.
Whaf  is net income  ?
The simplest  definition  of net income  is the sum available  to provide  for 
taxation,  living expenses,  capital  repayments,  investments,  developments  
in that order. It is the single  most important  efficiency  factor  on the farm  
as It gives the complete  picture. Other factors  such as “gross margin ”, 
“margin  over feed and fertilisers ” are incomplete  and can give a false 
impression  of overall  efficiency.  Personally  I have abandoned  assessment 
and preparation  of budgets  using the gross margin  or any other incom ­
plete factor  in favour  of net margin  calculations.
To explain  this point. Table 1 shows  the 1981 gross margin  and net 
margin  figures  for 2 similar  farming  situations  based on a 150 acre dairy
Table 1
Farm 150 acres —125 cows and followers
(A)
Owning  machinery 
Hiring  labour(B)
Hiring  contractors  
Hiring  labour
Gross  Output
Milk 59829 59829Calves6635 6635Cull cows/bull 9059 9059
75523 75523Variable  Costs
V.C. other than Contractors  charges 33777 33777Contractors — 5250
33777 39027
Gross Margin41746 36496
Fixed Costs
F.C. other than Labour  and Machinery 13313 13313Hired Labour7475 6540Machinery  and vehicle  costs (incl. depr.) 10036 5333
30824 25186
Net Income10922 11310
GROSS  MARGIN/ACRE 278 243
NET INCOME/ACRE 73 75
70
farm, 125 cows and 25 replacement  units. In one case (A) the farmer  
owned  the machinery  to do the entire operation.  In the second  case (B) 
the farming  situation  was exactly  similar  except  that the farmer  hired  
machinery  to make silage and spread  slurry. While  the gross  margin  per 
acre in Case (A) was £35 greater  than in Case (B) the net margin  per 
acre in case (B) was £2 per acre greater  than Case (A) i.e. a difference 
equivalent  to 50% of the net profit.
Relationship  between  output  and net profit
There  is not a direct  relationship  between  gross output  and net income. 
There are many dairy farms  where  fewer cows would  give a greater  net 
income.  This is not to be interpreted  as a case for reducing  output.  This 
situation  can also be true for other  farm enterprises.  Many  tillage  farmers  
that make good money  on a relatively  small area can be very disappoin ­
ted with profits  when they expand  into bigger  areas.
It is not within  the scope of this paper to explain  how this happens.  
However,  what is important  to understand  is that if farm profit is not 
satisfactory  it does not follow  automatically  that more production  units  
such as extra cows or acres of tillage  is the solution.
Enterprise  net incomes  in 1981
The Consultants  Association  carried  out a detailed  review  of the net 
incomes  in 1981 from efficiently  managed  medium  and large scale farms. 
To eliminate  the effect  of borrowing  for fixed investments  it was assumed 
that the farmer  had no borrowings  on land or buildings.  Two separate  
situations  were then examined  for each enterprise  (a) where  livestock  were 
financed  by borrowing,  (b) where  livestock  were not financed  by borrow ­
ing. In each of these situations  all interest  on working  capital  was bor­
rowed as this was believed  to be the most efficient  way to do business  in 
the total agricultural  context.  The results  of this review  are presented  in 
Table 2. The features  worth reflecting  on are as follows :
1. The low net income from all enterprises  while the gross margins  
appear  satisfactory.
2. In livestock  systems  the cost of financing  the stock is large and except  
in cases where extremely  high levels of performance  can be assured 
(such as 1000 gallons  per cow) it is difficult  to justify borrowing  
money  at present  interest  rates and repayment  periods  for the purpose  
of expanding  livestock  numbers.
3. When  comparing  dairying  or breeding  livestock  systems  with tillage 
systems  it is not always  advisable  to directly  compare  tbe systems 
after charging  the cost of financing  the breeding  livestock.  In an 
inflationary  situation  the breeding  stock will increase  in value by 
approximately  the level of interest  on borrowed  capital. While this 
“Profit ” will never be reflected  as cash in the bank until the day one 
goes out of business,  it is nevertheless  a real profit which does not 
apply in the non-livestock  systems.
71
Table 2
Review  of net incomes  in 1981
Enterprise Gross
marginNet
marginNet margin 
Cost of less cost of 
financing  financing  
livestock  livestockKey
CO-efficients
Creamery  milk £/acre £/acre £/acre £/acre 850 gal/cow
245 86 63 23 1 L.U./acre
14 cwt. meals/cow  
Labour :
Farmer  plus hired
Liquid  milk 274 100 69 31 900 gal/cow
1 L.U./acre
19 cwt. meals/cow  
Labour :
Farmer  plus hired
Pig breeding 210/sow 79/sow 21/sow 58/sow 18.5 bonhams  sold/sow 
1.1 tons feed/sow 
Labour  : All hired
Sugar  (1) excl. tops 144 87 87 Yield 17 tons
Beet (2) incl. tops 194 137 137 washed  beet/acre
Calf to 2 year 
old beef194 56 56 0 Sales : 1 animal  at
11.25 cwt.
Stocking  rate :
1 L.U./acre
Calf price : £124
Beef price : £52.5/cwt.
Cereals 136 75 75 Average  : 2.7 tons/acre  
yield (all crops)
4. In calf to beef systems  the interest  on stock and working  capital  
amounts  to £120 per acre. This totally  erodes  what otherwise  is a 
reasonable  net income. This system is therefore  only suitable  for 
situations  where finance does not have to be borrowed  or where 
there is income  from another  source  to provide  living expenses  and 
working  capital.
72
ORBENIN  IN
MASTITIS  OUT!
--T— ' ' —
O R B E N I N
O r b e n i n  Q . R . a n d L A . c o n t a i n  2 0 0 m g c l o x a c i l l i n  p e r s y r i n g e .  
Orbenin  Dry Cow contains  500 mg cloxacillin  per syringe.  
Orbenin  Is a Beecham  Group trademark.
73
Table 3
Net income  from creamery  milk production
Sales
99450  gallons  milk @ 60.16p/gallon  
87 calves @ £76.26  
25 cull cows @ £334.34  
1 bull
Expenses  
Variable  ;
Livestock —Breeding  bull 
Fertilisers 
Concentrate  feed 
Vet, Medicine  and A.I.
Machinery  hire 
Transport
Silage additive  and Polythene 
Bedding
Deductions  : Bord Bainne
Co-Responsibility
Institute
Disease  eradication  
Dairy inspection 
IFA/ICMSA  levy 
Bulk tank hire 
Cartage
Milk recording  service
Fixed ;
Lime
Pasture  renewal  
Wages  and Social Welfare 
Machinery  running  costs  
Rent and Rates
Car, Telephone  and E.S.B. (Share)  
Farm Insurance
General  maintenance  and repairs 
Mortality  (replacement)
Interest  on Working  Capital 
Machinery  and car depreciation  
Accounting  services  
Miscellaneous
NET FARM  INCOME
NET FARM  INCOME  PER ACRE(£)
59,829
6,635
8,359
700
1,000
8,554
16,152
2,597
5,250
100
1,394
300
3,680
465
1,350
6,540
2,400
1,650
2,565
300
1,050
720
3,468
2,933
450
1,295(£)
75,523
39,027
25,186
11,310
75
74
Preparation  of net income  budgets
To demonstrate  the detail required  in the preparation  of a net income 
budget I propose  to use the detoils  in the example  already  used.
In Table 3 a sales and expenses  statement  for 1981 is presented.  The 
herd average  was 850 gallons  per cow and meal feeding  was 14 cwt/cow.  
Taking  the conditions  in 1981 into account  this was good performance.  
With Table 3 I will try to explain  why farmers  seldom  make as much 
money  as they are supposed  to. I will deal briefly  with the items that 
are generally  incorrectly  treated in the preparation  of projections  and 
budgets.
1. Milk sales —To calculate  the true figure  the milk yield per cow should 
be multiplied  by the average  number  of cows in the herd rather  than 
the herd size. In practice  the average  number  of cows in a herd is 
seldom  greater  than 93% of the herd size. This is because  of in-calf  
heifers  entering  the herd in March/April  and also cull cows being 
sold off towards  the year end.
2. Milk price —This  must be related  to actual  prices  being obtained,  not 
the Creamery  quoted  price for Grade  I milk at 3.60% B.F. In prac­
tice farmers  seldom  average  the standard  butter  fat test and seldom  
avoid quality penalties  of some description.  In the Consultants  
Assocation  study the average  gross price was 60.16p  per gallon. The 
average  basic price of milk at the Creameries  concerned  was 61.54,  
i.e. a difference  of 1.38p
3. Calf prices —The number  of calves  that survive  birth and at least one 
month of life is the relevant  number.  Allowance  must be made for 
abortions,  still births and calves  that die within  one month. In the 
Consultants  study only 90% of cows and heifers  ended up with live 
calves.  Furthermore  the value  of all calves  must be taken  into account,  
ranging  from the Aberdeen  Angus  heifer  out of an incalf  heifer  to the 
good bull calves  from the biggest  cows.
4. Cull cow prices —The  value of any in-calf  heifer that has a difficult 
calving  and is sent to the factory  as a casualty  must be taken into 
account.  So also must the 10 year old cow with a poor kill-out  per­
centage. It is not realistic  to base prices always  on good quality  
animals.
5. Silage additive  and polythene —These are seldom reckoned  in pro­
jections  and they amount  to almost  £10 per acre.
6. Deductions —The list of levies etc. is large. Individually,  they may 
appear  insignificant  but collectively  they amount  to almost  £25 per 
acre.
7. Pasture  Renewal —It is generally  believed  that reseeding  is unneces ­
sary. However,  in practice  most intensive  dairy farmers  reseed their 
grasslands  at some stage and this is an expensive  exercise  where 
tillage  equipment  is now owned.
8. Wages  and Social Welfare —The  employers ’ share of Social Welfare 
contributions  is often omitted.  This amounts  to 10.25%  of the gross 
wage.
9. Machinery,  equipment  and car depreciation  — Often omitted  and
75
almost  invariably  underestimated.  It is advisable  to make a replace ­
ment provision  each year when budgeting.
10. Car, Telephone  and E.S.B.  — Never omitted  but invariably  under ­
estimated.  The E.S.B. cost of milking  a cow and refrigerating  the 
milk is approximately  £8 per cow per annum.
11. Mortality  (replacement) —In a herd of 125 cows with 25 replacement  
units a farmer  would  be fortunate  to lose only 1 cow and 1 weanling  
in a year. At to-day ’s prices  this amounts to almost  £6 per acre.
12- Interest  on working  capital —This is probably  the most controversial  
item of all. It can only be accurately  established  by preparing  a 
detailed  cast flow statement.  The reasons  why it is underestimated  
are :
(a) Inputs  are often not purchased  at their most competitive  price, e.g. 
concentrates  and fertilisers  are generally  purchased  as required  with­
out questioning  the cost. The correct  procedure  is to negotiate  the 
working  capital  requirement  with the Bank or A.C.C.  and armed  with 
cheque book negotiate  at the start of the season for the major  
inputs. In this way the overall  cost will be minimised.
(b) Milk sales are not reflected  as money  in the bank for a considerable  
time after the milk is produced.  At the extreme,  the value of milk 
sold on January  1st will not be credited  to the bank account  until 
March 1st.
(c) Living  expenses  must be included  in the cash flow unless  the farmer  
has another  souree  of income  from which  he can live. Similarly  other  
outgoings  such as loan repayments  and investments  must be included  
in the cash flow as they occur.
(d) Interest  is charged  to overdrafts  in March and September.  Unless  
the account  comes  into credit  after the March  charge  there will be an 
element  of compound  interest.
A budget  that miscalculates  totally  on all the above  items  would  err by
about  £17,000  in the case of the farm referred  to. In other  words  it would
be wrong  to the tune of 150%.
A Source  and Application  of Funds  statement  for this dairy farm is
presented  in Table 4. Using the Net Income  statement  and this Source
Table 4
Source  and application  of funds
Source(£) (£)Net Income  before  depreciation 14,243
Loan 5,000
19,243
Application
Family  Living Expenses 9,600
Repayments —(Capital  only) 1,528
Machinery/Vehicle  replacement 7,933
Income  Tax 1,000
Interest  accrued/not  charged (270)
Deficit  forward (548)
19,243
76
and Application  of Funds  a monthly  cash flow statement  is drawn  up, to 
show the working  capital  requirement  and the cost for the year.
In Table 5 the Net Income  from an area of 150 acres of sugar beet 
yielding  17 tons washed  beet per acre is presented.  As in the case of 
dairying  the list of costs is much more comprehensive  than one normally  
sees in a standard  type budget. If the beet tops are fully utilised  they 
could add £50 per acre to the profit.
Table 5
Net income  from 150 acres of sugar beet in 1981
Sales (£) (£)
17 tonnes  (15.6%  sugar)  @ £28.60  per tonne net 486.20 72,930
Expenses
Scutch  control 5.00 750
Ploughing 12.00 1,800
Lime 3.70 555
Fertiliser 84.60 12,690
Fertiliser  spreading 6.00 900
Cultivation 20.00 3,000
Seed 10.00 1,500
Drilling  and Sowing 15.00 2,250
Sprays 61.00 9,150
Spraying 7.00 1,050
Steerage  Hoeing  and Band Spraying 10.00 1,500
Insecticide 7.00 1,050
Transport 33.80 5,070
Machinery  running  costs 2.00 300
Interest  on Working  Capital 20.00 3,000
Farm Insurance 0.50 75
Harvesting 58.00 8,700
Car, Telephone  and E.S.B. (share)  excl. depr. 5.00 750
Rent and Rates 11.00 1,650
Miscellaneous  (inch general  maintenance  and repairs) 5.00 750
Accounting  Services 2.00 300
Depreciation  of machinery  and motor vehicles 13.93 2,090
Casual  labour 6.67 1,000
NET CASH INCOME59,880
13,050
NET CASH INCOME  PER ACRE 87
77
Importance  of efficiency
Efficiency  is determined  by output  and cost of producing  that output.  
Referring  back to Table 2 it is obvious  that performance  levels which 
would  be considered  satisfactory  by most standards  are not good enough  
to yield satisfactory  incomes.  While not suggesting  that farmers  are not 
within their rights to demand  more for their produce  there is still need 
for improved  efficiency  at farm level. It is unlikely  that pressure  will 
bring  about  price rises that will give an adequate  income  at milk yields  of 
750 gallons  per cow or cattle  weights  of 8 cwt at 2 years  of age.
Summary
Net income  is the only really reliable  figure for assessing  performance  
and for budgeting.  Income  projections  and budgets  are generally  hap­
hazardly  prepared  and overstate  output,  while understating  expenses.  This 
results  in overborrowing  and unwise  investments.  It is no longer  always  
correct  to say that what farmers  need is one more cow, one more sow 
and one more acre under the plough. Before  an extra cow is added to 
a herd the farmer  must be sure that the net income  earned  by every cow 
already  in the herd is satisfactory.
78
Financial  Trends  in British  Dairying
S. CHURMS
Regional  Consultant.  Farm Management  Services.  Milk Marketing  
Board  of England  and Wales.
The word ‘inflation ’ will occur  repeatedly  during  the course  of this paper.  
It is inevitabe  that it will continue  to influence  agriculture  both sides of 
the Irish Channel  and we ignore  it at our peril.
This paper  is conveniently  divided  into three parts :
(a) Financial  Trends  in recent  years
(b) Current  Trends
(c) Services  which Farm Management  Services  offer to dairy farmers  to 
help them with financial  problems.
Most of the information  for farm profits  comes  from the MMB  Infor ­
mation  Unit. I would stress that these figures  are not completely  rep­
resentative  of the dairy industry  for various  reasons.  However,  the trends  
undoubtedly  are similar  and no assumptions  have been made, whereas  
many ‘official ’ statistics  are years  old and contain  blatant  assumptions.
Financial  trends  in recent  years
Profit is only one aspect  of the story. From profits  we must pay for : 
Private  drawings  
Income  tax
Increase  valuation  (stock  and stores)
Repayment  of loans
Before  examining  the variation  in profits,  let us first consider  what hap­
pened when the farmer  paid for all his commitments.
In relation  to profit over the period 1979-1981  there were very high 
levels of capital  expenditure.  In addition,  personal  drawings  kept pace 
with inflation.  Farmers  already  had loans  to repay,  so with high capital  
expenditure,  increased  private  expenditure  and loan repayments  to meet,  
additional  increase  in borrowing  was inevitable.  In 1980 because  there  
was very little inflation  in stock values  and none in land there was a 
decline  in the net worth of some dairy farmers.  In 1981 there was a 
recovery  from that position  albeit modest. There has been an increase 
in farmers ’ net worth  but borrowing  is still increasing,  at a slower  rate.
For 1982 estimates  would  suggest  profit levels  at or below 1981 levels.  
There are definite  signs now however  that investment  has dropped,  and 
while borrowing  will increase  yet again it has slowed  down. Substantial  
increases  in livestock  values  in recent  months  should  mean an increase  in 
net worth for 1982.
Why have profits  declined  ?
Increases  in milk price over 4 years have been between  5 and 10 per 
cent. All the signs are that 5-7 per cent is as much as can be expected  
in the foreseeable  future. Calf prices have varied widely  but recently
79
there has been a good recovery.  Cow prices have increased  steadily 
except  in 1980/81.
About  5in tonnes  concentrates are  used in England  and Wales  per year. 
Increases,  except  for 1979/80,  have been very low. Had these kept up 
with inflation  in other materials  and had there been no change  in milk 
prices  considerable  losses  would  have occurred.
Fixed costs, excluding  interest  charges  between  1978 and 1981, in­
creased  at 16-25 per cent per year. Interest  charges  were a unique 
problem.  A combination  of soaring  levels of borrowing  and staggering 
increases  in interest  rates meant  a 63 per cent increase  in interest  costs 
in 1979/80.  However,  with outputs  inflating  at under 10 per cent while  
most other costs inflated  at 20 per cent for 3 years in a row, it is quite  
obvious  that if there had been no technical  improvements  profit levels  
would  have been far worse than actually  occurred.
Table I
Trend  of technical  performance  of F.M.S.  costed  herds 1976-1981
Milk yield  
per cow (1)Concentrate  
use per cow 
(kg)Fertiliser  use 
Kg/HaStocking  rate 
cows/haRate of
cow nos.
increase
1976 4692 1719 206 1.83 100
1977 4750 1868 180 1.92 104
1978 5155 1798 207 1.93 110
1979 5195 1872 214 1.95 114
1980 5243 1883 235 1.92 117
1981 5301 1783 243 1.95 120
The reason  for any profit being achieved  is because  several  technical  
improvements  have taken  place. As shown  in Table 1, these are :
(a) Cow  numbers  have increased  steadily
(b) Milk yield has also improved,  from 1-7%
(c) Contrary  to what  some grass  enthusiasts  would  like us to believe  con­
centrate  usage  per litre has been steady.  The only exceptions  were the 
unprecedented  drought  years of 1975/76,  1976/77.
Curreiijt  trends  1981/82
Inflation  of most costs has steadied  down. Bank overdrafts  are now 
increasing  less slowly. Had it not been for severe climatic  factors  a 
further  improvement  in profits  would  have been likely. Calves  and cow 
prices  have made a significant  improvement.
80
Weather  conditions  in 1981 were exceptionally  poor. The net result  
was ruined  pastures  and the worst  silage  for a very long time. The effects 
on yield per cow, concentrate  usage  and margin  per cow were significant.
By next year there should  be a recovery  in production  unless  weather  
continues  to be a major  problem.  Calf and cow prices  are always  erratic  
but there is nothing  to suggest  any major set backs. Inflation  of most  
costs api)ears  to be stabilising.  If all this occurs  then I think a modest  
recovery  could be made. I do not think this is being too cautious.  There  
is no way any major  recovery  to the position  of repaying  this amount  of 
borrowed  money  can occur as long as milk price consistently  increases  
much less than costs.
Current  profit levels are hardly sufficient  to maintain  a stable dairy  
industry.  On current  trends  investment  and development  is going to be 
minimal  in the foreseeable  future.
Approach  within  Fann Management  Services
In order  to undertake  financial  analyses  on our clients ’ farms,  detailed  
information  about these farms is necessary  for meaningful  conclusions. 
Farm Management  Services  provide  a full farm management  costing  
service  for 1100-1200  farmers.  The management  accounts  provide  —
a) Trading  Account —how much profit  ?
b) Annual  Cash Flow— how much money  was spent  ?
c) Balance  Sheet —levels  of borrowing
d) Gross  Margins —individual  enterprise  analysis.
Most of the farms are mixed farms. A high proportion  will have 
cereals  and some farms are very large on which cereals  are by far the 
biggest enterprise.  Our farm management  accounts  are specifically 
designed  as a basis for forward  budgeting  on the individual  farm.  
Determination  of how much profit was made is only one aspect. The 
really important  questions  are :
What profit will be made next year 
What are the commitments ?
Can these commitments  be afforded  ?
In effect we build up a forecast  set of accounts  using our best estimate  
of changes  in costs that are going to occur. Until inflation  accelerated  
in the late 1960 ’s, past performance  was a guide to likely future  profits. 
When inflation  of some commodities  varies from 5 per cent to 30 per 
cent in two years,  past experience  is a.poor  guide for the future.  Because  
of this, detailed  forward  budgets  are becoming  essential.  Banks  are now 
refusing  to increase  overdrafts  unless these budgets  are available  to 
support  a farmer ’s plan.
Where  it is quite obvious that there  is no margin  for error  these budgets  
are monitored  monthly  by our farm management  consultants.  This is 
usually  done by preparing  a monthly  cash flow and at the end of the 
month adding  up all expenses  and receipts.  If large discrepancies  are 
occurring  these are picked up sooner rather than later. If any prices  
change  unexpectedly,  adjustments  are made to see whether  the charges  
will cause major  problems.  Frequently  the only alternative  is to ring the
81
bank manager  and ask for his help. But the difference  is WE ring him. 
We also explain  why the problem  has occurred  and our proposals  to 
overcome  it.
Farmers  are required  to pay fees for our services.  The cost of pre­
paring  management  accounts  is in the region  of £400. A management  
consultant ’s time also has to be paid for. The accounting  system  is now 
fully computerised,  and we are increasingly  liaising  with accountants  to 
increase  the overall  value of the service.
Summary
1. Profits  in British  dairying  have been in decline  since the mid 1970 ’s. 
There has been a modest  improvement  in 1981.
2. The main reason  for the decline  has been the very high level of cost 
inflation  which  has consistently  been 5-10 per cent or more above  the 
rate of income  inflation  for several  years.
3. Climatic  effects  can have a severe  effect  at certain  times —early spring  
being  the most vulnerable.
4. Farm Management  Services  prepares  full farm management  accounts  
for 1200 clients. These are used to analyse  the business  and prepare  
a forward  budget  for the client.
82
NINTH  EDWARD  RICHARDS-ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The Potential  for Production  and 
Marketing  of Irish Bull Beef
V. FLYNN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
J. O’CONNELL  
University  College,  Dublin.
P. MOORE
Livestock  and Meat  Commission,  Dublin.
At the outset  we wish to thank  the trustees  of the Edward  Richards-Orpen  
Memorial  Trust for their invitation  to present  the Ninth Memorial  
Lecture.
This lecture  differs to previous  Orpen Memorial  Lectures  in at least 
two respects.  Firstly,  the authorship  is shared  between  three people  and 
each of us shall deliver our own specialised  section of the lecture. 
Secondly,  this lecture  is not a comprehensive  summary  of experiments  
conducted  over many years by the authors.  Instead,  it is a description  
of a production  system  which  is as yet practiced  by very few farmers  in 
this country;  it is an assessment  of the place for such a system  on Irish 
farms and an analyss  of the market  prospects  for the output  from the 
system.
The fact that the system  in question  is new to this country  and is as 
yet practiced  by only a small number  of present  day pioneer  farmers  
makes  it a suitable  subject  for a memorial  lecture  to a man who was 
himself  a great pioneer  farmer.
I. PRODUCTION  SYSTEM
Practically  all Irish beef is produced  from grass and all production  
systems  practiced  in the country  rely heavily  on grazing  as a feed source. 
An inadequate  supply  of low quality  hay and more recently  very mod ­
erate quality  silage are features  of traditional  systems.
Many  experiments  at Grange  and elsewhere  have indicated  that silage  
can be produced  which will support  production  of cattle very close to 
that expected  on grazed grass. A Grange  experiment  has shown that 
properly  made, well preserved  silage has feed value identical  to the 
feed value of the grass from which it is made (Table 1). Numerous  
Grange  experiments  have shown  that the major  factor  affecting  the feed 
value of silage is its DMD. The relationships  between  DMD  and pro­
duction  parameters  for 450 kg cattle  may be described  as follows  : 
Liveweight  gain (g/day)  = 34.6 DMD - 1763
Carcase  gain (g/day) = 23.8 DMD -1275
Dry matter  intake  (% mean liveweight/day)  = 0.019  DMD  + 0.578
83
Table 1
Comparison  of silage  and grass as feed for beef cattle
Grass Silage
DM% 22.9 23.3
DMD% 71 71
Carcase  gain kg/day .42 .43 + 29.8
Daily DM intake % L.wt. 1.98 1.87 + .03
Silage NH 3-N = 6% TN
The effect of these relationships  on the performance  of 450 kg cattle  
fed silage having  20% dry matter  and 3.9 pH is illustrated  in Table 2. 
Clearly,  high production  can be expected  from silage of high DMD  and 
increasing  DMD  has only a minor  effect  on silage intake  so that increas ­
ing DMD and increasing  animal productivity  has a major positive 
influence  on the efficiency  with which  silage DM is converted  to product.  
Any difference  in production  between  silage  of 75% DMD  and production  
from grazed grass can be explained  by difference  in DMD. In farm  
practice,  silage quality  can be greatly  improved  and may be optimised  
by harvesting  grass  after six weeks  growth  intervals.  The correct  standard  
practice  on many good farms in Ireland  involves  harvesting  after 8-9 
weeks  growth. Results  (Table 3) show a clear superiority  for 6 weeks  
silage  over 9 weeks  silage in terms  of carcase  gain, even when silages  are 
supplemented  with 3 kg barley  per animal  daily.
Table 2
Silage  DMD  and beef production
DMD% 60 65 70 75
Carcase  gain (kg/day) 0.15 0.27 0.39 0.51
LWG (kg/day) 0.27 0.45 0.64 0.82
DMI % L.wt. 1.66 1.75 1.85 1.94
Kg carcase/tonne
Silage DM intake 22 36 47 57
Two year old system
With sufficient  high quality  silage, it is possible  to maintain  cattle  
growth  at the same rate in winter  as in the previous  summer  with mod ­
erate concentrate  feed inputs. This is the basis for a 2-year-old  beef
84
Table 3
Comparisons  betsreen  six week and nine week silage  cuts
Carcase  gain (kg/day)
6 weeks 9 weeks
75% 70%
No barley .57 .45
3 kg barley/day .65 .58
system,  the weight  for age targets  for which  are set out in Table  4. These  
targets  relate particularly  to typical Irish spring born Friesian  steers.  
Note that the average  life time productivity  for this system  is only 0.73 
kg liveweight  gain per day. While this level of productivity  is high by 
comparison  with the average  productivity  of Irish cattle (about  0.5 kg 
gain per day) we must recognise  that it is very modest  by comparison  
with the current  standard  of 1 kg gain per day for male cattle bom into 
the dairy herds of Europe. For example,  all beef cattle produced  in 
Holland,  Denmark,  Norway,  Sweden  and Finland  are derived  from dairy  
herds  and are fed to grow at 1 kg/day  over their lifetime.  While  maize  
silage is the major  forage  for this kind of beef production  in Holland,  
France  and Germany,  it was not always  so. Scandinavian  countries  can­
not grow maize  any more than we can and must operate  the production  
system  on a base of high quality  grass silage supplemented  with 2 kg 
concentrate  per animal  per day. Their  standard  lifetime  gain is 1 kg/day.
Examination  of the daily gain targets  for the 2-year-old  system  (Table  
4) shows  that it is in the first year of the animal ’s life where  the greatest  
opportunity  exists  to raise growth  rate with a view to improving  lifetime 
growth  from 0.7 kg/day  towards  1.0 kg/day.
Table 4
Target  weights  for beef at 2 years of age
90 kg at 3 months 0.5 kg/day
200 kg at 8 months .65 „
285 kg at 13 months .55 „
455 kg at 20 months .85 „
575 kg at 24 months 1.0 „
Lifetime  gain = 0.75 kg/day;  300 kg carcase
85
We must recognise  however  that there is a limit to the production  
which  may be readily  achieved  on a diet of grazed  grass or high quality  
grass silage alone. For animals  up to 9 months  of age this limit is less 
than 1 kg liveweight  gain/day.  Accordingly,  in order  to increase  animal  
performance  during  the first 12 months  grass and grass silage must be 
supplemented  with concentrate  feed. Experience  and practice  abroad  
and here have shown  that calves  can grow at an average  of 1 kg per day 
from 110 kg liveweight  at 3 months  of age to 380-390  kg at 12 months  
on a diet of high quality  grass silage supplemented  with 2 kg of concen ­
trate feed per day. When animals  are grown through  the first year of 
life at a rate of 1 kg per day they must be continued  at that rate to finish  
fpr biological  and economic  reasons. When this is practised  Friesian  
males  will reach  finish  conditions  at 530 kg liveweight  at about 16 months  
of age.
16 month  system
With this knowledge,  it was decided  in 1979 to establish  an intensive  
16 month  calf to beef system  at Grange  based on silage. At that time at 
least one member  of this Association  had already  developed  his calf-to-  
beef system  to this level. Since then several  other farmers  have adopted  
the system.
Our feeding  system is similar  to the normal  practice  in Europe  and 
the standards  for the system are set out in Table 5. Bulls have a 
biological  advantage  over steers and the efficiency  with which  they con­
vert feed to lean meat has been well demonstrated  at Grange. This 
system,  rather than the two-year-old  system,  is the appropriate  kind of 
system within which to commercially  exploit  the biological  advantage
Table 5
Standards  16 month  beef
Months Concentrate  (kg/day) Live gain (kg/day) Weight  (kg)
0- 2 0.5 .65 80
12 2.0 1.0 390
12-13 2.0 1.1 430
13 - 16 4.0 1.1 530
High quality  silage ad lih 265 kg carcase
Total feed : 1100 kg concentrate  -I- 1850 kg silage
of the bull. In this context,  however,  it should  be noted  that the optimum  
combination  of growth  promoter  treatment  currently  available  for use 
in steer beef production  can be expected  to raise the productivity  and
86
efficiency  of steers very close to the productivity  and efficiency  of bulls.  
The average  of batches  of animals  in the 16 month  system  at Grange  is 
given in Table 6. Levels  of production  are consistent  with the targets  for 
the system.
Table 6
Performance  of animals  on 16 month  beef system  at Grange
1Batch  No.
2 3 4
Initial livewt.  kg 297 103 124 126
Final livewt.  kg 547 523 505 441*
Daily gain (kg/day) 1.13 0.99 0.93 0.99
Carcase  wt. (kg) 286 282 275
■Recent  batch not yet finished
In these trials there has been no culling  of animals  and no selection 
for attributes  such as colour marking  or conformation  at any time 
between  purchase  of the calf and slaughter.  In commercial  practice  it is 
reasonable  to exercise  a certain  degree  of selection  for conformation  at 
purchase,  and then at about 200 kg liveweight,  to cull if necessary  any 
animal  with particularly  poor performance.  Considering  the desirability  
to exercise  some selection  of animals  for this system  the standards  set 
out here for animal  performance  and the standards  achieved  at Grange  
should be readily  achievable  in farm practice.  Indeed  they are being 
achieved  by the small number  of farmers  practising  the system  already.
Type of farm
The place for this kind of intensive  beef production  system  in Ireland  
is limited  to those farms on which the necessary  management  decisions  
are taken to ensure  that silage quality  is excellent,  i.e. dry matter  DMD  
between  70 and 75%. There are too few farms in this category  at the 
present  time. However,  there are a number  of farms  on which  the targets  
for a two-year-old  system  are being  achieved  and surpassed  and on which 
silage quality  is of the standard  required  for a more intensive  system.  
There are also a number  of well organised  grass farmers  practising  
traditional  systems  of winter  beef production  on which silage and man­
agement  standards  are adequate  to meet the requirements  for this more  
intensive  calf-to-beef  system. An intensive  16 month  calf-to-beef  system 
is appropriate  to such farms,  provided  that the farmers  concerned  have 
the necessary  expertise  in calf rearing  and provided  that the budget  and 
projected  income  from the system are acceptable  and competitive  with 
their current  beef system.
87
Feed budgets
A budget  for a 16 month  Friesian  beef system,  producing  young  bulls  
at about 16 months  of age is set out in Table 7 together  with an equiv ­
alent budget  for a 2-year-old  system. Total feed feed costs and non-feed  
costs vary considerably  from farm to farm and calf prices  and expected 
beef prices are figures  that people will always  debate. However,  the 
figures  in Table 7 provide  a reasonable  basis on which  to compare  the 
two systems  and assess  the potential  commercial  place for more intensive 
production  systems  in Ireland.  There  is a clear advantage  of a 16 month  
old system  in terms of margin  over feed cost. This advantage  is suffic ­
iently large to ensure  that when reasonable  non-feed  costs are deducted,  
there will be a decided  profit advantage  in favour  of the more intensive  
system.
Table 7
Cost and income  budget  for 2-year-old  and 16 month  dairy beef systems
Sale price £/kg carcase £1.85
2-year-old 16 months£1.95
2-year-old 16 months
Carcase  wt. kg 300 285 300 285
Per animal
Sale of carcase 555 527 585 555
Less calf 100 100 100 100
— — — —
GROSS  OUTPUT 455 455 455 455
Less feed cost 224 267 224 267
— — — —
Margin  over feed 231 160 261 188
Per acre grass
Margin  over feed 231 320 261 376
Less non feed costs 120 160 120 160
— — — —
RETURN  TO LAND  
& LABOURIll 160 141 216
Breed  type
In this paper so far, only Friesian  bulls have been considered  for a 
16-month  system. But it should be fully understood  that Friesian  X 
Hereford  cattle or Friesian  X French  Beef Breed cattle will perform  at 
least as well and very likely better than pure Friesian  cattle in such a 
system. The system  is also flexible  : it will accommodate  steers instead  
of bulls by using approved  growth  promoters  and feed additives.  It is 
also possible  to produce  heifer beef through  this kind of system;  and 
several  farmers  are doing  so. It is of interest  to note that a variation  of 
this management  system is gaining  popularity  as a system for rearing  
dairy heifer  replacements  in France.
88
Summary
The place for systems  producing  intensively  fed young  beef in Ireland  
will be limited  to grass  farms on which  the standard  of grass management  
and silage production  is very high.
Profit earning  potential  will depend  on several  factors,  the most im­
portant  of which  are the quality  and cost of silage,  the cost of concentrate  
feed, the cost of the calf and the market  outlets  and value of the product.  
Because  of the importance  of silage quality,  the making  of silage must  
be under the farmer ’s control  rather  than a job dependent  on the con­
tractor. High calf prices  undermine  profit potential  for any calf-to-beef  
system.  Calf prices  will moderate  only if calf supplies  increase  or demand  
falls. From the beef industry  point of view such change  over the next 
few years would be best brought  about by a large increase  in the beef 
cow herd, preferably  producing  continental  cross calves  to be finished  
through  an intensive  feeding  system  as described  here for Friesian  cattle.  
Increasing  the beef cow herd on traditional  cattle farms  would  also have 
the effect  of reducing  the demand  for dairy calves  by traditional  farmers.  
If these two factors  would moderate  calf price to a level where an 
average  calf can be bought  for the value of 75-100  kg of live beef, there  
would be a bright future  for this system. This future would be secured  
by the development  of marketing  arrangements  to ensure that the beef 
price available  in Europe  would be available  to Irish farmers  all year 
round.
II. THE PRODUCTION  AND MARKETING  OF BULL  BEEF  
IN THE E.E.C.
As a proportion  of total cattle slaughterings,  bull slaughterings  were  
23.5%  in 1979 and in tonnage  terms  bull beef amounted  to 26.1%  (Table  
8). The difference  arises because  of the large number  of calves in the
Table 8
Gross  indigenous  cattle  production,  cattle  slaughterings  and bull slaughterings
in EEC Nine
1975 1976 1977 1978 1979
Production  (000 head) 29,254 27,840 27,000 26,992 28,078
Cattle  slaughterings  (000 head) 29,127 28,106 27,359 27,077 28,278
Bull slaughterings  (000 head) 5,964 6,399 6,370 6,321 6,637
Bull slaughterings  nos. as % 
cattle slaughtering  nos. 20.5 22.8 23.3 23.3 23.5
Cattle  slaughterings  (000 tonnes) 6,619 6,546 6,383 6,427 6,827
Bull slaughterings  (000 tonnes) 1,633 1,672 1,646 1,674 1.779
Bull slaughterings  tonnes  as % 
cattle slaughterings  tonnes 24.7 25.6 25.8 26.0 26.1
Source  : Eurostat  “Animal  Production ” with personal  correction  of Italian  data
89
cattle figures. Whichever  measure  is used, bull beef production  mcreased  
in importance  in the period 1975-1979.  It is most importa^  m Italy GermLy.  Denmark,  Belgium  and Luxembourg  and it is least important  
in Ireland  and U.K. (Table  9).
Table 9
Cattle  and bull slaughterings  by EEC country  in 1979
Cattle
(000 tonnes)Bull
(000 tonnes)Tonnes  as %
total tonnes
W. Germany 1517 785 52
France1824 230 13
Italy1105 710 64
Holland 403 54 13
Belgium 281 86 31
Luxembourg 8 3 38
UK1051 19 1.8
Ireland 388 3 0.8
Denmark 252 116 46
Source  : Eurostat  “Animal  Production ” with personal  correction  of Italian  data
With the exception  of W. Germany  and Denmark,  bull slaughterings  
were more seasonal  in 1978 than adult cattle slaughterings.  .,  
numbers  are also included  in adult cattle  numbers,  the seasonality  of bull 
slaughtering  relative  to adult cattle excluding  bulls would  be even more 
pronounced  still. For all adult cattle the most common  peak month  is 
November  and the most commonly  low month is July. For bulls the 
most common  peak months  are June, July, August  and the most com­
monly low months  are November  and February.  Bull slaughterings  
therefore  were quite opposite  to total adult cattle slaughterings  m th 
seasonal  pattern,  which  no doubt  suits the slaughter  factories  very much.
Beef consumption  and self-sufficiency  in EEC Nine  , • ,
Total meat consumption  and total beef consumption  increased  in t e 
neriod 1975-1979  Meat consumption  increased  faster than beet con- 
^mption  so that beef lost 2 percentage  Points of market  share It is 
predicted  that there will be increased  meat and beef consumption  by 
1985 but with beef having  lost another  2 percentage  points  ot market  
share. Figures  are not available  on bull beef consumption  a.one.
90
THE
FARMERS'
BANK
Bank  crlreiana
The bankof  a lifetime
91
Table 10 shows  that the EEC as a whole  was self-sufficient  in beef in
1979. The deficit  areas are Italy, U.K. and Belgium/Luxembourg.  It is
expected  that by 1985 Italy and U.K. will continue  to be very substantial  
importers  and Belgium  / Luxembourg  will remain small scale net im­
porters.  It has been forecast  by the EEC Commission  that W. Germany  
will be a net importer  by 1985. However,  it is difficult  to accept  ffiis, 
given  that W. Germany ’s self-sufficiency  has now grown  to 112% in 1981.
Table 10
Production  
(000 tonnes)Domestic  use 
(0(X) tonnes) Self-sufficiency
EEC -9 6791 6794 100
W. Germany 1515 1488 102
France 1957 1770 111
Italy 897 1413 62
Holland 412 307 134
Belgiumyi.uxembourg 284 289 98
U.K. 1060 1347 79
Ireland 428 87 493
Denmark 256 93 276
Trade  , j iAs can be seen in Table II the main EEC suppliers  of beef and veal 
to Germany  are France,  Holland  and Denmark.  The main suppliers  to
Table 11
Major  intra-EEC  Bows in beef and veal % of total beef and veal imports
W. Germany  France Italy Holland Bel./Lux. U.K.
W. Germany— 27 26 8 —
France 24 — 19 11 17 6
Italy 2 1 — ——
Holland 21 11 14— 20
Bel./Lux. 3 2 — 29— —
U.K. 12 32 — 8 10 —
Ireland 8 23 1 31 37 68
Denmark 13 1 23 3 2 1
Non-EEC 17 3 17 10 14 25
92
France  are UK, Germany  and Ireland. German  exports  to France  are 
mainly hindquarters  and conversely  French exports  to Germany  are 
mainly  forequarters.  French  imports  from the UK are also predominantly  
of hindquarters.  This is also true of imports  from Ireland,  although  to 
a much lesser extent. The main suppliers  of Italy are West Germany,  
Denmark  and France.  For Ireland,  Italy is still virtually  virgin  territory.  
Italy is by far the largest  importer  of live cattle in the EEC. Its pre­
dominant  supplier  is France. West Germany  is also a substantial  
supplier  of livestock  to Italy. After Italy, Germany  is the second  largest  
importer  of live cattle although  only about 11 % as large as Italy in 
that respect.
Prices
Let us now discuss  the vital topic of producer  prices  and the question  
of whether  or not there is a market  for Irish bull beef in the EEC. There  
is a variety  of determinants  of producer  prices  and these are summarised  
in Table 12. The number  of determinants  of producer  prices  is greater for 
an exporting  country  than for a non-exporting  country.  The position  of a 
country  in which  exports  are moderately  important  relative  to home  con­
sumption  is more complex  because  the price received  by the producer  is
Table 12
Determinants  of producer  prices
For a country  serving  
only its own marketFor a country  with 
a large export  orientation
Supply/Demand  — Wholesale  prices Wholesale  prices
Wholesale  margins Wholesale  margins
Transport  costs Transport  costs
Quality Quality
EEC/Government  aid Green exchange  rates, MCA ’s 
Currency  exchange  rate 
EEC/Government  aid
the result of interacting  domestic  market  and export  determinants;  the 
effect of each is in accordance  with its weighting  or importance  in the 
sale of the total output.  It is necessary  to make some simplifying  assump ­
tions if one is to draw any conclusions  from an examination  of producer  
prices. The assumptions  made here are (1) that wholesale  markins  
taken on Irish beef are similar  to those taken in other beef; (2) that 
factory  margins  taken on Irish beef are similar  to those taken on other  
beef; (3) that a given quality  makes  a given price irrespective  of country  
of origin. The third assumption  is the most crucial.  The issue of whether  
or not there are reasons  to believe  that it might  not be a valid assump ­
tion will be examined  later for the German  and French  markets.
93
Currency  exchange  rates, green  exchange  rates/MCA ’s and differences 
in transport  costs to market  can all cause differences  in prices at farm  
level. These effects  are specific  to the particular  exporting  and receiving 
country. As a general  exercise,  let us consider  Italy as the receiving 
country  and let us examine  producer  prices in Italy and in three other  
countries  which export  to Italy. The situation  with regard  to France  is 
complicated  by a price complement  to producer  groups  which bridges  
the gap between  the market  price and 94% of the guide price. Since  
producer  groups  supply 65% of bull beef in France,  the effect of this 
payment  on average producer  prices is taken as 65/100 times the 
relevant  payment,  which in October  1981 was roughly  a IFr/kg  dead ­
weight  (DW). The effective  payment  in Irish currency  was approximately  
Ir£4.40/100  kg liveweight  (LW). Prices and adjustment  factors are 
shown  in Table 13.
Table 13
Producer  bull prices  (IR£/100  kg LW) in those countries  serving  the Italian  
market,  2nd week Oct. 1981
Denmark France Germany Italy
Super 118.42 U 117.70 I 117.88 I 126.32
Extra 114.04 R 110.48 11 106.86 11 113.88
I 108.77 O 102.84
11 102.63
MCA paid to exporter  
into Italy 3.53 3.53 3.53 _
MCA paid to exporter  
out of Germany — — 8.67 —
French  subsidy — 4.40 — —
Transport  to Italy*
(Milan)  (P/kg DW) 6.93 5.63 5.49 2.64
Extent  to which Irish transport
costs exceed  those quoted 
above (P/kg DW)3.71 5.01 5.15 8.0
1. Source  : A. Archer  CBF
Inter-country  comparisons  of prices at producer  level are hazardous  
given the multitude  of price determinants  operative  at that level as 
discussed  earlier. Italy is a large deficit  country,  France  and Germany  
are in slight surplus  and Denmark  is a large surplus  producer.  Ireland ’s 
position  would  be quite similar  in this respect  to Denmark,  fairly similar  
to France  and Germany  and quite different  from Italy. Irish exporters
94
to Italy also receive  the Italian  MCA  of 3.53. In comparing  Ireland  with 
Denmark  in terms  of the data in Table 13, it is necessary  to adjust  only 
for the extra cost of transport  from Ireland  to Italy compared  with 
Denmark.  This excess  is 3.70 p/kg (approximately  2.15 P/kg LW). If 
Irish producers  were producing  Danish  quality  bulls and selling  them in 
Italy then they should receive Danish prices adjusted  for the excess  
transport  costs. These  prices  in October  1981 were :
Super IR£1 16.27/100  kg LW 
Extra  111.89
I 106.62
II 100.48
Compared  with producer  prices for Irish steers I in the same period  
these represent  premia  of IR£22.35/100  kg LW, 17.97, 12.70 and 6.56 
respectively.  The equivalent  figures  in carcase  terms depend  on killing  
out percentage.  Using 58% for Super and Extra and 55% for I and II 
these i;s30unt  to 17.5p/lb,  14.1p/lb  10.5p/lb  and 5.4p/lb  carcase. A 
similar  exercise  can done with French  prices which must also be 
adjusted  for the French  Government  subsidy  as well as excess  transport.  
The results,  in terms  of premia  relative  to Irish steers I price, are shown  
in Table 14.
Table 14
Approximate  estimate  of premia  relative  to Irish steers I for bull beef. All prices  
adjusted  for excess Irish transport  cost, MCA ’s and subsidy where necessary
(P/lh/DW)
Denmark France Germany Italy
Super 17.5 U 12.4 1 9.6 1 17.34
Extra 14.1 R 7.2 II 1.1 II 8.02
1 10.5 O 1.4
II 5,4
The data in Table 14 give a preliminary  idea of the premia  that are 
available  to Irish producers  for bull beef sold into Italy on the assump ­
tion that the effect of the other determinants  of producer  prices (i.e. 
intervention,  domestic  and other markets,  quality  and marketing  effiic-  
iency) would be the same for Ireland  as for the countries  listed. This 
assumption  would be least valid in the Italy-Ireland  comparison.  One 
expects  that it should be most nearly valid for the Denmark-Ireland  
comparison.  The Danish  figures  are interesting  and encouraging.  Carcase  
quality  and breeds are very important  and are discussed  elsewhere  in 
this paper,  together  with the efficiency  with which Danish  bull beef is 
marketed.
95
Let us now examine  Western  Germany  and France  in detail  as possible  
markets  for Irish bull beef.
W. GennaJiy
Young  bulls comprised  49.1 per cent of Germany  cattle output  in 1976 
and 48.1 per cent in 1980. The production  of young  bulls in W. Germany  
has reached  almost  half their total output  and this has been due to :
1) The greater  production  efficiency  of bulls.
2) Availability  of maize.
3) Proximity  to the large deficit  Italian  market.
4) The equation  of leaness  with quality  and value for money  by con­
sumers  which was reinforced  by a campaign  in the 1970 ’s against  
animal  fats.
5) The traditionally  high eonsumption  of manufactured  meat in 
Germany  (50% of meat consumed  in Germany  is in manufactured  
form) which requires  lean meat. The usage of bull beef in manu ­
facturing  also facilitates  the acceptance  of bull beef outside  manu ­
facturing.
6) Trade satisfaction  arising  from uniform  quality  of bull carcases  
and higher  profits  from greater  yield.
7) EEC factors  (a) an EEC scheme  to reduce  cow numbers  in the late 
1960 ’s led to a decline in beef supply which in turn led to in­
creased  prices;  (b) the introduction  of intervention  for bull beef in 
1974 with favourable  coefficients  and consequently  favourable  
intervention  prices for bull beef; (Intervention  took 8 per cent of 
German  bull slaughterings  in 1979).
8) The favourable  effects  on Germany  producer  prices of the move ­
ment of the German  mark and the Italian lira relative  to their  
respective  green rate of exchange.
The grading  distribution  varies dramatically  by region according  to 
breed. Bavaria  achieves  a figure of 56% of its young  bull beef in grade  
E because  of its preponderance  of Fleckvieh  (German  Simmental)  cattle.  
However,  in the dairy region  of North  Rhein Wesphalia  where  the Ger­
man Black  and White  and Red and White  predominate,  only 4.5 per cent 
of young  bulls are classed  as grade E with 66 per cent classed  as I and 
28 per cent as II. As regards  conformation  standards  in German  and 
Irish classifications,  the German  class E covers  slightly  more than the 
top two Irish classes  of I and R. In terms of fat cover,  class E would  
approximate  to about Irish fat class 2 and indeed very few of the 
German  classes,  except  EF which is a special  and very small “heavier  
fat” version  of class E, would  exceed  Irish fat class 3.
Table 15 shows  the percentage  distribution  by grade of Friesian  bulls  
sold by The Agricultural  Institute  over 3 years. Virtually  all these bulls  
graded as E and L and most of them were 2 and 3 in fat. As an 
approximation,  Irish Friesian  bulls would  fall mid-way  between  German  
classes  I and II; none would  fall in the E class. Irish grades  E and L of 
an acceptable  fat level would be incorporated  in the German  live grade  
II. It is the price of German  live grade II that we should use as a
96
starting  point in assessing  the likely potential  price that Irish Friesian  
bull beef would  make if sold in Germany.
Table 15
Percentage  distribution  by grade  of Friesian  bulls (The Agricultural  Institute)
Conformation  I
Fat 1 
2
3
4
No. = 127 Av. carcase  wt. 283 kgR E
3
15
19
7I.
4
7
29
15
The question  of whether  or not there are any reasons  to believe  that 
we would receive  less than the German  price for that quality  must now 
be raised. Firstly,  if we were selling bull beef on the German  market  
now and assuming  that we received  the same price as the Germans,  that 
price would  be lower  than the current  price for both Germans  and Irish 
alike. This would  simply  be due to the increase  in supply  which  the Irish 
beef would  entail. Of course,  the operations  of the intervention  system  
would abate this to some degree. Secondly,  if through  successful  mar­
keting  a special  market  segment  could be created  for Irish bull beef in 
Germany  it would not necessarily  have to eompete  with German  bull 
beef. Howe'^;^r,  it is extremely  unlikely  that Irish bull beef in Germany  
could be successfully  marketed  as a premium  priced  product.  The best 
that could be hoped for is that it would be viewed  as being equivalent  
to German  bull beef of similar  quality  and that it would receive an 
equivalent  price. There are possible  reasons  however  why even this 
might  be unattainable.
The German  market  is more than self-suffieient  in beef in general  
(112 per cent in 1981) and in bull beef in partieular.  Irish exporters  
would therefore  be selling an undifferentiated  product  into an over­
supplied  market.  In that situation  buyer  attention  would  centre  on priee 
competitiveness.  This would be particularly  true of the manufacturing  
sector  which  demands  a highly  specified  product  and is a very important  
user of bull beef. German  manufacturers  would buy our beef if we 
cou'd supply  the equivalent  product  as well as their German  suppliers  
but only if we were more price competitive.
Regarding  other marketing  channels,  it should be pointed  out that 
German  butchers  tend to buy their bulls on a breed and tradition  basis.  
Thus it is not merely  bull beef that they buy but Bavarian  Bull or Fran ­
conian  Bull. Vac-packing  for supermarkets  or other outlets  while tech­
nically possible  requires  special care. Bulls are susceptible  to stress.
97
Stress raises their Ph (reduces  the acidity  of the meat) and makes  the 
meat susceptible  to the growth of spoilage  organisms,  thus reducing  
vac-packing  potential.  Also, because  of light fat cover on the carcases,  
they do not travel well. Due to these problems  bull beef gives the buyer  
less time flexibility  in its sale than steer beef.
Taking  account  of the above issues,  it appears  that if we were selling  
bull beef into Germany  now we would not be receiving  the current  
German  bull beef price because  of:
(i) the pressure  that would be put on price through  the increased  
supply  of Irish bull beef;
(ii) the probability  that for a given quality  level we would  not receive  
the same price as German  beef of the same quality.
The price reduction  that would occur under (i) would be a function  of 
how much  the Irish beef would  increase  supply  and of the price elasticity  
of demand.  It is a matter  of speculation  as to what values  these would 
have. It is also a matter  of speculation  as to what price penalty  Irish 
beef would  suffer under (ii). For this exercise  I assume  that if we were 
selling  bull beef in Germany  now we would be receiving  95 per cent of 
the current  price.
As already  stated, Irish Friesian  bulls would fall into the second 
category  on the German  live classification  scheme.  The German  producer  
price of class II young  bulls in October  1981 was IR£106.86/ 100 kg LW. 
Ninety  five per cent of this is £101.52.  This is taken to be the price that 
Irish Friesian  bull beef would  have made in Germany  in October  1981.  
The price that could be passed  back to the Irish producer  from this price 
would  have been £101.52  less the MCA of IR£8.67/100  kg paid by the 
German  importer,  less the extent  to which  the transport  cost of the Irish 
product  exceeded  that on the German  product  (taken here as 2.5p/lb  
DW). When adjusted  for MCA and transport  the Irish producer  price 
works  out at £101.52-(£8.67  £3.03)  = £89.82/100  kg LW. This com­
pares with an Irish producer  price for Steer 1 in the same week in 
October  1981 of IR£93.92/100  kg.,/Therefore,  under the assumptions  
adopted  in this exercise,  the sale of Irish Friesian  bull beef in Germany  
in October  1981 would  have yielded  a lower producer  price (by 3.4p/lb  
DW) than was received  by Irish producers  of steers  1 at that time.
However,  if we assume  a German  producer  price for young  bulls class 
I and following  a similar  procedure  as before,  the Irish product  price is 
IR£100.30/ 100 kg which is higher  than the price received  by Irish pro­
ducers  of steers I at that time by IR£6.37/100  kg LW or about 5.3p/lb  
DW. This premium  would  be available  only for high quality  beef breeds  
equivalent  to the German  Simmental  (Fleckvieh)  and Charolais.  Such  
animals  would grade as I, 1,2,3 on the Irish beef classification  scheme.  
In a classification  exercise  in autumn  1979' none of 57,000  Irish steers  
were classed  as I and only 2.4 per cent were classed  as R. That we can 
produce  the high quality  product  is demonstrated  by the classification
1. “Beef Carcase  Classification  and Market  Requirements ”. P. O. Ryan. Paper
read at Winter  meeting  of IGAPA,  1979.
98
results  of the young bull reactors  sold from Tully Performance  Station  
(Table 16). The bulls were suckled  as calves,  weaned  at 200 days and 
put on full test feed thereafter.  The management  was very good but not 
outside  the reach of any specialised  producer.
Table 16
Classification  results  of Tully bulls
Breed Carcase  wt. (kg) Conformation Fat Age (months) Number
Limousin 427 I- 3- 16.6 12
S'mmental 439 3 16.7 27
Charolais 418 R+ 3 15.7 14
Blonde  D’Aquitane  455 I- 2- 16.8 7
Source  ; Coleman,  Department  of Agriculture
France
Bull production  is less important  in France  than in Germany.  Whereas  
bulls account  for about 5() per cent of production  in Germany  they 
account  for only 20 per cent of production  in France. However,  in the 
last 10 years production  of young bulls in France has more than 
doubled. Steers, which constitute  only 2 per cent of production  in 
Germany,  amount  to 23 per cent of production  in France. The deter ­
minants  of the growth  of bull beef production  in France  were :
(i) Increased  profitability  arising  from greater  production  efficiency.
(ii) Availability  of maize.
(iii) Producer  groups  formation  which now account  for 65 per cent 
of production  and qualify  for Government  aid.
(iv) Proximity  to the Italian  market.
(v) Support  by the intervention  system  which currently  takes 27 per 
cent of bull production.
(vi) Trade satisfaction  arising from lower quality variation  of bull 
carcases  and higher  profits  from increased  yield.
Of the total production  of young bulls 36 per cent are consumed  in 
France,  27 per cent are sold to intervention,  24 per cent are exported  as 
beef and 23 per cent are exported  live. It is estimated  that about 80 per 
cent of live and dead exports  are sent to Italy. It is expected  that bull 
production  will continue  to expand  in France and that the increased  
production  will be consumed  on export  markets  and not in France  itself.  
Bull beef is not highly  regarded  in the quality  conscious  French  marke?
Appraisal  of breed distribution  of young  French  bulls by carcase  clast 
together  with information  from the Department  of Agriculture,  Dublin  
makes it possible  to relate the French  and Irish classification  schemes
99
and to conclude  that Irish Friesian  bulls  would  cross  the R and O Grades  
of the Europe  system.
As was seen in Table 15 Irish Friesian  bulls are distributed  evenly  
across Irish classes  E and L. Thus, the price for Irish Friesian  type 
carcases  selling  in France  consists  of about  one third of the French  price  
for French  grade R and two thirds  of the French  price for the French  
grade O. This price must firstly be reduced  by IR£4.40/100  kg which  is 
the estimated  value of the French  Government  subsidy  in October  1981.  
The starting  price for the 2nd week in October  1981 is therefore  calcu ­
lated as
(110.48-4.40)  X 0.34 + (102.84-4.40)  x 0.66 = 1R£I01.04/ 100 kg LW 
The question  arises  again as to whether  or not we could  expect  to receive  
this price (in France)  if we were now exporting  bull beef to France. As 
was the case with the German  calculations,  one must allow for the price 
depressing  effect that an increase  in bull beef from Ireland  would have 
on French  prices. Salient  features  in the marketing  of bull beef in France  
are that catering  outlets  and supermarkets  are currently  the most impor ­
tant domestic  market  outlets,  but butcher  chains  could be large outlets  
in the future. As in Germany,  butchers  tend to buy on a breed and 
traditional  basis.  Vac-packed  bull beef is bought  by French  supermarkets.  
Bull beef is produced  and marketed  in a very disciplined  and organised  
way in France  and is mostly  sold direct from abattoir  to retail outlet.  
Wholesalers  do not handle  very much bull beef. This may be an impor ­
tant consideration  for an exporting  country  in that direct abattoir-retail  
trade requires  a high degree  of discipline  of supply  and quality  specifica­
tion. Meat colour  is very important  and a problem  with young  bull beef 
is that it may be too light in colour  for consumers.  This may be overcome 
by including  carrot  pigmentation  in the feedstuff.
The French  market  is not a deficit  market  and there is little possibility 
of further  increases  in French  production  being absorbed  in the French  
market  at realistic  prices.  Alternative  export  markets  are being  examined.  
As in the case of Germany,  the Irish would  be selling  an undifferentiated  
product  which has less selling  time-flexibility  than French  bull beef or 
Irish steer beef on a fully supplied  market.  It is therefore  reasonable  to 
take 95 per cent of the previously  mentioned  starting  point price as 
being a more accurate  estimate  of the price that Irish Friesian  bull beef 
would  receive  if selling  now in France.  This works  out as 95 /100 x 101.04  
= IR£95.99/ 100 kg LW. There  are currently  no MCA ’s on trade  between 
Ireland  and France. However,  it is assumed  that transport  for the Irish 
exporter  would be 2p/lb  deadweight  more than it would for the French  
supplier.  This amounts  to about IR£2.42/100  kg liveweight  so that the 
price the Irish producer  would  receive  for Friesian  bulls sold in France  
in the 2nd week of October  1981 is estimated  as IR£93.57/100  kg LW. 
This compares  with an Irish producer  price for steer I in the same week 
of IR£93.92/100  kg LW. There is therefore  effectively  no difference  in 
price.  It compares  with a penalty  in the case of Germany  of about  3.4p/lb.
The message  is fairly clear in both cases—bull  beef production  for the 
French and German  markets  using Friesian  animals  is not a realistic
100
proposition.  If one assumed  that Irish bull beef was good enough  to 
achieve  gradings  of E, U, R on the EUROPA  scheme,  then using the 
same procedure  os outlined  already  the premia  relative  to Irish steers I 
in October  1981 would be 15.8p/lb  DW, 8.8p/lb  DW and 3.6p/lb  DW 
respectively.  The premia  obtainable  by producing  German  class I bulls  
was previously  estimated  at 5.3p/lb  DW.
Summary
Solely  from a marketing  point of view, the sale of Irish Friesian  bull 
beef in Germany  and France  would not offer much prospect  of any 
premia in price. However,  premia  relative  to Irish steer I prices are 
available  for good quality  beef derived  from Continental  beef breeds,  the 
extent  of the premia  being  dependent  on the quality  level.
The issues  from the marketing  point of view are :
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.What are these breeds  ?
Can we produce  beef from these breeds  more efficiently  than Con­
tinental  competitors  ?
What  are the factors  other  than distance  from the market  which  might  
prevent  us from receiving  the same price for a given quality as 
producers  in Europe  receive  ?
Can we reduce  or eliminate  these factors  ?
Can  ,we create  the other  marketing  determinants  such as intervention,  
producer  groups,  guaranteed  producer  prices, some of which have 
been very important  in the development  of bull beef production  
abroad  ?
III. MARKETING  PRACTICES  FOR YOUNG  BULL  BEEF  IN 
DENMARK  AND GREAT  BRITAIN
Denmark  and Great Britain  have few similarities  in the production  
and marketing  of young bulls. Denmark  is an important  exporter  of 
beef, and has been producing  young  beef for some time. Great Britain,  
by contrast,  is the third largest  beef importer  in the EEC,  has a relatively  
low level of young  beef production  and prospects  for market  growth  are 
not bright.
(a) Denmark
An assessment  of Danish  experience  in the marketing  of young bull 
beef commences  in the early 1960 ’s. At that time the cattle sector in 
Denmark  was not organised  and was second  in priority  to the streamlined  
dairy sector. There  was a combination  of veal production  and live cattle  
exports.  Danish  ‘veal ’ however,  was different  from traditional  European  
veal. Dutch,  French  and German  veal is derived  from calves  fattened  on 
milk products  only, with meat that is white in colour and having a 
carcase  weight  of about 85 kg. Danish  ‘veal ’ was from calves fed on 
mixed  rations  of barley,  beet, oilseed  products,  etc., to produce  a carcase  
of about 140 kg.
Live cattle exports  during  the early 1960 ’s were sent mainly  to West  
German  seaport  towns  with large public  abattoirs.  In 1962, 350,000  live
101
cattle were shipped  but with the formation  of the EEC this trade was 
disrupted  and other outlets  had to be found. The Danes,  however,  with 
the same attitude  which prompted  them to develop  the British  bacon  
market,  organised  their veal production  to produce  young  bull carcases  
for the Italian  market.
Production
Young  bulls currently  account  for about 43% by weight  of total beef 
and veal production.  The overall  trend in Danish  production  during  the 
1970 ’s has been downward,  as indicated  by a 9% decline  in disposals  
from 1970 to 1980 (Table  17). There  has been a corresponding  gradual  
rate of decline  in young  beef production  with the result that its share of 
total production  has remained  fairly  constant.  This currently  amounts  to 
about 500,000  young bulls per year. In common  with the pattern  in a 
number  of continental  EEC states, steer production  in Denmark  is 
relatively  low and currently  aecounts  for less than one per cent of total 
output.
Table 17
Slaughterings  of cattle and calves  in Denmark  (000 head)
1970 1975 1980
Cows  \ 369.7 410.5
Heifers 1 482.1 130.3 100.6
Old bulls  I 21.0 25.7
Steers  ' 10.7 5.3
Young  bulls  1 575.8 537.4 509.0
Baby beef 1 23.9 8.4
Veal 1 29.0 14.6 11.0
Total slaughterings 1,086.9 1,107.6 1,070.5
Live exports 103.4 29.4 6.5
Total production 1,190.3 1,137.0 1,077.0
Source  : Statistik  1980, Danish  Meat Board
Breeds
The breeds of cattle on which young bull production  is based are 
virtually  all dual purpose  or dairy type. In fact, 90% of all cows in 
Denmark  are either Friesian,  Danish  Red or Jersey (Table 18). Pure 
beef breeds  account  for only 2.5% while  the remaining  animals  are cross ­
breds. The major  change  that has occurred  in the past 10 to 15 years  
has been the growth  in the Friesian  breed at the expense  of Danish  Red.
102
Table 18
Breeds  of cows in Denmark
1966 1978
Red Dane 47.8% 21.2%
Friesian 29.3% 52.0%
Jersey 16.4% 15.5%
Beef breeds 0.1% 2.5%
Crossbreeds 6.4% 8.8%
Source  : Danish  Meat Board
Slaughter  weights  and classification
Danish  bulls are slaughtered  at relatively  light weights  compared  with 
young bulls in other Continental  EEC countries.  A survey  carried  out 
in 1980 showed  that 85% of Danish  young  bulls have a carcase  weight 
ranging  from 163 to 275 kg. A weight  of about 230 kg is preferred  by 
the Danish  meat export  sector. The usual age at slaughter  is 12 months  
and animals  achieve  a lifetime  growth  rate of about 1 kg per day.
The Danish  classification  system contains  four principal  classes,  Al, 
A, B and C. Classes  A, B and C are again divided  into 3 sub-classes 
giving  a total of 10 individual  classes. Nearly  two-thirds  of animals  are 
classified  into the Al class and the 3 sub-classes  of A. Approximately  
one-third  of animals  fall into the B sub-classes  with a small minority  
being further  downgraded  into the C area.
An approximate  link up between  the conformation  standards,  of the 
Danish  and Irish classification  systems  is as follows  ; the Danish  classes  
of Al and A roughly  correspond  to the top three Irish classes,  I, R and 
E. Irish classes  L and A broadly  correspond  to Danish  B classes.
Seasonality  of production
Production  of young bulls in Denmark  is spread evenly throughout  
the year and there is also a stable pattern  of production  from one year 
to the next. These  two factors  facilitate  an orderly  approach  to both 
processing  and marketing.  The ratio of maximum  weekly  slaughterings  
is about 1.5 : 1. In actual throughput  at meat plants, this means a 
change  of about 2,500 cattle in weekly  slaughterings  above and below 
the average  level of about 9,500 animals.  The months  of peak slaughter  
are March,  May and June. Supplies  are lowest in July, November  and 
December.  Year to year changes  in production  since 1975 have not at 
any time exceeded  10%, which in terms of annual throughput  is a 
variation  less than 36,000  animals  (Table 19).
Market  outlets
In 1980 two-thirds  of all bull beef produced  in Denmark  was sold in 
Italy. The proportion  consigned  to Italy in earlier  years was even higher.
103
Table 19
Production  variations  within  year and between  years
Annual  slaughterings  (000 head) Average  weekly  slaughterings  (head)
1975 537,4 January 9,450
February 9,600
1976 541.3 March 10,250
April 9,500
1977 550.0 May 10,350
June 11,800
1978 514.4 July 7,600
August 9,850
1979 533.4 September 9,650
October 9,400
1980 509.0 November 8,700
December 8,000
Source  : derived  from Statistik  (various  issues)
Since the Danes  rely so heavily  on this market,  it is obviously  in their  
interests  to maintain  quality standards.  There is a deliberate  policy 
wherebv  bull carcases  with the highest  grades  are exported  to Italy; those 
with lower grades  are sold for intervention  storage  and on the domestic  
market.  Bull forequarters  are sold to West Germany  for manufacturing.  
The Danish  meat export  sector strongly  maintains  that it is very impor ­
tant not to allow bull carcase  weights  higher  than 240 kg for export.  
The principal  reason  is that it permits  them to maintain  and serviee  a 
particular  market  segment  within the Italian  market,  without  having  to 
meet direct  competition  from other suppliers.
Italy is the major  importer  of chilled  bull beef in Europe  and is also 
a large market  for veal. The total amount  of bull beef imported  has 
remained  fairly constant  at about 250,000  tonnes per year, which is 
largely  imported  as carcases  and hindquarters.  Within  these requirements  
for bone-in  bull beef, there would appear  to be two separate  market  
segments.  The larger segment  of the market  consists  of bulls weighing 
between  250 kg and 350 kg carcase  weight  and whose  meat is darkish  red 
in colour. This market  segment  is largely  supplied  by imports  from West  
Germany  and from Franee,  both in carcase  form and as live animals.
The smaller  market  segment  is for carcase  weighing  from 220 kg to 
250 kg, with meat that is light pink in colour. It is this latter market  seg­
ment which is supplied  almost exclusively  by Denmark.  The Danes  
maintain  that the characteristic  of a standard  lean light carcase  is more
104
important  than conformation  because  they can supply  the requirements  
of a market  segment  in between  the larger bull beef market  and the 
separate  market  segment  for white veal.
Danish  bull beef sold in Italy is not identified  at consumer  level. The 
product  is sold via the wholesaler  trade to butcher  shops. Little Danish  
bull beef is sold through  Italian  supermarkets.  Sales are concentrated  in 
three main regions  : Florence,  Milan  and Genoa. Surprisingly,  Denmark  
sells only small quantities  of bull beef to the large population  in the 
Rome  area. Also, not only are Italian  consumers  unaware  that the beef 
they purchase  is Danish  but, in the view of some Danish  exporters,  many  
consumers  believe  that it is Italian  veal they are purchasing.  If this is 
the case, it allows  the trade in Italy to take a better  margin  on the Danish  
product  and would partly explain  why Italian importers  express  a pre­
ference  for the Danish  product.
Another  interesting  aspeet of the Danish  trade to Italy is that the 
majority  of bull carcases are  not broken  down before  export  into quarters  
or cuts. About  two-thirds  of carcases  are left unsplit  and the remaining  
trade is hindquarters.  Actual  trade in bull meat from Denmark  is direc ­
ted by both co-operatives  and private  enterprise.
(b) Great  Britain
Bull beef in Great Britain  is produced  and marketed  on a relatively  
small scale and is estimated  at the present  time to account  for less than 
2% of all clean cattle s'aughtered.  This market  share has remained  
constant  in recent years and indications  are that the prospects  for sig­
nificantly  increasing  its market  are not bright. The majority  of young  
bulls, about 70%, are produced  in intensively  fed cereal beef systems  
(barley  beef) by producers  who continue  in the business  from one year 
to the next. The remaining  30% are produced  by farmers  who change 
in and out of the system  with changes  in the levels of calf and feed 
prices. Cereal-fed  bull beef, like cereal-fed  steer beef, is extremely  
sensitive  to changes  in cereal and ca'f prices. Cereal-fed  steer beef has 
declined  considerably  in Britain  in recent  years,  as steers  tend to become 
overfat  on the high levels  of nutrition,  in addition  to their disadvantages  
of slower  growth  rates compared  with bulls. Young  bulls are slaughtered  
at between  10 and 13 months  of age ranging  in liveweight  between  220 
and 260 kg. The breed of animal  used is Friesian  or Friesian  cross.
Meat  yield from bulls
Because  of their superior  lean-to-bone  ratio, bulls contain more  
saleable  meat than steers at the same level of fatness. However,  the 
distribution  of lean meat in bulls is slightly  inferior  beeause  less of their  
saleable  meat is in the higher priced cuts. According  to the British  
Meat Research  Institute  bulls have more neck meat and less rump but 
the difference  is small and is more than eompensated  by the higher  yield  
of saleable  meat.
105
Retail  demand  for young  beef
Considering  the relatively  small level of production  in Great Britain,  
it follows  that the current  size of the retail market  for intensive  fed beef 
is also limited. Nonetheless,  it is an established  market  and the super ­
market  groups  who market  the product  appear  to be satisfied  with it 
and they are prepared  to pay a premium  price. Rates  of premium  paid 
by the retailers  vary at different  times  of the year but the most commonly  
quoted  figure is about 4.4p/kg  for a bone-in  side price compared  with 
high quality  commercial  l^ef. Also, there are no indications  from the 
two supermarket  groups  currently  selling intensively  fed beef that their  
sales are not profitable.  Incidentally,  the term “bull” beef is not men­
tioned  in any of their promotional  literature.
Major  criticisms  of bull beef
In general,  the attitudes  to the product  of meat traders  net selling  bull 
beef are adverse.  Probably  the most wide'y  voiced  criticisms  a’e that it 
lacks flavour  and taste, even though  most traders  admit that this is their 
own personal  view, and not the result of any tests carried out with 
shoppers.  Lack of colour  is also mentioned  as a problem.  However,  the 
real prejudice  on the part of the British  meat trade to bull beef may be 
that it commands  a premium  price. This would  cost more and secondly, 
the trade appears  to be concerned  about  possible  supp'y  prob'ems.
On the price factor,  the British  are sceptical  that the higher  purchase  
price  of the beef  would  be compensated  by the higher  saleable  meat  yields.  
They are not prepared  to risk becoming  uncompetitive  in the market  
p^ace. On the supply  situation,  it must be recognised  that at the present  
time in Great  Britain  meat companies  have no real problems  in obtaining  
the quality  of beef they currently  specify  and, if one supplier  fails, they 
can usually  change  to another.  With bull beef however,  supplies  are not 
so plentiful  and a meat company  could lose some of its flexibility  as far 
as supply  is concerned.
Organisation  of marketing
There is little doubt that the two retail groups  currently  selling sig­
nificant  qualities  of bull beef have devoted  a large amount  of effort into 
securing  their supply by way of arrangements  with meat plants and 
making  contacts  back to producer  level. In fact, mest bull beef produc ­
tion is carried  out on the basis of an established  market  outlet. Many  
producers  sell their animals  to the same firms on a continuous  basis, i.e. 
an “integrated ” approach.  An inherent  benefit  in this system  of direct  
marketing  is that it would appear  to eliminate  the incidence  of “dark  
cutting ” beef. Dark cutting beef, which is both unattractive  to the 
cooijjmer  and highly  susceptible  to bacterial  spoilage,  can be produced  
in both steer and bull carcases  by high levels of pre-slaughter  stress and 
activity.  Bulls  are more sensitive  than steers  to stress and therefore  more 
prone to produce  dark cutting  beef if they are nrt handled  properly  prior  
to slaughter.
106
The first example  of a beef production  line specifically  designed  to 
satisfy  a particular  retail need was in 1974 when the Aberdeen  Beef and 
Calf group collaborated  with Buchan  Meat Producers  (a co-operatively  
owned  meat plant)  to provide  the Waitrose  supermarket  group  with beef 
on a regular  basis. That particular  three-way  link up is still in existence 
and it has led to the formation  of others,  but it does not conceal  the 
fact that it is an undertaking  which takes an amount  of organisation.  
Incidentally,  Waitrose  buys all its beef from its suppliers  in vacuum-  
packed  form which is totally  different  to Denmark  where carcases  are 
left unsplit.
Conclusions
In assessing  the potential  market  for Irish bull beef in the EEC there  
are two comments  worth  noting  :
1. Solely from a distribution  viewpoint,  the marketing  of bull beef 
requires  a greater amount  of co-ordination  and organisation  than 
conventionally  fed beef.
2. The question  of “why should  we change ” is likely to compound  the 
marketing  effort  required  in any development  stage,  given  that doubts  
arise about  the viability  of the system  and the availability  of adequate  
and consistent  supp ’ies at competitive  prices  in this country.
107
ABSTRACTS
GRAZING  MANAGEMENT  : ITS EFFECTS  ON SWARD  
PRODUCTION  AND PROCESSES
O. CARTON  and A. J. BRERETON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
The currently  recommended  system  of grazing  management  for dairy  
cows (rotational  paddock  system)  was examined  in ternis  of the balance  
achieved  between  the supply  of grass  and herd feed requirement.  Difficul­
ties in balancing  the feed budget  arise at two levels. For most of the 
grazing  season an overall  balance  between  supply  and demand  can be 
achieved,  but feed problems  arise in early spring and late autumn.  At 
any time during the season— although  there is an overall  balance  between 
supply  and demand —there is wide variation  in the balance  achieved  in 
individual  paddocks  within  each rotation.  The effects  of these disparities  
between  supply  and demand  on total production  were examined.
Experimental  results were presented  showing  the effect of differing 
grazing  practices  on herbage  dry matter  production.  The results were 
used to present  an integrated  picture  of the implications  for production  
of different  management  strategies  within the limits of the rotational  
system. Flexib'e  options  for overcoming  the difficulties  that arise in 
balancing  the feed budget  were considered.
An analysis  of leaf and tiller dynamics  (data from labelled  tillers)  
indicate  that the management  effects  evaluated  in terms of dry matter  
may not be simply  translated  into effects  on the animal. Results  show  
that managements which  increased  leaf extension  rates also increased  leaf 
senescence  rates. Therefore  a management  practice  which increases  dry 
matter  production  may not result in a corresponding  increase  in useful  
feed.
108
MICROBIOLOGICAL  STUDIES  ON SILAGE  
D. R. SEALE,  C. M. QUINN,  P. A. WHITTAKER  
St. Patrick ’s College,  Maynooth,  Co. Kildare.
R. K. WILSON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.
First and second  cuts of Poa trivialis  and Festuca  rubra were ensiled 
in laboratory  silos with the grass structure  intact (long),  partly  destroyed  
(chopped)  and more extensively  destroyed  (minced).
Total viable counts,  coliform  bacteria,  Clostridia,  yeasts and moulds  
as well as DM, pH, VFA,  lactic acid and VN/TN  % were recorded  on 
days 2, 4, 10, 30 and 60.
First cuts of both grasses  made excellent  silages  in spite of low levels  
of WSC,  9.2 and 10.1 % for P. trivialis  and F. rubra respectively.  Second  
cuts, although  chemically  similar  to the first cuts gave a range of silages.  
pH values  were 4.82 and 5.64 for the long silages  and 3.80 and 3.99 for 
the minced  silages  at day 60. Chopped  silages  were intermediate.  Apart  
from a highly  significant  (p<0.01)  delay in growth  of lactobacilli  on long 
silage at day 2, the differences  between  grasses  were small. Large  counts  
of coliform  and Clostridia  were present  in long silages  at day 60. Results  
suggest  that a rapid release  of nutrients  by cell collapse  is essential  for 
good preservation.  The number  of lactobacilli  may be less important.  
Total WSC, since it does not assess  available  WSC, is a poor indicator  
of the suitability  of grass for silage.
PASTURE  FINISHING  OF CULL  COWS 
D. J. MORGAN  and P. ALLEN  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
A gioup  of 30 cull cows were assembled  in April that had calved  since  
the previous  December.  They were divided  into two groups  on the basis  
of liveweight,  body score and lactation  number,  and one group  (C) was 
slaughtered  as a control  group  on April 29th. The second  group  (G) was 
allowed  a 54 day grazing  period before being slaughtered  on July 1st. 
The cows were grazed  on a 2.8 ha area divided  into six paddocks  using 
an 18 d rotation.
The G group  gained  on average  44 kg liveweight  and improved  by 0.5 
body score. They killed out 2.2 percentage  points higher than the C 
group despite  having  heavier  kidney-knob  and channel  fat. Estimated  
carcass  gain of the G group  cows was 32 kg while both factory  grade  and 
conformation  classification  of group  G were improved  compared  to group  
C. Fat score was unchanged.  Allowing  for differences  in initial weight,  
group  G cows yielded  12.4 kg more saleable  meat per side than group  C 
cows,  hence almost  78% of the estimated  carcass  gain was in the form of 
saleable  meat.
109
THE EFFECT  OF CUTTING  FREQUENCY  ON THE YIELD  OF 
GRASS  FOR SILAGE  AND THE PERFORMANCE  OF 
BEEF  CATTLE
R. W. J. STEEN
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  
Co. Down  BT26  6DP.
Several  experiments  have been carried  out to quantify  the effects of 
cutting  frequency  and digestibility  of grass for silage on the intake and 
performance  of beef cattle. However  there is little information  available  
on the effects  of cutting  frequency  on dry matter  and digestible  organic  
matter  yields  of grass  over the range  of cutting  intervals  relevant  to silage  
making.  A plot experiment  has therefore  been carried  out to examine  
the effects  of harvesting  ryegrass  swards  at 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 
week intervals  throughout  the growing  season. Swards  of both early and 
late-heading  varieties  of perennial  ryegrass  (Cropper  and Talbot)  respec ­
tively)  were used over a three year period. Fertilizer  was applied  to all 
treatments  at the rate of 420 kg nitrogen,  175 kg PjOj and 210 kg KjO 
per hectare  per annum. Plots measured  2 m x 6 m and there were six 
replicates  per treatment.  Mean annual  dry matter  yields over the three  
years of the experiment  for swards  harvested  at 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 
12 week intervals  were 12.80, 13.95, 14.72, 15.32, 16.07, 14.86, 15.63 and 
15.65 + 0.322  t/ha respectively  for Cropper  and 12.28, 12.91,  14.17,14.52, 
14.61, 14.29, 14.41, 14.74 ± 0.284  t/ha for Talbot.  A series  of eight feed­
ing experiments  have also been carried  out over an eight year period  to 
examine  the effects  of cutting  interval  of grass for silage on the intake  
and performance  of finishing  beef cattle. The silages  were offered  ad 
libitum  to a total of 600 cattle (mean initial live weight 340 kg) for 
periods  of 105 to 150 days. The results  were presented.
no
SULPHURIC  ACID AS A SILAGE  PRESERVATIVE  
V. FLYNN  and P. O’KIELY  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
The efficacy  of 45% sulphuric  acid as a silage preservative  was evalu ­
ated in a series  of experiments  during  1980 and 1981. In each trial 85% 
formic acid applied  at 2.3-3.0 1/t was used as a positive  control. In 
Experiment  1 (1980) three successive  cuts of silage were harvested  on 
May 22nd,  July 1st and August  27th using a rotary  mower  and a pick-up  
wagon. Within  each cut, grass was treated  at ensiling  with either 85% 
formic  acid or 45% sulphuric  acid, both applied  at 2.3 1/t. A group  of 
16 Hereford  cross heifers  were allocated  to each treatment  and within  
each of these, first, second and third cut silages  were fed in sequence 
to the same cattle. Silage was the sole feed and was offered  ad libitum  
for 135 days. Daily  liveweight  gains  for the finishing  heifers  fed the 85% 
formic  and 45% sulphuric  acid treated  silages  were 0.81 and 0.83 kg 
respectively  and the corresponding  figures  for daily carcase  gains were 
0.47 and 0.45 kg.
In Experiment  2 (1981)  grass was direct  cut with a double  chop har­
vester  on 30th May and ensiled  either  without  preservative  or with 85% 
formic  acid at 3.0 1/t, or with 45% sulphuric  acid at 1.5, 3.0, 4.5 and 6.0 
1/t. Four yearling  Friesian  steers  per treatment  were individually  fed the 
silages  ad libitum,  without  supplement  for 35 days. Silage D.M. intake  
was recorded  and was 2.0, 2.1, 1.9, 2.0, 2.0 and 2.0% of mean liveweight 
for the 6 treatments  respectively.
In Experiment  3 the same treatments  and harvesting  system were 
applied  as in Experiment  2, except  it was carried  out using the regrowth  
followng  Experiment  2. It was cut on 30th July 1981 and was fed simi­
larly to 4 weanling  Friesian  steers per treatment  for 56 days. Silage  
preservation  and digestibility  was similar  for the 6 silages and D.M. 
intakes  (% liveweight)  were 2.1%, 2.2%, 2.2%, 2.1%, 2.1% and 2.2%,  
in the same order  as for Experiment  2.
For Experiment  4 (1981)  three successive  cuts of silage were harvested  
on 2nd June, 29th July and 6th October  using a double  chop harvester.  
Within  each cut, grass was treated  at ensiling  with either (a) no preserv ­
ative (3 tonne negative  control  clamp),  (b) 2.3 1/t of 85% formic  acid,  
(c) 2.3 1/t of 45% sulphuric  acid or (d) 4.2 1/t of 45% sulphuric  acid. A 
group  of 16 heifers  were allotted  to each of (b), (c) and (d) and within  
each of these, first, second and third cut silages  were fed in sequence. 
Within  each group of 16 heifers,  half were supplemented  with 2.39 kg 
rolled barley  daily. This feeding  trial lasted 191 days. Preservative  treat ­
ments (b), (c) and (d) resulted  in similarly  preserved  silages  and similar  
carcase  gains (approximately  0.36 kg daily)  and similar  intakes  of silage  
D.M. There was no interaction  between  supplement  and preservative  
treatments.
The copper  status  of the animals  in Experiments  2-4 and the copper,  
sulphur  and molybdenum  levels in the parent grass and the resultant  
silages  were determined.
Based on all results  accumulated  to date, it may be concluded  that 
sulphuric  acid is an effective  silage preservative  treatment  and may be 
used as an alternative  to formic  acid.
Ill
EFFECTS  OF MODERATE  AND HIGH  LEVELS  OF RELATIVE  
HUMIDITY  AT I5°C and TC ON CALF  HEALTH  AND  
PERFORMANCE
T. G. KELLY,  V. A. DODD,  D. J. RUANE  and R. J. FALLON  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
These  experiments  are part of current  research  in calf housing,  involv­
ing comparisons  of house  types  and model  studies  of basic  designs.
Two expernments  with purchased  Friesian  male calves (approximate  
age 7 days) were used to evaluate  the effects  of 75% versus  95% RH, at 
15°C in Experiment  1 and at 7°C in Experiment  2. In each experiment  
the calves were blocked  on a liveweight  basis and allocated  at random  
to one of two physchometric  houses  (20 calves  per house). They were  
individually  penned  on wooden  slats for a 42 day experimental  period. 
The fresh air ventilation  rate in each house for both experiments  was 
0.4 mV  hour/kg  liveweight  with a recirculation  rate of 26 air changes  per 
hour. Calves  were fed a milk replacer  diet at 38°C twice daily by bucket  
in proportion  to metabolic  liveweight  (M“ ’V and the amount  fed was 
adjusted  weekly. At 15°C the respective  intakes  of milk replacer  (kg/ 
calf) and average  liveweight  gains  were 27.34 and 27.15 kg and 330 and 
347 gms/day  for 75% and 95% RH and at 7°C the corresponding  values  
were 27.39 and 26.79 kg and 403 and 345 gms/day.  The difference 
between  the latter liveweight  gain calves was statistically  significant 
(P < 0.05) which suggests  that damp conditions  decreased  calf perform ­
ance in Experiment  2.
Health  observations  indicated  that the incidence  of respiratory  infec ­
tions decreased  with increased  RH. Radiological  examinations  conducted  
at 21 day intervals  showed  more apparent  lung damage  in calves  housed  
at 75% compared  with 95% RH.
The corresponding  total viable bacterial  counts  per litre of air were  
5.25 and 8.44 colony  forming  units at 15°C and 2.37 and 2.20 colony 
forming  units at 7°C respectively,  thus indicating  that warm, damp  
conditions  favoured  the survival  of airbom  bacteria.
These two experiments  suggest that the calves ’ tolerance  of high 
humidities  may be dependent  on the temperature  at which the calf is 
housed.
112
SUPPLEMENTATION  OF GRASS  FED CALVES  
M. G. KEANE  and F. J. HARTE  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Two experiments  were described  in which 14 week old calves were 
fed grass alone or supplemented  with milk or concentrates.  In absolute  
terms, all supplements  depressed  grass intake and increased  total dry 
matter intake,  the effects of concentrates  being greater  than those for 
milk. As a function  of bodyweight  however,  there was little difference 
in total dry matter  intake  between  the various  treatments.  All supplements  
improved  calf performance,  the response  to milk being  greater  than that 
to concentrates  regardless  of the basis for comparison.  The regressions  
of calf performance  (Y in g/d) on supplement  level (X in kg DM/d)  were:
Milk : Y  = 668 + 463X, = 0.99
Concentrates:  Y = 665 + 155X,  R^ = 0.98
Efficiencies  of utilization  of milk DM, ME and NEg were 2.7, 2.0 and 
1.5 times  those for concentrates.  The performance  of milk supplemented  
calves  was higher  and that of concentrate  supplemented  calves  was lower  
than predicted  from their ME intakes. There was no response  from  
treatment  of the soyabean  fraction  of the concentrates  with formaldehyde.  
When fed at the same net energy  level, there was no difference  between  
milk replacers  of different  ME concentrations.
113
PROCESSING  OF CONCENTRATES  FOR EARLY-WEANED
CALVES
C. MILLER,  P. O. BROPHY  and P. J. CAFFREY  
Department  of Agriculture,  University  College  Dublin.
Concentrate  mixtures  based on barley  and soyabean  meal have proved  
successful  in the feeding  of early-weaned  calves  over a number  of years.  
It is claimed  that the incidence  of digestive  problems,  such as bloat and 
acidosis  (potential  hazards  for ruminants  on high-concentrate  diets) is 
minimised  by judicious  processing  of the concentrates  and/or  the pro­
vision  of some long roughage.  The work reported  investigated  the effect  
of (i) method  of processing  of concentrates  and (ii) inclusion  of 3.5% fat 
in concentrate  mixture  on calf performance  in an early-weaning  system  
of rearing.
The following  concentrate  treatments  were compared  ;
A. Whole  barley  62.5%,  soyabean  meal 25%,  Cassava  3.5%,  molasses  
5.0%,  and mineral/vitamins  3.0%,  prepared  as 8 mm pellet.
B. Composition  as A but barley  ground  and concentrate  prepared  as 
5 mm pencil.
C. Same  as B except  cassava  replaced  by 3^% tallow.
The three concentrate  treatments  were compared  under  ad libitum  feed­
ing with calves  bedded  on straw and having  free access  to hay (Trial 1) 
and with calves  in crates  without  aecess  to long roughage  (Trial 2).
In Trial 1 concentrate  treatment  had no significance  on liveweight 
gain or rumen  pH and there were no digestive  problems.  In trial 2 live- 
weight  gain, concentrate  intake and rumen  pH values  were significantly  
higher  on Treatment  A than on Treatments  B and C. Bloating  was not 
apparent  on Treatment  A but calves  on Treatment  B suffered  from per­
sistent  bloat. Thus,  it appears  that method  of processing  of concentrates  
can have a significant  effect on the incidence  of bloat and liveweight 
gain in calves  and that there is likely  to be an interaction  between  type of 
processing  and the supply of long roughage.  Long roughage  intake  
accounted  for less tham 10% of total dry matter  Intake  in Trial 1.
114
EFFECT  OF MILK  FEEDING  REGIME  AND METHOD  OF 
PROCESSING  OF CONCENTRATES  FOR CALVES  ON 
PERFORMANCE
P. BERMINGHAM,  P. O. BROPHY  and P. J. CAFFREY  
Department  of Agriculture,  University  College  Dublin.
A 3 X 2 factorial  design,  involving  60 Friesian  bull calves,  was used in 
which two milk feeding  regimes  and three methods  of processing  the 
barley in the concentrate  mixture  were compared.  The milk-feeding  
regimes  were ; (i) ad libitum  feeding  of acidified  milk fed cold for 46 days  
(mean milk powder  intake,  42 kg) and (ii) early weaning  in which a 
restricted  level of milk replacer  was fed warm twice daily until weaning  
at 26 days (mean  milk powder  intake,  10.2 kg). The concentrate  mixture  
(barley,  soyabeans,  minerals,  vitamins)  which  was fed as a 9.5 mm pellet  
differed  in method  of processing  the barley  prior to pelleting  as follows:  
(i) whole  barley,  (ii) whole  barley  treated  with sodium  hydroxide  (28.2 g 
sodium  hydroxide  per kg barley)  and (iii) ground  barley.
The experimental  period  lasted 11 weeks  during  which  time the calves 
were bedded on straw and had free access to hay, concentrates  and 
water.
Mean daily liveweight  gain was significantly  higher  on the ad libitum  
milk feeding  regime  than on the early weaning  regime  during  the first 
four weeks (0.62 versus  0.45 kg) but there was no significant  difference 
in daily gain (ad libitum  milk : 0.81 kg, early weaning  : 0.79 kg) over the 
11-week  period. The total mean concentrate  intake  was 58 kg higher  on 
the early weaning  system  than on the ad libitum  milk feeding  system.
Calf performance  was not significantly  affected  by method  of pro­
cessing  of concentrate  although  calves  on the “ground  barley ” tended  to 
have the lowest  concentrate  intakes  and liveweight  gains.
Calf rearing  regime  did not have any significant  effect on subsequent  
performance  or on carcase  weights  at the two-year-old  stage.
115
COMPARISON  OF BEEF SIRE BREEDS  FOR GROWTH  AND
CARCASS  TRAITS
G. J. MORE  O’FERRALL,  E. P. CUNNINGHAM  and 
M. A. SHANNON
The Agricultural  Institute.  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.
Over 70% of our beef in Ireland  originates  in the dairy herd,  either  in 
the form of pure Friesian  animals  (36%)  or Friesian  x beef sire steers  
and heifers  (36%). The remainder  comes  from the suckler  herds. In 1978 
about 20 herd owners  agreed  to cooperate  in using a proportion  of beef 
sire inseminations  on a random  sample  of their cows. Progeny  of these  
matings  from six sire breeds  (Charolais  (CH), Simmental  (S), Friesian  
(F), Hereford  (H), and Angus  (AA) were purchased  the following  spring 
and reared  on a commercial  basis to slaughter  at 28 months  (67 heifers)  
and 31 months  (89 steers)  of age. Heifers  and steers  were separated  after 
their first winter;  all breeds  had steer and heifer  progeny  except  Friesians  
(steers  only).
On an age constant  basis CHx and Sx steers  had 6% and 5% heavier  
carcass  weight  and weight  for age than Friesians,  which  were similar  to 
the overall  breed average;  AA steers were 10% lighter. CH, H and S 
heigers  were 5%, 4% and 3% above average  carcass  weight,  and AA 
10% below. Limousins  had significantly  better killing  out percentage,  
while CH steers and heifers  and S heifers  had significantly  better con­
formation,  and F steers  and AA heifers  significantly  poorer  conformation  
than the overall  mean. F steers  and S steers  and heifers  had significantly  
greater  carcass  depth.
In a second  trial of 57 intensively  reared heifers  (16 month  old beef)  
of CH, F and H, Charolais  had significantly  better  carcass  weight  (10%)  
carcass  weight  for age (9%) and killing  out percentage  (55.5 vs 51.9);  
than Friesians;  they also had significantly  better  conformation  and lower 
fat scores. Herefords  had lower carcass  weight  and growth  rate (3.4%),  
better killing out percentage  (53 vs 51.9) and conformation,  than 
Friesians.
In a third trial involving  steers of the same three breeds  fed at two 
feed levels and slaughtered  at three different  carcass  weights,  Charolais  
had significantly  greater  carcass  weight  for age (15%)  conformation  and 
killing  out percentage  than Friesians,,  with Herefords  being  intermediate.
Killing  out percentage  and conformation  scores  improved  as slaughter  
weight  increased.  Friesian  had slightly  longer  and deeper  carcasses  than 
either  Charolais  or Hereford.
These trials confirm  that Continental  cattle have superior  growth  rate 
(av. about 10%)  and conformation,  than Friesians.  In order  to obtain  the 
best results  from continental  crosses  they should  be fed more intensively 
than under  our traditional  extensive  system.
116
THE EFFECT  OF SODIUM  HYDROXIDE  TREATMENT  OF
WHOLE  BARLEY  ON ITS NUTRITIONAL  VALUE  FOR THE
PIG WHEN  PRESENTED  IN THE MILLED  AND UNMILLED
FORMS
D. C. PATTERSON
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough.
Co. Down  BT26  6DP.
Whole barley grain of 821 g DM/kg  was treated  with an aqueous  
solution  of sodium  hydroxide  (270 g NaOH/kg)  to give 33.8 g NaOH/kg  
DM. This treatment  softened  the seed coat of the barley  so that it could 
be easily rubbed  off by hand. Barleys  both in the untreated  state and 
treated  with NaOH  were then included  at the rate of 800 g/kg in the 
ground  and unground  forms in the diets of 48 individually  penned  pigs 
from 31.6 kg until slaughter  at 81.7 kg liveweight.  The diets were fed 
to a scale which gave equal amounts  of dry matter  offered  daily on all 
treatments.
Treatment  of barley  with NaOH  did not affect the rate of growth  or 
feed conversion  ratio obtained  with the diet containing  whole  barley  but 
with ground  grain there was a significant  (P< 0.001) deterioration  in 
both variables.  For the diets with untreated  ground  and treated  ground  
barley the liveweight  gains were 571 and 445 + 11.5 g/d respectively 
and the feed conversion  ratios (DM basis) were 2.69 and 3.16 + 0.071  
respectively.
Grinding  improved  growth  rates (P < 0.001)  and feed conversion  ratios  
(P <0.001)  with untreated  barley. With the untreated  whole and un­
treated  ground  diets the liveweight  gains were 484 and 571 + 11.5 g/d 
respectively  while the feed conversion  ratios (DM basis) were 2.69 and 
3.16 + 0.071 respectively.  No improvement  in performance  resulted  from 
grinding  treated  barley.
Grinding  significantly  increased  the digestibility  of energy  and nitrogen. 
Treatment  with NaOH  improved  the digestibility  of energy  from 441 to 
582 + 20.1 g/d (P < 0.001)  in diets with whole barley. The digestibility  
of energy  remained  unaffected  by treatment  with NaOH.
Treatment  of barley with NaOH  did not improve  nutritive  value of 
either ground  or whole barley but the apparent  utilisation  of digested 
energy  for growth  was severely  depressed.
117
MICROMANIPULATION  OF EMBRYOS
M. P. BOLAND,  R. GATICA  and I. GORDON
Department  of Agriculture,  U.C.D.,  Lyon ’s Estate,  Newcastle,
Co. Dublin.
This report described  efforts to produce  identical  twins in cattle and 
sheep. Embryos  were produced  following  the hormonal  induction  of 
superovulation.  The zona pellucida  of the embryos  was opened  and the 
blastomeres  evacuated  with a micromanipulator.  The blastomeres  were  
then grouped  in two halves  and replaced  in previously  evacuated  zonae  
pellucidae.  The rupture  in the zona pellucida  was sealed using a 1 % 
agar solution  in sodium  chloride;  the cylinders  were transferred  to the 
oviducts  of synchronized  ewes for 4-5 days. Overall  40% of split sheep 
embryos  and 75% of split cow embryos  continued  development  when  
recovered.  Five of eight recipient  cows were palpated  pregnant  at 90 
days following  transfer  either surgically  or non-surgically  with micro- 
manipulated  embryos.
118
FREEZE-STORAGE  OF CATTLE  EMBRYOS
M. G. DISKIN  and J. M. SREENAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
The advantage  of being able to successfully  freeze embryos  include 
the following : facilitate  the wide scale application  of embryo  transfer,  
dispense  with the requirement  to maintain  large recipient  herds,  genetic  
studies,  immunological  studies,  breed preservation,  help to overcome 
transport  and quarantine  restrictions  in addition  to numerous  other  
potential  uses. Applications  such as these are dependent  on obtaining  a 
simple freezing  method  which will ensure high embryo  survival  rates  
following  thawing.  The freezing  process  consists  of partial  dehydration  
by the stepwise  addition  of a eryoproteetive  agent and freezing  very 
slowly  to temperatures  between  — 30°C and — 60°C prior to transfer  to 
liquid N. at — 196°C.
Day 6 and Day 7 embryos  were collected  from superovulated  donors  
and exposed  to increasing  concentrations  of a cryoprotectant  and cooled 
from 20 - 22‘'C to —7°C at 1°C min'*. Crystalization  or seeding  was 
indueed  at —7°C. Following  seeding,  embryos  were eooled to final 
temperatures  of — 60°C (Method 1), — 33°C (Method  2), — 36°C  
(Method  3) at varying  rates between  0.1 and 0.3 °C min^' before direct  
transfer  to liquid for longterm  storage.
Embryos  frozen by Method  1 were slowly  thawed  by direct transfer  
from — 196°C to —50°C and from SO’C to — lO'C at 10°C min"' and 
from - 10°C to a waterbath  at 20-22°C.  Embryos  frozen  by Methods  2 
and 3 were thawed  by transferring  directly  from — 196°C  to a waterbath  
at 20-22°C.  The eryoproteetive  agent was removed  by exposing  the 
embryos  to a decreasing  gradient  of the cryoprotectant.  Embryos  under ­
going normal  development  in culture,  and expansion  of the blastoeoetic  
eavity  and/or  hatching  from the zona pellucida  were eonsidered  to have 
survived.
Embryo  survival  rates for Day 6 embryos  following  freezing  by all 
three methods  were 0. Embryo  survival  rates following  freezing/thawing  
for Day 7 embryos  were 14%, 75% and 74% for Methods  1, 2 and 3 
respeetively.
Following  thawing  and eultures,  embryos  showing  normal  development  
were transferred  to recipients  to determine  pregnancy  rate. Pregnaney  
rates of 87% and 63% (P > 0.05) were achieved  following  a single  
ipsilateral  transfer  of either  a fresh or frozen  embryos.
In a further  experiment  in order to simplify  the de- and rehydration  
proeesses,  direct and stepwise  de- and rehydration  were compared  using 
the optimum  freezing/thawing  procedures.  Embryo  survival  rates were 
high (80%)  and similar  for all four possible  combinations.
119
RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  OVULATION  RATE  AND EMBRYO  
MORTALITY  IN SHEEP,  CATTLE  AND  PIGS
J. P. HANRAHAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
The number  of offspring  born per conception  depends  on ovulation  
rate and embryo  survival,  since fertilisation  is essentially  an all-or-none  
process. Information  on the relationship  between  ovulation  rate and 
embryo  mortality  may be used to predict  litter size, if a suitable  model  
for the distribution  of deaths  can be formulated.  From a study of an 
extensive  set of sheep data from both natural  matings  and from egg- 
transfer  experiments  it appears  reasonable  to assume  that the distribution  
of the number  of surviving  embryos  for a given ovulation  rate, is 
binomial.  Consequently,  embryo  loss rate may be estimated  from data 
on pregnant  females  only and such an analysis  for published  data on 
sheep shows  that the probability  of embryo  loss increases  linearly  with 
increasing  ovulation  rate over the range 2-8 eggs shed. The resulting  
estimates  combined  with the binomial  distribution  model, yield the 
following  curvilinear  relationship  between  ovulation  rate (X) and litter  
size (Y); Y = 0.15 -H 0.926X  -0.0763X1
A survey of published  literature  on embryo  mortality  in multiple  
ovulating  cows suggests  the possibility  that the distribution  of twin 
ovulations  between  the unilateral  and bilateral  types may depart sub­
stantially  from that expected  under  a model  which  assumes  independent  
sampling  of ovaries  for the location  of twin ovulation  points. The 
observed  distributions  differer substantially  among studies (P<.01)  
reported  in the literature,  with observed  proportions  of unilateral  twin 
ovulations  varying  from 0.42 to 0.76. Published  data on twin pregnancies  
and their associated  ovulation  counts  revealed  that 75 por cent of twin 
pregnancies  (due to twin ovulations)  were associated  with bilateral  
ovulation  points. This result together  with the data on the distribution  
of twin ovulations  indicates  a substantial  difference  in embryo  survival 
between  bilateral  and unilateral  twin ovulating  cows. Using the same  
model as for sheep the probability  of embryo  death  was estimated  to be 
0.22 higher  for unilateral  twin ovulations  than for bilateral  twin ovula ­
tions. The rate of embryo  loss in bilateral  twin ovu'ations  appjeared  to 
differ little from the loss in single ovulating  cattle. Using a base value 
of 0.30 for embryo  loss in cows with single bilateral  twin ovulations  the 
following  relationship  between  ovulation  rate and litter size was derived.
Ovulation  rate 
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5Predicted  litter size 
1.08 
1.12 
1.17 
1.21
The relationship  is essentially  linear  over the range of ovulation  rates of 
likely interest  for cattle. The predicted  litter size was not very sensitive  
to changes  in the proportion  of unilateral  twin ovulations  but, as ex­
120
pected,  depended  critically  on the level of embryo  mortality  in twin 
ovulations.
The relationship  between  ovulation  rate and embryo  loss in pigs also 
shows  an increasing  rate of embryo  mortality  as the number  of eggs shed 
increases,  with evidence  of a curvilinear  relationship  between  ovulation  
rate and litter size. Available  data in the literature  do not allow a 
detailed  examination  of the distribution  of embryo  survival  in the pig 
as a function  of ovulation  rate. In contrast  with sheep there is good 
evidence  for considerable  breed differences  in embryo  survival  rate and 
also a suggestion  that uterine  capacity  in the sow may be a function  of 
age with gilts being least able to accommodate  increases  in ovulation  
rate.
The relationship  between  ovulation  rate and litter size in sheep has 
been found to give accurate  predictions  of litter size from data on ovula ­
tion rate. Predictions  for the cattle have not been tested while in the 
case of pigs there is likely to be a need for breed specific  relationships.
121
heat  detection  by time -lapse  video  recording
W. J. McCAUGHEY  and A. M. A. KARIEM
Veterinary  Research  Laboratories,  Stormont.  Belfast  and Faculty  of 
Agriculture.  Queen ’s University,  Belfast.
The .xper™e„«l  whicfl  ocT™
toTng  oe'msrsS  groups  of housed  ^ " The'Tndftionrof  
Sexpe^  fe uo™a,  dairy fanus  in
Northe^rSaUd  Where 70% heifers  are bred in winter  and up to 90%S farms  provide  artificial  light overnight  during  the winter  mont s.
In the first experiment,  6 heifers  were fed eoncen  rate) at
8 ^0 am and were continuously  observed  throughout  a total of 15 hea .
Since the results  of the experiment  indicated  that there was a 
fall in activity  following  feeding,  this aspect  was investigated  m a secon
^""l^'^^riment  II the feed was presented  at 8.30 P^*"- *^2 h^als
experimStal  conditions  were ''Stained  as previously  A total o^^  
were observed  with a mean  duration  of 18-1 +3_5 hours Heat aci y 
chaneed The majority  of activity  occurred  during  the normal  worwng  
dav Ld 75% of all the events  occurred  between  7 am and 9 P*"- 
o?erall  frequency  of the heat signs also appeared  to u ^ut
H^fferen^s  were shown  to be statistically  significant  (P less than .01) butffSSw  of Th? small number  of heats  m 774^  7
undetermined,  may have been involved.  Further  studies  in this area
'”i"„®trthird°Sperime».  one heifer was removed  from the group re- 
olaced by a teaser bull, and feeding  again occurred  at 8.30 am as in 
Moeriment  1 A total of 10 heats were observed  with a mean duration  
of^6  1+4 1 hours. The investigatory  behaviour  of the hub. when n 
heifer  w'as in oestrus  or approaching  oestrus.  ^kh  This
^X ‘of S^SSr^Kd  r,7  ilsl^brn  ^oi hi. igf  A^a^ed
TbSrlation  in heifers. The presence  of the bull however  reduced  the 
frequency  with which  heat signs  were displayed  by the heifers.
Although  the number  of heats  examined  in each experiment  was small  
the^re^sult!  suggest  that heat detection  may improved  by changes  in 
management  which  could readily  be applied  by dairy farmers.
122
.......... ..................; \;;<i
