Irish Grassland  
Association  Journal
2002  VOLUME  36
IRISH  GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION
CORPORATE  MEMBERS  2002
ACC  
AIB Bank  
Alltech
Bank of Ireland  
Dairymaster  Limited  
Dawn  Meats  
Drinagh  Co-Op  
Farm Managers  Association  
Glanbia
Goldcrop  Limited  
Green  Agribusiness
Hibernian  General  Insurance  Ltd 
I.A.W.S.  Group  pic 
I.F.A.C.
Irish Farmer ’s Journal  
Irish Fertilizer  Industries  
Richard  Keenan  & Company  
LELY  Ireland  Limited  
Monsanto  Ireland  Ltd 
Mullinahone  Co-Op  
New Zealand  Cattle  Limited  
Premier  Molasses  Company  Limited  
Timac  Limited
lEAGASC  EDUCATION  and ADVISORY  SERVICES
Ballyhaise  Agricultural  College  
Cork East  
Cork West
Kildalton  Agricultural  College  
Kerry  
Laois  
Limerick
Regional  Office,  South,  Kildalton  
Regional  Office,  North,  Grange  
Tipperary  South  
Westmeath
Irish Grassland  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 36 2002
Edited  by 
David  McGilloway
ISSN 0332-0588
Printed  by Walsh,  Printer,  Roscrea
CONTENTS
PAGE
S. Flanagan
W. KellyExtended  grazing  as an alternative  to Housing 1
A.F. Carson
L.E.R.  Dawson
D. IrwinDeveloping  easy-care  lambing  systems 8
A. Winter Lame  Sheep  - are they an inevitability  of
Sheep  farming16
H. M. Gunn Scrapie,  a TSE that must be eliminated  - 
an EU perspective18
T. Sweeney Scrapie,  current  knowledge  on the genetics  
and infective  agent20
T.J. Gilliland
P.D. Barrett
R.E. AgnewVariety  diversity  in key characters  determining  
grazing  value in ryegrass  {Lolium  perennel  L) 
swards26
N. Gowan
Ml 0 Donovan
1. Casey  G StakelumImproving  cow performance  at grass,  
what do grass  cultivars  offer?33
J. McNamara The impact  of grazing  management  on 
improving  milk solids  production45
D.J. Garrick Dairy cow improvements  using selection  and 
crossbreeding49
P. Dillon
F. Buckley
R. Evans  J Kennedy
D. Berry
R.F. VeerkampBreeding  objectives  for a seasonal  calving  
pasture  based  system  of milk production57
B. Hillard Crossbreeding  results  at farm level in the 
Dungarvan  area67
J.G. Crowley A blueprint  for growing  maize 71
E. Phelan What  are the advantages  of using maize  silage
For a spring  calving  system78
T Keady Complementary  forages  for dairy production 83
Ml Ryan Understanding  the N Cycle  and the
Pathways  of N loss85
S. Regan  
J. Dwyer
Ml Wallace  
J. Breen,  S Crosse
Ml Doran
P. French  
M.C. Hickey
Ml Drennan
T. EganEnvironmental  legislation,  current  and 93
Pending  and its implications
The future  of the Irish Dairy Industry  - the 99
IGA submission  to the Department  of
Agriculture
Milk pricing  revisited:  equity,  transparency 106
and producer incentives
How I intend  to grow my beef enterprise  - 120
A farmer's  perspective
Outwintering  pads as an accommodation  system 125
for beef cattle
Important  factors  in suckler  beef production  129
and influence  of calving  season  on income
Financial  returns  from cattle systems  137
COUNCIL  2002-2003
President  
Vice-President  
Past-President  
General  SecretaryJohn O 'Brien  
Tony Pettit  
Noel Culleton  
Grainne  Dwyer
Peter Baker,  Brendan  Barnes,  Johnny  Butterly,  John Claffey,  Jim Dwyer,  John  
Dunworth,  Richie  Fallon,  Donal Fitzgerald,  Sean Flanagan,  Jan Frederiks,  
Padraig  French,  James  Humphreys,  Anne Kehoe,  Pearse  Kelly, William  Kingston,  
Mike Magan,  Pat McFeely,  David McGilloway,  Michael  O’Donovan,  Robin  Talbot,  
Padraig  Walshe,  Peter  Young
Irish Grassland  Association,  Moneymore,  Borris  in Ossory,  Co. Laois 
Phone/Fax  0505 41025 Email: arassland(a)eircom  net
Extended  grazing  as an alternative  to housing
S. Flanagan  and W. Kelly
Teagasc,  Knockbeg  Sheep  Unit, Carlow
Introduction
Labour  demands  and production  costs are two components  of flock management  that 
are commanding  increasing  significance  for sheep  producers.  Both components  have  
one unifying  determinant  that can reduce  man-hours  and costs, namely,  grazed  grass.  
Grass  and how it is used is central  to the competitiveness  of the sheep  sector  and, in 
particular,  to reducing  the workload  associated  with winter housing. Results  which  
reduce  labour  demand  and input costs are summarised  in this paper.
Two contrasting  systems
Two systems  of mid season  lamb production  are being compared  on two self-contained 
farmlets  at Knockbeg:
1. Grazing,  silage  and housing:  9.6 ha grass/clover  pasture  stocked  at 14 ewes per ha 
including  a silage  budget  of 0.6 t per ewe for a 100-day winter.
2. Extended  grazing:  15.0 ha perennial  ryegrass  pasture  stocked  at 10 ewes per ha; 
only surplus  grass is conserved  for silage.
In 1999 and 2000 the ewes in both systems  were housed  for lambing  but in 2001 the 
ewes in the extended  grazing  system  lambed  in the field.
The objectives  of this project  are:
(i) to improve  the enterprise  competitiveness  of sheep  production
(ii) to develop  grassland  management  practices  for all-year  round grazing
(iii) to compare  ewe lambing  performance  and output  in flocks wintered  and lambed  
down either  indoor  on silage  or outdoor  on grazing  grass
(iv) to compare  the labour  inputs  (man-hours)  required  for winter  housing  and extended  
grazing  systems
Choice  of lambing  date
This was a key factor  in the management  plan. In order  to minimise  feed costs  in spring,  
meal supplements  post-lambing  were ruled out. It was therefore  necessary  to maximise  
grass supplies  in both systems  for satisfying  ewe peak feed demand  post-lambing.  A 
70 kg ewe suckling  twin lambs  and producing  3 kg milk per day requires  a daily Intake  
of almost  3.5 kg grass DM. At 14 ewes per ha the feed demand  is almost  50 kg grass  
DM/ha/day.  Spring  pastures  in the Carlow  region  do not attain this level of production  
until mid April. However,  for lambing  in mid-March  adequate  supplies  of grass can be 
accumulated  by resting pastures  from the previous  December  and by application  of 
fertilizer  N around  February  1.
In 1999 and 2000  the lambing  date chosen  for both systems  was March  21; in 2001 April 
1 was chosen  for outdoor  lambing  in the extended  grazing  system.  Ewes  were  therefore  
joined  with the rams on October  17 with the exception  of the outdoor  lambing  flock for 
which the date was October  25. All rams were removed  after 6 weeks. The 
management  calendar  was planned  around  these  dates.
Fertilizer  N
Nitrogen  inputs  were low, 75 kg and 80 kg N per ha in systems  1 and 2 respectively.  In 
system  1 the clover  content  of the pasture  was high and fertilizer  N was restricted  to 50 
kg N around  February  1 for early grass,  70 kg N in April for silage  and 34 kg N for silage  
aftermath.  In system  2, N inputs  were based  on the principle  that the optimum  amount  
of N depends  on the stocking  rate. For 10 ewes per ha only strategic  dressings  of N 
were applied;  50 kg N around  February  1 for early grass and 34 kg N in autumn  when  
closing  paddocks  for extended  grazing.
Autumn  saved  pasture
Pasture  for extended  grazing  was accumulated  by closing a number  of paddocks  
sequentially  during  September  and October,  applying  34 kg N per ha and resting  them  
until December.  Up to 50 % of the farmlet  was closed;  hence  the stocking  rate on the 
grazing  area during  the breeding  season  was high, e g. up to 20 ewes  per ha. The ewes  
were already  in good condition  prior to September  as a result of lax grazing  during  
August.
Grass  budgeting  1998-2000
The ewes in system  1 were housed  in mid December.  In system  2 extended  grazing  
was commenced  in early December.  The ewes were block grazed  in daily shifts using  
electrified  net fencing  and offered  a daily ration of 1.3 kg grass DM/eweWay.  A back 
fence  was used to prevent  access  to ground  already  grazed.  Grazing  was completed  in 
February;  the ewes were then housed and offered silage ad libitum plus meal 
supplements.
Average  results  on the feeding  capacity  of extended  grazing,  days housed  and ewe 
liveweight  for the 2 years 1998-2000  are shown  in Table 1. Grass  supply  was 1625 kg 
DM per ha and, when rationed  as described,  grazing  extended  to February  6. Thus,  the 
housing  period was reduced  to 44 days. The adequacy  of the grass allowance  for 
satisfying  the feed requirements  for 70 kg ewes in mid pregnancy  was confirmed  by a 6 
% increase  in liveweight.  Condition  score was maintained.  Moreover,  lamb birth rate 
was significantly  heavier  {+ 0.4 kg) in the extended  grazing  system.
Table 1. Feeding  capacity  of extended  grazing  (1998-2000)
System Silage  and housing Extended  grazing
No. ewes 131 153
No. ha autumn  saved  pasture - 6.5
Extended  grazing  commenced - December  7
Grass  supply  (kg DM/ha) - 1625
Grass  allowance  (kg DM/ewe/day) - 1.3
Date of housing December  14 February  6
No. days housed 98 44
Ewe liveweight  (kg), C. score);
Mid pregnancy  (December  12) 69,4 67.8  (3.5)
Late pregnancy  (February  9) N/A 72.0 (3.5)
Effects  of extended  grazing  on management  inputs
Conventional  housing  and silage  feeding  systems  require  the cutting  and transport  of 
grass to the farmyard  for silage conservation,  tractor transport  and machinery  for 
feeding,  handling  of straw on a regular  basis for bedding  pens, followed  by the task of 
mucking  out sheds  and providing  transport  to the field for manure  disposal.  The shorter 
housing period resulting  from extended  grazing reduces  demands  for these  
management  inputs. It is, however,  necessary  to purchase  portable  electric  fencing  for 
managing  extended  grazing.
Comparative  estimates  for winter management  inputs including  fencing  are shown  in 
Table 2. Requirements  for silage and straw in the extended  grazing  system  were 
reduced  by two-thirds  leading  to a cost saving  of €827 per 100 ewes at year 2000  
prices. Straw  was worth  approximately  €114 per ha (Teagasc  2000)  which  at a yield of 
2.5 t per ha is equivalent  to 4.6 cent per kg. The cost of straw  varies  widely  depending  
on whether  it is home grown or purchased.  The fencing  cost incurred  by extended  
grazing  must be set against  these savings  and may be discounted  over 5 years as 
shown,  resulting  in net savings  of €707 per 100 ewes.
Labour  as measured  by man-hours  required  for feeding  and herding  was reduced  by 
over two-thirds. The financial  savings  attributable  to this factor depend on the 
opportunity  cost of the stockman ’s own labour. If it is included  at the current  agricultural 
wage of €9 per hour, labour cost is reduced  by €783 per 100 ewes. In practice,  
however,  the opportunity  cost varies from farm to farm and the values  shown here 
should  be adjusted  accordingly.
Table 2. Winter  management  in-puts  and cost savings  arising  from extended  grazing  
(1998-2000)
Silage  and 
housingExtended
grazingSavings*  /100 ewes  
(€)
Housing  period  (days) 98 44
Per 100 ewes:
Silage  (t) 60 20 610
Straw (kg) 7480 2720 217 827
Less cost of electric  fencing:
300 m @ €2/m
discounted  over 5 yrs. 120 707
Labour  (man-hours/day) 1.0 0.3
Labour  (man hours) 100 13
Waqe  @ €9/hour 900 117 783
*Costs:  Silage  €l5.24/t;  straw  4.6 cent/kg;  electric  fencing  €100/50  metre  roll
Grass  supply  in spring
The provision  of adequate  supplies  of grass in spring  is a critical  point of management  
for cutting  feed costs. Extended  grazing  reduces  the resting  period  for grass recovery  
in spring  and hence  may be expected  to impact  on grass  supply.  The adequacy  of grass  
supply  however  is relative  to feed demand  which,  at the stocking  rate practised  in the 
extended  grazing  system,  is low. To date, relative  to feed demand,  extended  grazing  
has not adversely  affected  grass  supply  for ewes  post-lambing.  Indeed,  after application  
of fertilizer  N in February  the fast recovery  of pasture  following  extended  grazing  has 
been a notable  feature  of the daily block grazing  system.
Grazing  management
Six paddock  rotational  grazing  was practised  on both farmlets. Occasionally,  1 or 2 
paddocks  were sub-divided  temporarily,  e.g. for ewes rearing  triplets. Creep  feed was 
introduced  to ail lambs  at 8 weeks  of age and offered  at the rate of 300g/head/day  until 
slaughter.  Length  of grazing  rotation  depended  on sward height,  i.e. ewes and lambs  
were moved  when the sward  was grazed  down to 4 cm in April, 5 cm in May, 6 cm in 
June and 8 cm in July/August  for weaned  lambs. (Sward  height  for sheep  is measured  
to ground  level). Grazing  control  proved  difficult  in the extensive  system  due to the lax 
grazing  arising  from the low stocking  rate.
Output
Pooled  results  on lamb performance  and oufput  for the two years  are shown  in Table  3. 
Lamb birth weights,  growth  rates and carcass  weights  were significantly  higher  in the 
extensive  system  with its lower stocking  rates of ewes and lambs. Due to the use of 
Belclare  x Cheviot  ewes, output  per ewe was high in both systems  of intensive  and 
extensive  production.  Output per ha, however,  was significantly  reduced  in the 
extensive  system  due to the lower  stocking  rate.
Table  3. Lamb performance  and output  (1998  - 2000)
Intensive  grazing Extensive  grazing
No, ewes/ha 14 10
No. lambs  reared/ewe 1.77 1.78
No. lambs  sold/ha 24 18
Growth  rate (g/day):
Birth to 5 weeks 271 286
5 to 14 weeks 238 267
Weaning  wt. (kg) 29.0 31,1
Carcass  wt. (kg) 18,8 19.3
Lamb carcass  output:
kg/ewe 33,3 34.2
kg/ha 451 347
Outdoor  lambing  2001
To further  develop  an easy care approach,  it was decided  in 2001 to continue  extended  
grazing  for February/March  and to allow  the ewes lamb in the field. Concentrates  were 
introduced  at 6 weeks pre-lambing  (February  7) at the rate of 400 g/ewe/day  fo 
supplement  the daily grass ration of 1.3 kg DM. Lambing  in the extended  grazing  
system  was delayed  until April 1 firstly, to stagger  the seasonal  demand  for labour  and 
secondly,  because  this date coincided  with the change  to summer  time. Ewes were  
scanned  in January  and 3 paddocks  were reserved  for single,  twin and triplet bearing  
ewes to lamb separately.  A fourth paddock  was reserved  for grazing  post-lambing.  
These  paddocks  had already  been grazed  in December/January  and were dressed  with 
fertiliser  N in February.
The date for the booster  vaccine  at 2 weeks  pre-lambing  was used for 'spread-out',  i.e. 
the ewes were removed  off block grazing,  transferred  to the 3 assigned  paddocks  and 
set stocked  for lambing.  At this time also, the concentrate  supplements  for ewes  bearing  
mulfiples  was increased  to 700g/head/day.  Ewes were allowed  to lamb unassisted  and 
no lambing  supervision  was conducted  after dark. Creep  feed was introduced  to all 
lambs  at 8 weeks  of age and offered  at the rate of 250 g/head/day.
Ewe productivity  2001
Results  on ewe lambing  performance  are shown  in Table  4. Ewe productivity  was again  
high in both systems,  i.e. about  1.8 lambs  reared  per ewe joined. Lamb  birth weight  was 
significantly  higher {+ 0.6 kg) in the extended  grazing  system. It is possible  that 
concentrate  supplementation  at grass was excessive. Current  work is aimed at 
clarifying  this issue. The advantage  of 0.6 kg extra birth weight  in the extended  grazing  
system  combined  with the lower stocking  rate resulted  in significantly  higher  weaning  
weight.
Table  4 Ewe reproductive  performance  2001
System Silage  and housing Extended  grazing
No. ewes to ram 140 152
Ewes lambing  (%) 92.1 94.7
Litter size 2.19 2.17
Lamb mortality  (%)* 13.1 10.6
No. lambs  reared/ewe  joined 1.76 1.84
‘Figures  relate  to all lambs  born (dead and alive)
Input  costs
Comparative  results on outputs,  inputs and gross margins  are shown in Table 5. 
Average  price per kg carcass  was 452 cent. Income  from lamb sales, wool and premia  
was as shown. The net cost of replacing  cull ewes in autumn  2000 was €14.73.
Direct  costs are listed under  seven  headings  and do not include  labour. Silage  making  
was costed  at €19 per t. Concentrates  for ewes and creep  feed for lambs  consisted  of 
a pelleted  compound  costing  €190 per t (crude  protein  content  190 g/kg DM). Flock  
health  expenses  were comprised  mainly  of pour-ons  for fly strike prevention,  cydectin  
for scab prevention,  zinc sulphate  for footbathing,  fasinex  and oramec  for dosing  against 
fluke and worms. Other  costs included  straw  (5) 64 cent per bale, shearing  @ 152 cent 
per ewe and levies  @ 80 cent per lamb.
Gross  margin  per ewe was almost  15% higher  in the extensive  system. Gross  margin  
per ha was reduced  considerably,  reflecting  the lower  carcass  output. Critical  appraisal  
of Table 5 shows  that creep feed was an expensive  input. This component  is being  
targeted  for significant  reduction,  especially  in view of the likely return of more normal  
lamb prices  than those of 2001 .
Cost per kg carcass
Production  cost is a major determinant  of enterprise  competitiveness.  The estimates 
shown  in Table 6 provide  a basis  for estimating  cost of production.  Direct  costs are as 
already  listed in Table 5 and the fixed costs shown in Table 6 are those incurred  by 
buildings  and machinery  maintenance,  depreciation  charges,  fuel, etc; labour and 
interest  charges  are not included.  Total costs per ewe amounted  to €85.51  and €63.01  
in the silage/housing  and extended  grazing  systems,  respectively.  Using the carcass  
weights  shown in Table 4 the relative  costs of producing  1 kg of lamb carcass  were  
calculated  as shown.  The effects  of extensification  in reducing  costs (per ewe, lamb, kg) 
are clearly  evident.
Table  5. Outputs,  inputs  and gross margins  2001 (€)
System Silage  and housing Extended  grazing
No. ewes 140 152
Output  per ewe
1.77 iambs 152.0
1.84 lambs 151.4
Wool + premium 12.84 164.85 12.84 164.21
Less replacement 14.73 14.73
150.12 149.48
Direct  costs  per ewe
1. Fertilizers  for grazing 5.87 4.79
2. Silage  0.6 t 11.43
3. Concentrates:  Pre-lambing  20 kg 3.94
Pre-lambing  23 kg 4.52
Post-lambing  for ewes suckling  triplets:
23 ewes @ 1 kg/ewe/day  for 6 weeks 1.30 1.30
4. Creep  feed 30 kg/lamb 10.11
26 kg/lamb 9.10
5. Flock health 8.20 8.20
6. Scanning 0.89
7. Other 6.14 46.99 2.97 31.77
Gross  margin  per ewe (€) 103 118
Gross  margin  per ha (€) 1494 1180
Table  6. Production  costs in 2001 (€)
System Silage  and housing Extended grazing
Gross  output/ewe 150.12 149.48
Direct  costs/ewe 46.99 31.77
Fixed costs/ewe 38.52 85.51 31.24 63.01
Net margin/ewe 64.61 86.47
Cost/kg  carcass  (cent) 254 188
Costs  as percent  of price 56% 42%
How many  ewes?
It is of interest  to estimate  the flock size that is required  to generate  an income  
equivalent  to the 2001 average  industrial  wage  of €23,500  (£18,500).  By deducting  the 
costs per ewe (Table  6) from the gross  outputs  (Table  5), the net margins  per ewe in the 
silage/housing  and extended  grazing  systems  were €64.61  and €86.47  respectively.  
Using these values  the flock size required  in each system  for earning  the average  
industrial  wage  is 364 and 272 ewes  respectively,  excluding  labour  and interest  charges.  
These  estimates  are based on a lamb crop of about 180 lambs reared  per 100 ewes  
joined.
Lamb prices  in 2001 were exceptional.  If prices drop significantly  (and the history  of 
sheep  price trends  almost  demands  it) or if levels of ewe productivity  are lower than 
those  discussed  here, a larger  flock would  be needed  to earn the equivalent  wage.
Conclusion
Income  is dependant  on the volume  of output  and, hence, on flock size. Many mid 
season  enterprises  are relatively  small - average  flock size is about 100 ewes - and 
extensification  must be accompanied  by financial  support  measures  to compensate  for 
lower output  per ha.
Extensification  practices  are an attractive  option  where  flock size is of sufficient  scale  for 
producing  enough  output per labour unit to generate  a commercially  viable income.  
There is considerable  scope for increasing  profit margins  by reducing  unit costs of 
production,  e.g. costs per ewe or per labour  unit as shown  by the results.
Developing  easy-care  lambing  systems
A.F. Carson,  L.E.R. Dawson  and D. Irwin 
The Agricultural Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  Co. Down
Introduction
The significant  long-term  decline  in the margins  from sheep  production  is having  a major  
impact  on the shape  of the industry.  In Northern  Ireland,  the gross margins  of recorded  
lowland  sheep  production  systems  have declined  by approximately  50% per ha in real 
terms  over the past 20 years  (DARD,  2001). In a bid to remain  viable,  sheep  producers  
have increased  flock size from 86 in 1982 to 119 in 2002 and/or have become  
increasingly  dependent  on income  from off-farm  sources. Currently  55% of sheep  
producers  in Northern  Ireland  are part-time  (DARD,  2000), These  trends  are likely to 
continue  and the ratio of stock  to stockpersons  set to increase  further.
Current  systems  of sheep production  require  relatively  high levels of labour input.  
Survey  data  from Ireland,  both North  and South,  indicates  that 4 to 8 man hours  per ewe 
are put into lowland  sheep production  systems  (DARD,  1996; Connolly,  2001). The 
major labour input in sheep production  occurs over the lambing  period. Recent  
estimates  indicate  that approximately  19% of the total labour  input in lowland  sheep  
production  systems  occurs  over this period  (Connolly,  2001). Thus the intensive  labour  
requirements  of sheep  production  systems  over this period  represent  a major  limitation  
to the size of flock, which a producer  can operate,  particularly  as hired labour  costs  
continue  to increase.
In view of this background  a research  programme  was established  in autumn  1999 to 
investigate  the potential  to develop  lower  labour  input easy-care  lambing  systems.  The 
main issues  the programme  is seeking  to addressr  are:-
1. The effect  on labour  input and iamb output  of adopting  an easy-care  (grass-based)  
lambing  system  in comparison  to indoor  lambing  systems.
2. The effect of herbage  allowance  and concentrate  feed level in late pregnancy  on 
ewe condition  and lamb performance.
3. The effect  of ewe and ram breed  on lamb output  in indoor  and grass-based  lambing  
systems.
Outline  of research  programme
The main study  was carried  out at ARINI,  and on five commercial  lowland  farms  across  
Northern  Ireland. On each farm the experimental  flock (n=90 on average  per farm),  
consisting  of Blue-Faced  Leicester  X Scottish  Blackface  (BLXB),  Texel X Scottish  
Blackface  (TXB),  Suffolk  X Cheviot  (SXC)  and Texel  X Cheviot  (TXC)  ewes  were mated  
with high lean growth  index  Suffolk  (n=9), high lean index  Texel (n=9) or double-muscled  
(DM) Texel (n=9) sires. Ewes in the indoor  lambing  system  were mated  to lamb down  
from mid to late March. Some  but not all of the producers,  mated  ewes in the easy-care  
system  2 weeks  later i.e. to lamb down late March  to early  April (2 out of the 6 farms in 
year 1).
Developing  a complete  out-wintering  grazing  system  is only possible  at low stocking  
rates. Thus in the current  study ewes in the easy-care  system  were removed  from the 
main grazing  area in mid-pregnancy  and fed supplementary  grass silage on cereal  
stubble  ground or indoors,  or fed forage rape/turnips.  Three to six weeks before  
lambing,  ewes  were  turned  out onto the grazing  area and budgeted  2 kg of herbage  dry
8
matter  (DM) per day above  a pasture  cover  of 800 kg DM/ha. During  the pre-lambing 
period, ewes were set-stocked  with lambed  ewes being drafted  out 12 - 48 h after 
lambing. (Work  in New Zealand  indicates  that it is critical  that over the first 2 - 6 h after 
birth, the ewe and lamb are left alone on the birth site. This is the period  when the 
maternal  bonding  between  the ewe and lamb develops.  The ewe and lamb learn to 
recognise  each other  and the maternal  drive of the ewe is reinforced  by the lamb).
In the indoor  lambing  system,  ewes were housed  in late pregnancy  and offered  grass  
silage  ad libitum  plus concentrates  (level depending  on silage  quality,  ewe condition  and 
foetal number)  and ewes and lambs  were turned  out to grass 1 to 7 days post-lambing.  
Ewes and lambs  from the indoor  and easy-care  lambing  systems  were grazed  together 
as a single  group  on each of the farms  after the lambing  period.
Effect  of lambing  system  on lamb output
Lamb birth weight  was higher  in the ewes on the easy-care  lambing  system  compared  
with those  lambing  indoors  on silage-based  diets (Table  1). In the first year of the study,  
lambing  difficulty  was greater  in the easy-care  lambing  group due to a proportion  of 
oversized  lambs. This was due to higher  than anticipated  grass  growth  rates, resulting  
in grass allowances  being higher  than planned.  In the second  year of the study, grass  
covers  were monitored  more closely  and producers  ensured  that ewes had access  to 
only moderate  grass  covers  in late pregnancy  (1200  to 2000 kg DM at turnout  to lambing  
pastures)  with concentrates  fed if grass  supplies  were inadequate.
Lamb mortality  rates were similar  In the easy-care  and indoor  lambing  system  (11 and 
13% respectively)  (Table 1). Lamb growth  rates in the first six weeks  of lambing  were  
higher  in the lambs  born outdoors.  This indicates  that milk yield in the ewes  was higher  
in the easy-care  system,  likely as a result  of the ewes in the easy-care  system  lambing  
down in higher body condition  score. Thereafter  iamb growth rates between  the 
systems  were similar,  thus the days to slaughter  were marginally  lower  for ewes in the 
easy-care  system  (158 and 161 days to slaughter  for the easy-care  and indoor  lambing  
systems  respectively).  The overall  ewe output,  expressed  as the total weight  of lambs  
weaned  per ewe was similar  in both systems.
Table 1. The effect  of lambing  system  on lamb mortality
Lambing  system
Indoor Easy-care Sig.
No. lambs  born/ewe 1.79 1.77 NS
Lamb birth weight 5.0 5.2 *
No. lambs  born dead/ewe 0.10 0,11 NS
No. lambs  died (birth-weaning) 0.10 0.12 NS
No. lambs  weaned/ewe
Lamb  growth  rate1.59 1,50 NS
Birth - 6 weeks 292 310
Birth - weaning 266 273 NS
Weaned  lamb output  (kg/ewe) 56.8 56.2 NS
NS = difference  is not significant; * = significant;  **= highly  significant.
: very highly  significant
Effect  of lambing  system  on labour  requirements
In the current  study, ewes in the easy-care  system  were observed  at regular  intervals  
and the producers  intervened  as considered  necessary  when the life of the ewes or 
lambs  was threatened.  The necessity  to collect  research  data (e.g. lamb birth weight,  
ewe milk score) resulted  in more contact  with the sheep than would normally  be 
considered  necessary.  Nonetheless,  the study  yielded  useful  comparative  data on the 
labour  requirements  of indoor  versus  easy-care  lambing  systems.
The time spent  lambing  was similar  in the indoor  and easy-care  systems  (Table  2). In 
the indoor  system,  the time spent  catching  ewes  which  required  assistance  to lamb plus 
the time spent moving  ewes into lambing  pens was greater  than the time required  to 
catch those ewes which required  intervention  in the easy-care  lambing  system. The 
time spent  on lamb care was similar  in both systems.
Feedback  from the producers  involved  in the trial indicates  that they are becoming  
increasingly  confident  of the performance  of the easy-care  system,  and feel that in the 
future  there is potential  to further  delay intervention.
Table  2. The effect  of lambing  system  on labour  inputs (year 2 of study)
NS = difference  is not significant;  * = significant;  
significantActivity  (min/ewe)Lambing  system
Sig. Indoor Easy-care
Lambing 2.2 2.0 NS
Catch/move  ewes at lambing 6.5 4.6jHt
Neonatal  Lamb-care 1.6 1.7 NS
Moving  ewes to grass 3.5 0.0*★*
= highly  significant;  *** = very highly
Ewe breed  performance  in easy-care  systems
FI crossbred  ewes produced  from a previous  hill sheep  study (Dawson  and Carson,  
2002)  were used in the current  study. These  ewes  were  chosen  due to the fact that each 
of the crosses  contained  50% hardy hill breed genes  and have the potential  benefits  of 
maternal  hybrid vigour. This study enabled  the performance  of a highly prolific  
crossbred  ewe type, the Bluefaced  Leicester  X Blackface  ewe, to be compared  with 
moderately  prolific  ewe breed  types,  Texel and Suffolk  crosses,  under  indoor  and easy-  
care lambing  systems.
Lambing  difficulty  score was lower in Suffolk  X Cheviot  ewes compared  with the other  
ewe breed types (Table  3). Consequently,  the average  time spent lambing  each ewe 
was lowest  in the Suffolk  X Cheviot  and highest  in the prolific  Bluefaced  Leicester  X 
Blackface  in the easy-care  system.  Although  lamb mortality  tended  to be higher  in the 
Bluefaced  Leicester  X Blackface  ewes in the easy-care  compared  with the indoor  
system,  lamb output  remained  highest  with this ewe breed. Nonetheless,  the superiority  
of Bluefaced  Leicester  X Blackface  was less in the easy-care  system,  with Suffolk  X 
Cheviot  ewes performing  relatively  better  in the easy-care  system.
Ram breed  performance
Suffolk  and Texel are the predominant  terminal  sire breeds  in Northern  Ireland. In the 
current  study, animals  were sourced  from sire reference  schemes  and were selected  to
10
represent  the top 10% of sires on the basis  of estimated  breeding  values  for lean growth  
indices. Double-muscled  (DM)-slred  lambs  were also used in this trial as previous  work 
at ARINI had found Texels  selected  for carcass  conformation  and less for growth  rate 
produced  relatively  small lambs  with a low incidence  of lambing  difficulty.
Table 3. The effect  of ewe breed  type on lamb output
O)
■(/)
SI
02
Ic
0>
II
c
02
(/)
(/)
In the current  study DM-Texel  sired lambs  were lighter  at birth compared  with Texel and 
Suffolk-sired  lambs  and had a slightly  lower Incidence  of lambing  difficulties.  However
11
sire breed  did not significantly  affect  the time spent  to lamb an ewe. The percentage  of 
Suffolk-sired  lambs born dead was higher  compared  with DM-Texel  and Texel-sired  
lambs, resulting  in a higher overall mortality  rate in both the indoor and easy-care  
systems.  Higher  rates of lamb mortality  in Suffolk  compared  wifh Texel sires have also 
been found in previous  work (Carson  et ai, 2001).
High lamb growfh  rates are an important  component  of low labour  input  systems  through  
reducing  days to slaughter.  DM-Texel-sired  lambs  had significantly  lower  growth  rates  
from birth to weaning  compared  with the Texel and Suffolk  sires (Table  4). Consequently  
days to slaughter  were greater  for DM-Texel-sired  lambs  (173 days) compared  with 151 
and 155 days for Suffolk and Texel-sired  lambs respectively,  thus overriding  any 
potential  labour  saving benefits  of low lambing  difficulties  associated  with DM-Texel-  
sired lambs. Growth  rates were higher  in Suffolk-  compared  with Texel-sired  lambs  
produced  in the indoor  lambing  system.
Table  4. Effect  of ram breed on lamb output  in indoor  and easy-care  lambing  systems
Indoor Easy-care
DM
TexelTexel Suffolk SigDM
TexelTexel Suffolk  Sig
Lamb birth weight 4.81 4.98 5.13 NS 4.90 5.18 5.43*★
Lambing  difficulty  score  
Lamb  mortality
No. lambs  born1.2 1.3 1.4 NS 1.3 1.4 1.4 NS
dead/ewe
No. lambs  died0.07 0.07 0.15 NS 0.09 0,10 0.16 NS
(birth-weaning)
Lamb  growth  rates0.12 0.09 0.09 NS 0.15 0.09 0.13 NS
Birth-6 weeks 272 292 313***304 312 314 NS
Birth-weaning
Labour  inputs  (min)247 268 283 263 279 277★
Lambing 1.7 1.9 2.9 NS 1.5 2 9 1.6 NS
Neonatal  lamb-care 1.2 1.3 2,3 NS 1.1 1.5 2.6 NS
NS = difference  is not significant;  * = significant;  ** = highly  significant;  *** = very highly  
significant
Developing  appropriate  grazing  regimes  for ewes in late pregnancy
Whilst  there is a significant  amount  of information  on the effect of conserved  forage  
qualify  on ewe performance  at lambing  there is little or no information  on the effect of 
herbage  allowance  and concentrate  feed rates on which to base outdoor  grass-based  
feeding  strategies.  Consequently  studies  are being carried  out at ARINI  to determine  
the effect  of herbage  allowance  and concentrate  feed level on ewe body  condition,  lamb 
birth weight  and subsequent  performance.
The first study in this programme  investigated  the responses  to increasing  levels of 
concentrates  on low (1.3 kg DM/day)  and high (2.6 kg DM/day)  daily allowances  of 
herbage.  Provisional  data indicates  that ewe condition  score  and lamb birth weights  at 
lambing  increased  linearly  with increasing  levels of concentrates  on both the low and 
high herbage  allowances  (Figure  1). However,  in the first of this series of planned  
studies  little benefits  of additional  concentrate  supplementation  on subsequent  lamb 
performance  were achieved.
12
Figure  1.Effect  of concentrate  feed rate and herbage  allowance  on ewe condition  score  
and lamb birth weight.
3.6 1
200 400 600 800 1000
Concentrate  feed rate (g/day)200 400 600 800 1000
Concentrate  feed rate (g/day)
4 Low herbage  allowance  (1.3 kg DM/ewe/day)
B High herbage  allowance  (2.6 kg DM/ewe/day)
The work to date has shown  the potential  for grass-only  diets to support  the nutritional  
requirements  of ewes in late pregnancy.  A recent  indoor  study at ARINI  has shown  the 
higher intake characteristics  of zero grazed  grass compared  with conserved  forages 
(Table 5). In addition  grass alone was shown to support  relatively  high levels of 
colostrum  production.  Work is planned  to investigate  further  the effect of herbage  
allowance  on subsequent  performance  to develop  grazing  strategies  requiring  no 
concentrate  supplementation.
Table  5. The effects  of forage  type and concentrate  supplementation  on dry matter  
(DM) intake,  lamb birth weight  and colostrum  yield (1)
Diet DM intakeLamb  birth weight  
(kg)Colostrum  
yield (1)
Grass-only 1.7 5.2 1.6
High D silage  only 1.2 4.5 1.3
Restricted  grass (1 kg 1.4 4.4 2.2
DM/ewe/day)  + cone
High D silage  + cone 1.7 4.9 1,7
Medium  D silage  -r cone 1.0 5.2 1.5
Shelter  provision
In the current  study, the easy-care  system  has been investigated  over two years  on six 
farms  representing  a wide range  of farming  conditions.  On each of the farms,  fields  for 
lambing  were chosen  by the producers  on the basis of ground  conditions,  shelter  and 
convenience  to the farmyard.  Ewes have been noted  to use shelter,  particularly  during  
periods  of adverse  weather  conditions.  (In Australia  the provision  of additional  shelter 
for ewes around  lambing  has been shown  to improve  lamb survival  (Alexander  et at. 
1980)). During  the forthcoming  lambing  season  a study is planned  to investigate  the 
effect of providing  additional  shelter  on lamb survival  and growth  rates in grass-based  
lambing  systems.  The design  and location  within paddocks  of shelter  provisions  over a 
range  of farm sites will be examined.
13
other  management  issues  
Castration
In the current  study  all ram lambs  were left entire  eliminating  one of the routine  tasks of 
lamb production  and enabling  the producers  to benefit  from the higher  growth  potential  
of ram lambs. Entire males  typically  grow 10% faster  than castrates  and can be taken  
to heavier  carcass  weights  at the same fat class (+0.7 kg) (Wylie  et a!., 1997). In the 
current  study  there were few differences  in meat quality  between  the male and female  
lambs. Cooking  loss was slightly  higher  in males  and tenderness  slightly  lower,  however  
the differences  were small and the instrumental  meat quality  values  were indicative  of 
good eating  quality  in both sexes.
Worm  dosing
Effective  control  of gastrointestinal  parasites  is crucial  in maintaining  good animal  health  
and performance  and thereby  minimising  labour  requirements.  The indiscriminant  use 
of wormers  is likely  to be inefficient  from a labour  and economic  point of view as well as 
raising  concerns  on the usage  of chemicals  in production  systems.  Thus, the current  
programme  is evaluating  the potential  for on-farm  monitoring  of faecal egg counts  to 
direct  and monitor  worm control  strategies  on a sound  epidemiological  basis.
In the first year of this component  of the programme  the periparturient  rise in ewe faecal  
egg counts  (EEC)  was observed  on each of the farms  indicating  the need to dose ewes  
in late pregnancy  in a bid to minimise  larval contamination  of the pasture.  As ewes in 
the easy-care  system  are at grass  during  this period  the risk of larval contamination  of 
pastures  is likely to be reduced  by ensuring  that ewes are dosed at least four weeks  
before  the commencement  of lambing  combined  with good pasture  management.  
Provisional  data from the first year of this study indicates  that there are breed  
differences  in the level of the periparturient  rise in EEC (Figure  2). Suffolk  X Cheviot  
ewes tended to have higher FEC ’s in late pregnancy  than the other breed types.  
However,  within each of the ewe breed types a large variation  occurred  between  
individuals  in their worm egg count as assessed  by FEC. Progress  on increasing  the 
genetic resistance  to gastrointestinal  parasites  in sheep is being made through  
extensive  research  programmes  being  carried  out in the UK and Ireland  and this is likely  
to lead to considerable  benefits  in breeding  sheep  for easy-care  systems.
Figure  2. Effect  of crossbred  ewe genotype  on periparturient  rise in faecal  egg counts.
I - Bluefaced  Leicester  X Blackface  
^ Suffolk  X Cheviot 
OverallTexel X Bluefaced  
Texel X Cheviot
Weeks  pre-lambing
14
Conclusions
Grass-based  lambing  systems  have been shown  to have the potential  to reduce  the 
fixed costs associated  with lowland  sheep  production.  Averaged  across  a range  of ewe 
breed types lamb output  was similar  in grass and indoor  lambing  systems.  There  are 
some indications  that the superiority  of highly  prolific  ewe types in terms  of lamb output  
is less in grass-based  systems. Sire breed has been found to affect lamb mortality  
rates. Breed  improvement  programmes  are now taking  into consideration  traits such as 
resistance  to worms. Suitable  emphasis  needs  to be placed  on traits of vital importance  
in easy-care  systems  such as ease  of lambing  and lamb vigour. Further  work is required  
to investigate  the effect of grass allowances  in late pregnancy  to develop  grazing  
strategies,  which ensure  ewes lamb down in the correct  body condition  with lambs  of 
optimum  size.
Acknowledgments
The authors  are indebted  to the following  producers  for undertaking  this research  
programme:-  Mr and Mrs Isaac Crilly, Messrs  John and Francis  McHenry,  Messrs  Billy 
and John Martin,  Mr Alan Montgomery  and Mr Robert  Moore. Thanks  are also due to 
Dr Maurice  McCoy  and staff at the Diagnostic  Unit, Veterinary  Sciences  Division,  DARD  
and also to Mr Andrew  Crawford,  Economics  and Statistical  Division,  DARD. This 
research  programme  has been funded  by AgriSearch  and the Department  of Agriculture  
and Rural Development  for Northern  Ireland.
References
Alexander,  G., Lynch,  J.J., Mottershead,  B E. and Donnelly,  J.B. (1980). Reduction  in 
lamb mortality  by means of grass wind breaks: Results of a five-year  study.  
Proceedings  of the Australian  Society  of Animal  Production  13: 329 ~ 332 
Carson,  A.F, Dawson,  L.E.R.  and Irwin. D. (2001). A comparison  of Scottish  Blackface  
and Cheviot  ewes and five sire breeds  in terms of lamb output  in hill sheep  systems.  
Journal  of Agricultural  Science,  Cambridge  137: 221 - 223
Connelly,  L. (2000). Labour  on sheep  farms. Proceedings  of the 27^^ Meeting  of the 
Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  pp. 82
Dawson,  L.E.R. and Carson.  A.F. (2002). Effects  of crossbred  ewe genotype  and ram 
genotype  on ewe prolificacy,  lamb viability  and lamb output in the lowland  sector.  
Journal  of Agricultural  Science,  Cambridge  (in press)
Department  of Agriculture  and Rural Development  (DARD) (1996). An economic  
analysis  of ewe flock performance  In Northern  Ireland  1994. Studies  in Agricultural  and 
Food Economics.  Department  of Agriculture,  Belfast.
Department  of Agriculture  and Rural Development  (DARD)  (2000). EU Farm Structure  
Survey 2000. Northern  Ireland: Report on the Agriculture  Labour Force. Farm  
Diversification,  Use of Contractors.  Econcomics  and Statistics  Division,  DARD.  
Department  of Agriculture  and Rural Development  (DARD)  (2001). Farm Incomes  in 
Northern  Ireland  (1999/00),  Economics  and Statistics  Division,  DARD,  March  2001.  
Wylie, A.R.G., Chestnutt,  D.M.B. and Kilpatrick,  D.J. (1997). Growth  and carcass  
characteristics  of heavy  slaughter  weight  iambs: effects  of sire breed  and sex of lamb  
and relationships  to serum  metabolites  and IGF-1 . Animal  Science  64: 309-318.
15
Lame  Sheep  - are they an inevitability  of sheep  farming?
Agnes  Winter 
University  of Liverpool
Introduction
As someone  who has kept sheep  for most of her life, the author  knows  that the utopian  
aim of eliminating  all lameness  from sheep  flocks Is impossible.  Even if the diseases  
caused  by the common  bacteria  Fusobacterlum  necrophorum  (scald)  and Dichelobacter  
nodosus  (foot rot) are controlled  (In the former)  and eradicated  (in the latter),  there are 
other  non-Infectious  problems  affecting  feet which  continue  to cause  sporadic  problems  
in individual  sheep  and sometimes  in significant  numbers  within  a flock. The author  is 
particularly  interested  in these  conditions,  which  seerfi  to involve  hoof quality.
However,  it is certainly  the case  that scald and foot rot are the major  causes  of lameness  
at flock level. It is important  to realise  that the bacteria  involved  live under different  
conditions  and this factor  determines  whether  it is possible  to eliminate  them.
Scald
F. necrophorum,  which causes  the interdigital  condition  scald. Is an organism  that is 
found  everywhere  in the environment,  particularly  in dirty conditions  and in faeces. It is 
therefore  impossible  to eliminate. It does not, on its own, cause an invasive  foot 
condition.  It is not known  whether  individual  sheep  or breeds  are more resistant  than 
others  (based  on a very small  sample,  the author ’s experience  is that black  sheep  seem  
more resistant  than white). No vaccine  is available,  so shepherds  must try and reduce  
the factors that predispose  to the condition  developing,  and to treat accordingly.  
Predisposing  factors  include:  -
Dirty/muddy  areas around  feed troughs,  water  troughs  and In gateways  that keeps  the 
skin of the interdigital  space  wet and In contact  with the bacteria 
Excessively  long grass or other herbage  that damages  the interdigital  space  
Poorly  bedded  and damp  conditions  under-foot  when sheep  are housed
• Maintaining  short swards  is good for foot health  as well as nutrition.  Situating  feed 
and water  troughs  on hard or well-drained  ground  will help to prevent  areas  of mud 
forming.  The regular  moving  of non-fixed  troughs  will also help. Attention  should  
also be paid to gateways  to ensure  that they do not become  'mud baths ’. Placing  
builders  lime in gateways  can also help to keep these areas dry, and a slightly  
alkaline  environment  may reduce  bacterial  contamination.
• Despite  these precautions,  a number  of cases will still occur which require  
treatment.  Small  numbers  respond  well to topical  Oxytetracycline  spray. If flock or 
group treatment  Is required,  the best option is probably  still walking  through  a 
formalin  footbath  at no more than 2 - 3% strength.  Standing  on a dry surface  for 
half an hour after footbathing  will ensure  that the chemical  is not immediately  
washed  off.
Foot rot
This is caused  by the combined  effects  of F. necrophorum  and D. nodosus.  After the 
initial Interdigital  damage  caused  by F. necrophorum,  D. nodosus  is able to invade  the 
hoof causing  the characteristic  smelly  necrosis  and horn separation,  which starts at the
16
heels. The degree  of invasiveness  depends  on virulence  of the strain of the bacterium.  
It is important  to realise  that this is an infectious  condition  - merely  treating  obviously 
lame animals  will never  clear the disease  from a flock. The organism  can only live on 
the ground  for 16 days, so if it is eliminated  from the feet of all sheep  and they are not 
put on ground  that has recently  had sheep on it, it is possible  the eradicate  it from a 
flock. This is worth considering  for closed flocks. However,  this is hard work and 
requires  determination  to achieve. In commercial  open flocks it is more realistic  to 
control  the disease  to an acceptable  level. Measures  which  will to need be considered  
to achieve  control  include:-
Regular  foot paring  (not too severe)
Separation  of uninfected  from infected  sheep  by examination  of all feet 
Foot bathing  (preferably  in 10% zinc sulphate)
Possible  use of vaccination
Use of antibiotic  injections  for severely  affected  animals  
Culling  of chronic  cases
Eradication  demands  much more scrupulous  imposition  of whichever  combination  
of these  control  measures  is to be applied.
Conclusion
Lame sheep suffer pain and therefore  need to be treated  as soon as is practically  
possible. Prevention  of lameness,  where  suitable  methods  exist, should  be the aim. 
More note needs to be taken of genetic  factors impacting  on the development  of 
lameness,  as it is known  that there is varying  susceptibility  to foot rot. Hoof horn quality  
may also be influenced  by genetics.  Nutrition  may also be a factor  in horn quality.  There 
is still plenty  work to be done on the control  of lameness  in sheep.
17
Scrapie,  a TSE that must  be eliminated  - an EU perspective
H. Michael  Gunn
Department of Agriculture  and Food
Abstract
A number  of Transmissible  Spongiform  Encephalopathies  (TSE's) affect man and 
animals. Scrapie,  a disease  of sheep  and goats, has been recognised  for the longest  
period  - approximately  300 years. While microscopic  changes  in the brain and spinal  
chord are common  to all these  conditions,  clinical  signs generally  include  alterations  in 
“attitude",  loss of control of movement  and eventually  death. In sheep and goats  
suffering  from Scrapie,  the loss of condition  and movement  control may also be 
accompanied  by an itch associated  with wool loss.
For precautionary  reasons,  member  states of the EU have been obliged  to eliminate  
Scrapie.  Controls  were initially  implemented  in the early 1990's. The disease  was made  
notifiable;  only sheep from 'Scrapie  free' flocks were allowed  to be exported  tor 
breeding;  the feeding  of Meat and Bone Meal (MBM)  to sheep  was banned,  and tissues  
which might possibly  be infected  with TSE's  have to be removed  at slaughter.  Ireland  
has been the first country  in the world  to actively  look for Scrapie  using a 'rapid  test' on 
post-mortem  tissues. The group with the highest  risk of having  the disease  - culled  
ewes -- has been targeted  in the major  slaughterhouses  since 1998. Data obtain  from 
such surveillance  and information  collected  from clinical cases indicates  that 
approximately  10 new flocks a year are detected  in Ireland  as having  Scrapie.  Using  
less sophisticated  surveillance  systems,  reports  indicate  that approximately  150 new 
cases  are found  per year In the UK, 13 per year in Italy, 12 per year in the Netherlands,  
nine per year in Greece  and four per year in Spain.
An EU Directive  on TSE's  has been put in place  since  July 1st 2001. This necessitates  
extra controls  being put in place within the EU. Member  States  are obliged  to actively  
look for TSE's  In their sheep  flocks. When  identified,  infected  animals  and their relations  
(and their parts after slaughter)  must be identified  and destroyed.  Controls  on sales of 
animals  from infected  flocks will be enacted  for 3 years after infection  has been 
identified.
While Scrapie,  as a disease  of small ruminants,  is accepted  to pose no human  health  
risk, its capacity  to mask BSE (as shown  in laboratory  controlled  studies)  has raised  
public health concerns.  While BSE has not been shown  to be present  in commercial  
sheep, studies  are on-going  to investigate  if sheep affected  with what appears  like 
Scrapie  are in fact infected  with BSE. This scenario  may have arisen  as Sheep  were 
probably  exposed  to similar  contaminated  MBM as were cattle; BSE' could then cycle  
in the sheep  population,  but show  the signs of Scrapie.
Traditionally  the control  of Scrapie  in sheep and goats relied on eliminating  infected  
animals  and vacating  premises,  which  were used by infected  sheep. While  it has been  
recognised  for years  that excluding  Scrapie  infected  animals  from the breeding  pool was 
useful  in controlling  the disease,  the underlying  genetic  explanation  for this is now better  
understood.  Eliminating  genetically  susceptible  animals  may be a useful tool in 
eliminating  Scrapie.  However,  at present,  there is insufficient  evidence  to assure  public  
health concerns  as genetic  ‘resistance ’ may only prevent  clinical signs and mask  
infection.
Options  being considered  to allay public  health  concerns  include  rapid testing  (for TSE 
infections)  of all sheep  going  for slaughter,  extending  the list of Specified  Risk Materials
18
to be removed  from sheep  at slaughter  and only allowing  sheep  of specific  genotypes  
to enter  the food chain. Despite  the practical  and economic  consequences  of instigating  
these measures,  there is, at present,  insufficient  knowledge  to guarantee  the safety  of 
food products  from sheep  and goats if BSE were found in these  species.
A number  of investigations  are being carried  out by DAF into the nature  of ‘resistance ’ 
to prion diseases  and the possible  role of breeding  for resistance  to Scrapie,  which  will 
contribute  to the understanding  of what is meant,  by ‘resistance ’. Breeding  programmes 
have been set up in five commercial  flocks, in which there was active Scrapie,  with 
considerable  co-operation  of their owners. When the entire breeding  stock on these  
farms  has been changed  to the "resistant ” type, detailed  laboratory  examinations  will be 
carried  out on members  of the flocks,  to ensure  that the Scrapie  prion - PrPSc  - has 
been eliminated  from the flocks.
At present  an interim policy to eliminate  Scrapie  positive  flocks and vacate  infected  
premises  is being pursued  by DAF. This policy  will be reviewed  on a regular  basis and 
will respond  to advances  in knowledge  on TSE ’s.
19
Scrapie;  current  knowledge  on the genetics  and infective  agent
Torres  Sweeney
Faculty  of Veterinary  Medicine,  University  College  Dublin.
Summary
Scrapie  is an untreatable  and fatal disease  of the central  nervous  system  of sheep  and 
goats. It is one of a group of unconventional  diseases  known as transmissible  
spongiform  encephalopathies.  Other diseases  in this group include  Creutzfeld-Jakob  
Disease  (CJD) in humans  and Bovine Spongiform  Encephalopathy  (BSE) in cattle.  
Currently,  the diagnosis  of scrapie  is dependent  upon post mortem  confirmation  by 
histological  examination  of the brain. Another  diagnostic  characteristic  of scrapie  is the 
accumulation  of an abnormal  variant  of the prion protein  in the lymphoreticular  '-ystem  
and in the central  nervous  system.  The nature  of the infectious  agent  is not known  and 
is the cause of much scientific  debate. The development  of scrapie  in sheep is 
dependent  on a genetically  susceptible  animal  being exposed  to the infectious  agent.  
Genetic  variation  at codons  136, 154 and 171 on the sheep  PrP gene has been found  
to influence  susceptibility  to scrapie.  There  is considerable  concern  that BSE may have 
entered  the sheep  population  following  the inadvertent  feeding  of meat and bone meal 
to sheep. There  is however,  no scientific  evidence  to date to support  this concern.
PrpSc  as a biochemical  marker  of infectivity
One of the characteristics  of the lymphoreticular  system  and central  nervous  system  of 
sheep  is the presence  of prion protein. The function  of the prion protein  is unknown  and 
does not appear  to play any role in normal physiological  functioning  of the animal.  
However,  the earliest  sign that a sheep  is developing  scrapie  is the transformation  of this 
protein  into an abnormal  conformation  that is very resistant  to breakdown.  Hence  this 
protein  accumulates  in the cell preventing  the cell from functioning  normally.  As the 
disease  progresses,  more and more cells accumulate  the abnormal  form of the prion 
protein. The accumulation  of this protein  in cells of the cent.'al  nervous  system  causes  
cell death, which gives a spongiform  type histopathological  appearance  under the 
microscope.  Once the cells start to die, the behaviour  of the animal  changes  and the 
characteristic  clinical  signs of scrapie  develop.  In the pre-clinical  stages  of scrapie  the 
abnormal  isoform  {PrP^'^)  of prion protein  has been detected  in gut-associated  lymphoid  
tissues,  the spleen,  lymph  nodes,  tonsil and nictitating  membrane  of the eye (Hadlow  et 
at., 1982; Van Keulen  et ai., 1996; 1999; 2000; Schreuder  etai.. 1996, 1998; O'Rourke  
et ai.. 1998; Andreolliti  et ai.. 2000). The ileal Peyer's  patch was identified  as the likely  
primary  entry site of the scrapie  agent  with subsequent  replication  and dissemination  of 
the infectious  agent occuring  in the secondary  lymphoid  system  via the lymphatic  or 
vascular  pathway  (Andreoletti  et ai., 2000). PrP can be detected  in these tissues  for 
many  months/years  before  becoming  detectable  in the CNS. While  a pre-clinical  test is 
currently  not available,  screening  peripheral  lymphoid  tissue  for PrPSc  offers  a possibility  
of pre-clinical  diagnosis  in sheep  scrapie  (Schreuder  etai., 1996; O'Rourke  etai., 1998;  
Thuring  et ai., 2001; 2002).
Genetic  susceptibility  to scrapie
The gene which  determines  whether  an animal  is resistant  or susceptible  to developing  
the clinical  signs of scrapie,  is the prion protein  gene. Polymorphisms  at codons  112, 
136, 137, 138, 141, 151, 154 and 211 of exon 3 of the gene have been characterised.
20
There are three positions  or codons  on the prion protein gene showing  variation  
associated  with resistance  or susceptibility  to developing  the clinical  signs of scrapie;  
these are at codons  136. 154 and 171. The alanine  (A) to valine (V) polymorphism  at 
codon 136 and the glutamine  (Q) to arginine  (R) polymorphism  at codon 171 contribute  
to susceptibility  to developing  clinical  signs  of scrapie  (Laplanche  etal., 1993; Belt etal.,  
1995; Clouscard  etal., 1995; Hunter  etal., 1996, 1997b;  Junghans  etal., 1998; Elsen  
etal., 1999; Tranulis  etal., 1999;  Thorgeirsdottir  etal., 1999). The association  between  
scrapie  susceptibility  and polymorphisms  at codon 154 are currently  unclear,  but there  
is a possibility  that histidine  (H) at codon  154 may offer protection  from scrapie  in some  
breeds  of sheep (Elsen et al., 1999; Thorgeirsdottir  et a!., 1999). Polymorphisms  at 
codons  112, 137, 138, 141, 151 and 211 are rare and have not been associated  with any 
disease  phenotype  in natural  and experimental  scrapie  (Laplanche  etal., 1993; Bossers  
etal., 1996; Tranulis  et al., 1999; Thorgeirsdottir  et al., 1999).
In the entire  sheep  population  studied  to-date  around  the world, five different  alleles  of 
the prion protein  gene have been identified.  These  are ARR, ARH, ARQ, AHQ, VRQ.  
Each animal  inherits  two alleles  (one from each parent),  which  gives rise to the animals'  
genotype. The most resistant  allele has been found to be ARR. Based on a 
combination  of these alleles, fifteen PrP genotypes  have been identified. These  
genotypes  can be graded  from the most resistant  genotype  (AA130 RR154 RR171 or 
written another  way prpARR/ARRj  jq the most susceptible  genotype  (W130 RR154 
QQ,71 or PrPVRQ/VRQ)
The genotype  frequencies  of the 10 main breeds  of sheep  in Ireland  have recently  been  
published  (O'Doherty  etal., 1991). There  was significant  variation  between  the different  
breeds. In a study of 154 scrapie-infected  sheep  in Ireland  genotyped  between  1998 
and 2000, seven PrP genotypes  were identified:  VV130 RR154 QQ171 (PrP'^FiQA/RQ)  
VA,36 RRi54 QQi71 (PrPVRQ/ARQ),  AA,30 RRi54 QQi7i (PrPARQ/ARQ),  VAi30 RR,54
■'171(PrPVRQ/ARR),  aAi30 RR154 QH'171QHi7i (PrpVRQ/ARH)  vAi 
(PrpARQ/ARHj  AAi30 RR154 HH,7, (PrpARH/ARH)  (Q'Doherty  et al., 2002). The results  
presented  in this study show that there is a significant  risk of developing  the clinical  
signs of scrapie  associated  with particular  PrP genotypes  in the Irish sheep  popuiation.  
The association  between  the VRQ, ARQ and the ARH allele and scrapie  was evident,  
as was the association  between  ARR and resistance  to developing  clinical  signs of 
scrapie. It was also evident  that the presence  of the AHQ allele in the flocks  examined  
resulted  in a decreased  risk of developing  scrapie.
PrpSc  distribution  in sheep  of different  genotypes
Recent  studies  have  suggested  that  the specific  PrP genotype  of an animal  can have  an 
influence  on the distribution  of PrP^c  throughout  the lymphoid  system  in natural  scrapie,  
PrPSc  has been detected  in the spleen,  lymph  nodes,  tonsil, nictitating  membrane  and 
gut-associated  lymphoid  peripheral  lymphoid  system of animals  of the following  
genotypes;  W136 RR154 QQ171 (PrpVRQA/RQ),  VA130 RR154 (PrpVRQ/ARQ),
AAi36 RRi54 QQi7i (PrpARQ/ARQ)^  VA130 RR154 QH171 (PrpVRQ/ARH)  (Van Keulen  et 
al., 1996, Schreuder  et al., 1998, Q'Rourke  el al., 1998, AndreoHiti  et al., 2000). In 
contrast,  PrP^c does not accumulate  in the lymphoreticular  system  of VA130 RR154 
QRi7, (PrpVRQ/ARR)  sheep  naturally  affected  with scrapie  but is detected  in the CNS
21
(Van Keulen  et al. 1996: Schreuder  etal. 1996, 1998;  AndreoHiti  etal. 2000), Hence,  it 
is imperative  to characterise  the distribution  of PrPSc  in the lymphoid  tissues  of animals  
with different  PrP genotypes.
A current  study underway  in Europe  is highlighting  that the earliest  time of detection  of 
PrPSc in lambs appears  to be influenced  by the breed of sheep and the genotype.  
Taking the genotype:  VVi3@ RR154 QQ171 (PrpVRQA/RQ)  Romanov  sheep express  
PrPSc  as early as 3-5 months  of age, Texels  express  PrPSc  at 4-6 months  of age, while  
Cheviots  had not expressed  PrPSc  at 10 months  of age.
What does “genetic  resistance  to scrapie ” mean?
Genetically  susceptible  sheep with genotypes  such as PrpVRQA/RQ^  prpVRQ/ARQ  
PrpARQ/ARQ  prpVRQ/ARH_  prpVRQ/ARR  p^pARQ/ARH  prpARH/ARH  ,hat develop  clinicai  
signs of the disease  following  exposure  to the infective  agent are said to be 'genetic  
susceptibility , One of the complex  areas in transmissible  spongiform  encephalopathy  
research  is to define ‘genetic  resistance ’ to scrapie. By saying that animals  of the 
genotype  PrPARR/ARR  are genetically  resistant  to scrapie,  we mean that no animal  of 
this genotype  has ever been confirmed  with scrapie  with histopathology  or detection  of 
PrPSc in any tissue  in the body. This includes  animals  that have died of old age and 
infectivity  analysed  by the subsequent  innoculation  of brain tissue  into mice. There is 
the possibility  that these  animals  had some  residual  PrpSc  that could not be detected  by 
current  biochemical  or mouse  bioassay  tests. However,  the question  has to be asked,  
if these  tissues  are not infective  in the mouse  bioassay  test, is there still a risk to other  
sheep  or to humans?
Scrapie  strain  types  and BSE in the sheep  population
Concerns  have been raised about the possibility  of natural  transmission  of the BSE 
agent  to sheep  as experimental  studies  have revealed  that sheep  develop  signs  that are 
indistinguishable  from conventional  scrapie  following  experimental  infection  with BSE 
(Foster  et al., 1993). Hence  this is one of the most active  areas of research  on TSE's  
at present.  Currently,  the experimental  innoculation  of mice with brain from the affected  
animal  is the standard  recommended  method  for distinguishing  different  TSE strains. In 
the mouse  bioassay,  the incubation  time of the disease  and brain lesion profile  pattern  
in the mice are used to differentiate  the different  strains. However,  in these  assays  large  
numbers  of animals  (26 mice per line) from three different  highly inbred mouse  lines 
(C57BI, VM95, Rill) plus their intercrosses  need to be infected  and subsequently  
analysed.  Although  the results  obtained  using this mouse  inoculation  procedure  are 
considered  reliable,  the effort and time needed  for conducting  these experiments  are 
considerable.  Hence  alternative  criteria  and techniques  are currently  being developed  
to characterize  TSE agents. Glycotyping  is a procedure  involving  the isolation,  
proteinase-K  digestion  and immunoblotting  of PrPSc  from infected  animals.  The protein  
normally  segregates  into three bands  of different  molecular  mass  on an SDS-PAGE  gel. 
The different  molecular  masses  are caused  by the number  of glycosylation  chains  on 
the protein molecule:  di-glycosylated,  mono-glycosylated  and non-glycosylated. 
Different  strains appear  to have different  sensitivities  to proteinase-K  and also the 
proportion  of the three different  glycoforms  can vary with different  strains.
22
The question,  whether  BSE can be detected  in sheep  scrapie  cases  by use of the above  
criteria,  for the molecular  characterization  of PrP^'^ was addressed  (Sweeney  et al., 
2000). Samples  from the central nervous  system (thoracic  cord, thalamus,  basal  
ganglia,  mediobasal  hypothalamus,  medulla  and cortex)  were collected  from 16 scrapie  
infected  sheep  which  had shown  a wide variety  of clinical  signs  and which  were carrying  
the following  PrP genotypes:  PrP^RQ/ARH  p|-pARQ/ARQ-  p|-pVRQ/ARQ|  pcpVRQ/ARH  
Cerebellar  and brain stem samples  were also collected  from BSE infected  cattle. PrPSc  
in ovine  scrapie  samples  from Ireland  displayed  clearly  distinct  molecular  characteristics 
from PrPSc  in bovine  BSE samples.  Sheep  scrapie  PrP^c  was generally  characterized  
by less than 55% diglycosylated  PrP compounds  in immunoblot,  while In BSE PrP^c  
about  70% diglycosylated  proteins  were detected.  It must be noted,  however,  that for a 
final characterization  of the Irish scrapie  cases,  a mouse  lesion profile  scoring  of these  
samples  will be analysed.
Three  other studies  on the molecular  characteristics  of PrPS*-  from field scrapie  cases  
have been published  to date. Two research  groups have reported  a considerable 
degree  of variation  in PrP^c  from British  scrapie  cases,  which  were assumed  to reflect  
the diversity  of different  strain  types in the country  (Hill et al., 1998; Hope et al., 1999).  
In contrast  to these results, French  scientists  found little diversity  in French  sheep  
scrapie  cases,  but glycotyping  patterns  which  closely  resembled  BSE patterns  (Baron  et 
al., 1999)
Conclusion
In conclusion,  we now have significant  information  on the genotype  variation  within  and 
between  breeds  as well as information  on the genotypes  that are more susceptible  to 
developing  the signs  of scrapie.  The distribution  of the prion protein  in scrapie  infected  
sheep  has been determined.  While  there is no evidence  that BSE is present  in sheep,  
experimental  infection  studies  are undenway  to characterise  BSE in sheep, and all 
European  countries  are developing  the technology  to identify  such cases.
References
Andreoletti,  O., Berthon,  P., Marc, D., Sarradin,  R, Ggrosclaude,  J., van Keulen,  L., 
Schelcher,  F, Elsen, J.-M. and Lantier,  F. (2000). Early accumulation  of PrPSc  in gut- 
associated  lymphoid  and nervous  tissues  of susceptible  sheep  from a Romanov  flock 
with natural  scrapie. Journal of General  Virology  81:3115-3126.
Baron,T.G.,  Madec,  J.Y. and Calavas,  D. (1999). Similar  signature  of the prion protein  
in natural sheep scrapie and bovine spongiform  encephalopathy-linked  diseases.  
Journal  of Clinical  Microbiology  37: 3701  -3704.
Belt, B.G.M.,  Muileman,  I.H., Schreuder,  B.E.C.,  Bos-de  Ruijter,  J., Gielkens,  A.L.K.  and 
Smits, M.A. (1995). Identification  of five allelic  variants  of the sheep  PrP gene and their 
association  with natural  scrapie. Journal  of General  Virology  76: 509-517.
Bossers,  A., Schreuder,  B.E.C,,  Muileman,  I.H,, Belt, P.B.G. and Smits, M.A. (1996).  
PrP genotype  contributes  to determining  survival  times of sheep  with natural  scrapie.  
Journal  of General  Virology  77: 2669-2673.
Clouscard,  C., Beaudry,  P, Elsen, J.M., Milan, D., Dussaucy,  M,, Bounneau,  C., 
Schelcher,  F, Chatelain,  J., Launey,  J.M. and Laplanche,  J.L. (1995). Different  allelic  
effects of the codons  136 and 171 of the prion protein gene in sheep with natural  
scrapie. Journal  of General  Virology  76:2097-2101.
23
Elsen,  J.-M.,  Amigues,  Y, Schelcher,  R, Ducrocq,  V., Andreoletti,  O., Eychenne,  R, Tien 
Khang,  J.V., Poivey,  J.-R, Lantier,  R. and Laplanche,  J.-L. (1999). Genetic  susceptibility  
and transmission  factors  in scrapie:  detailed  analysis  of an epidemic  in a closed  flock of 
Romanov.  Archives  of Virology  144:431-445.
Roster, J.D., Hope, J. and Rraser, H. (1993). Transmission  of bovine spongiform  
encephalopathy  to sheep  and goats. Veterinary  Record  133:339-341.
Hadlow,  W.J., Kennedy,  R.C. and Race, R.E. (1982). Natural  infection  of Suffolk  sheep  
with scrapie  virus. Journal of Infectious  disease  146:657-664.
Hill, A.R, Sidle, K.C., Joiner, S., Keyes, R, Martin,  T.C., Dawson,  M. and Collinge,  J. 
(1998). Molecular  screening  of sheep  for bovine  spongiform  encephalopathy.  Neurodci.  
Lett 255 (3): 159-162.
Hope, J., Wood,  S.C.E.R.,  Birkett,  C.R., Chong,  A., Bruce,  M.E., Cairns,  D., Goldmann,  
W., Hunter,  N. and Bostock,  C.J. (1999). Molecular  analysis  of ovine prion protein  
identifies  similarities  between  BSE and an experimental  isolate of scrapie,  CHI 641. 
Journal  of General  Virology  80: 1 -4.
Hunter,  N., Roster,  J.D., Goldmann,  W., Stear, M.J., Hope, J. and Bostock,  C. (1996).  
Natural  scrapie  in a closed  flock of Cheviot  sheep  occurs  only in specific  PrP genotypes.  
Archives  of Virology  141: 809-824.
Hunter, N., Goldmann,  W., Poster, J.D., Cairns, D. and Smith, G. (1997). Natural  
Scrapie  and PrP Genotype:  Case-control  Studies  in British Sheep. Veterinary  Record  
141: 137-140.
Junghans,  R, Teufel, B., Buschmann,  A., Steng, G. and Groschup,  M.H. (1998)  
Genotyping  of German  sheep  with respect  to scrapie  susceptibility.  Veterinary  Record  
143: 340-341.
Laplanche,  J.L., Chatelain,  J., Westaway,  D., Thomas,  S., Dussaucy,  M., Brugere-  
Picoux,  J. and Launay,  J.M. (1993). PrP polymorphisms  associated  with natural  scrapie  
discovered  by denaturing  gradient  gel electrophoresis.  Genomics  15: 30-37.
O’Doherty,  E., Aherne,  M., Ennis,  S,, Weavers,  E., Hunter,  N., Roche,  J.R and Sweeney,  
T. (2000). Detection  of polymorphisms  in the prion protein  gene in a population  of Irish 
Suffolk  sheep. Veterinary  Record  146: 335-338.
O’Doherty,  E., Aherne,  M., Ennis,  S., Weavers,  E., Roche,  J.R and Sweeney,  T. (2001).  
Prion protein  gene polymorphisms  in pedigree  sheep  in Ireland. Research  in Veterinary  
Science  70: 51-56.
O'Doherty,  E., Healy,  A., Aherne,  M., Weavers,  E., Doherty,  M., Roche,  J.R, Gunn, M. 
and Sweeney.  T. {in press). Prion protein  (PrP) gene polymorphisms  associated  with 
natural  scrapie  cases  and their flock-mates  in Ireland. Research  in Veterinary  Science.  
O'Rourke,  K.I., Baszler,  TV., Parish, S.M. and Knowles  D.P. (1998). Preclinical  
detection  of PrP^c  in nictitating  membrane  lymphoid  tissue  of sheep. Veterinary  Record  
142: 489-491.
Schreuder,  B.E.C.,  van Keulen,  L.J., Vromans,  M.E., Langeveld,  J.R and Smits, M.A. 
(1996). Rreclinical  test for prion diseases.  Nature 381: pp563.
Schreuder,  B.E.C.,  van Keulen,  L.J., Vromans,  M.E., Langeveld,  J.R. and Smits, M.A. 
(1998). Tonsillar  biopsy  and RrRSc  detection  in the preclinical  diagnosis  of scrapie.  
Veterinary  Record  142: 564-8.
Sweeney,  T, Kuczius,  T, McElroy,  M., Gomez  Rarada,  M. and Groschup,  M. (2000).  
Molecular  analysis  of Irish scrapie  isolates.  Journal  General  Virology  81: 1621-1627.
Thorgeirsdotter,  S., Sigurdarson,  S., Thorisson,  H.M., Georgsson,  G. and Ralsdottir,  A.
24
(1999). PrP gene polymorphism  and natural  scrapie  in Icelandic  sheep. Journal  of 
General  Virology  80: 2527-2534.
Thuring,  C.M.A.,  McElroy,  M., Sweeney,  T. and Weavers,  E. (2000). Protuberances  on 
sheep  third eyelids  as a suitable  biopsy  site for lymphoid  follicles. Veterinary  Record  
147: 631-632.
Thuring,  C.M.A.,  Crowe,  M.A., McAllister,  H., Earley, B., Roche,  J.R and Sweeney,  T. 
(2002). Peripheral  lymphoreticular  biopsy techniques  and associated  clinical side 
effects  in sheep. Research  in Veterinary  Science  (in press).
Tranulis,  M.A., Osland,  A., Bratberg,  B. and Ulvund,  M.J. (1999). Prion protein  gene  
poymorphsims  in sheep  with natural  scrapie  and healthy  controls  in Norway.  Journal  of 
General  Virology  80: 1073-1077.
van Keulen, L.J.M., Schreuder,  B.E.C., Meleon,  R.H,, Mooij-Harkes,  G., Vromans,  
M.E.W.  and Langefeld,  J.P.M. (1996). Immunohistochemical  detection  of prion protein  
in lymphoid  tissues  of sheep  with natural  scrapie. Journal  of Clinical  Microbiology  34 
(5): 1228-1231.
van Keulen, L.J., Schreuder,  B.E,, Vromans,  M.E., Langeveld,  J.P and Smits, M.A. 
(1999). Scrapie-associated  prion protein in the gastrointestinal  tract of sheep with 
natural  scrapie. J. Comp.  Pathol. 121 (1): 55-63.
van Keulen,  L.J., Schreuder,  B.E., Vromans,  M E., Langeveld.  J.P. and Smits, M.A. 
(2000). Pathogenesis  of natural  scrapie  in sheep. Arch. Virol. Suppl. 16:57-71.
25
Variety  diversity  in key characters  determining  grazing  value  in 
ryegrass  (Lolium  perenne  L.) swards
T. J. Gilliland'',  P. D. Barrett^  and R. E. Agnew^
Department  of Agriculture  and Rural Development for Northern  Ireland  
^Applied  Plant  Science  Division,  Plant Testing  Station.  Crossnacreevy,  Belfast.  BT6
9SH
^Agricultural Research  Institute  for Northern  Ireland,  Hilllsborough.
Introduction
Herbage  yield is only a partial indicator  of the overall  value of a perennial  ryegrass  
variety  as animal  productivity  is the ultimate  measure  of its vt/orth. Despite  this, current  
variety  testing  programmes  in the UK and Ireland  are based  primarily  on cutting  systems  
\«ith animals  rarely involved  and only then to introduce  grazing  pressures  or to assess  
grazing  preferences,  but not to measure  animal  output  from varieties  (Weddell  et af. 
1997). This absence  of a direct animal output assessment  is recognised  as a 
shortcoming  of the testing  systems  (Orr et af, 1988).
A total of 111 different  perennial  ryegrasses  are currently  recommended  in the UK and 
Ireland  and upwards  of 40-50  new candidates  are submitted  annually  for evaluation.  It 
is both impractical  and prohibitively  expensive  to measure  animal  output  on such large  
numbers  of varieties.  Consequently,  any grazing  output  studies  that have been done  
only examine  a very small number  of varieties.  So alternative  ways of assessing  the 
animal  output  potential  of ryegrass  varieties  must be sought. Variety  feeding  value can 
be defined  as a combination  of the nutritive  quality  and intake potential  of the grass,  
which  will comprise  chemical,  morphological  and yield factors. Characteristics  such as 
sward surface  height,  herbage  mass, bulk density  and green leaf mass have all been 
implicated  as having  effect  on intake  during  grazing  (Penning  etal., 1994; Barrett  et af, 
2001). Furthermore,  nutritive  value factors such as digestibility  and water-soluble  
carbohydrate  (WSC)  have been shown  to increase  the output  of milk or meat without  
increasing  production  costs (Davies  etal., 1991). In contrast,  protein  levels  in grass  are 
not normally  limiting  for ruminant  nutrition  and are therefore  unlikely  to be important  
parameters  for variety  evaluation.
In the present study, the potential  value and practicality  of incorporating  the 
aforementioned  parameters  into routine  testing  procedures  for compiling  recommended  
lists of perennial  ryegrass  varieties  is considered.
Materials  and Methods
The study was conducted  at the Plant Testing Station Northern  Ireland using 12
perennial  ryegrass  varieties,  comprising  diploids  and tetraploids  of different  maturity  
types (Table 1). The varieties  were managed  under the simulated  rotational  grazing  
system  used for the Northern  Ireland  Recommended  List (Weddell  et af, 1997) and so 
were cut with a plot harvester.
26
Table 1. Perennial  ryegrass  varieties  examined
Early Maturing
Frances Sambin AberTorch  (T) Tetramax  (T)
Intermediate  Maturing
AberDart Merbo  Calibra  (T) Missouri  (T)
Late Maturing
Choice Foxtrot Millennium  (T) Navan  (T)
(T) indicates  a tetraploid  variety
At each of eight rotational  grazing  cuts between  early May and October,  representative  
samples  were taken  for five sward  morphological  characters  (sward  height,  tiller length,  
bulk density,  Leaf:Stem  ratio and leaf weight),  three nutritive  value parameters  (water-  
soluble  carbohydrate  ‘WSC concentration  and WSC yield and in vitro digestibility  by 
pepsin  cellulase  ‘%DMD')  as well as for the standard  test assessments  of total annual  
and seasonal  yields and sward density. In all cases the methods  employed  were as 
described  by Gilliland  et al., (2002).
Current  yield based  assessments
The 12 ryegrass  varieties  differed  significantly  in total annual  yield, in their seasonal  
distribution  of yield across  the growing  season  and also in sward density  (Table 2). 
These data are supplied  annually  to farmers through the Northern  Ireland 
Recommended  List booklet  and show that the tetraploids  are among  the highest  total 
annual  yielding  varieties  available.  Importantly,  the table shows  that the total annual  
yield rankings  do not remain  fixed throughout  the growing  season. With the exception  
of Merbo,  which maintains  a relatively  consistent  performance  throughout  the year, the 
other varieties  display  periods  of peak productivity  at specific  times. For example,  
Sambin  outperforms  all other  varieties  except  for AberTorch  in spring,  despite  it having  
the lowest  total annual  yield of all 12 varieties.
Table 2. Comparison  of production  and sward density  of perennial  ryegrass  varieties 
under  a simulated  grazing  management
Control  Yield  
it DM ha <)HeadingTotal
Yield SpringEarly
SummerLate
Summer AutumnSward  
Density  
0-9 high dafe 12.5 1.9 5.1 3.9 1,5
AberTorch  (T) 9 May 106 130 94 100 102 5.8
Frances 11 May 95 104 93 98 97 6.1
Sambin 16 May 87 122 88 85 91 6.9
Tetramax  (T) 19 May 101 111 101 96 96 5.8
Merbo 21 May 93 95 98 96 92 5.8
AberDart 27 May 92 99 98 105 107 5.9
Calibra  (T) 27 May 107 103 104 105 98 5.8
Missouri  (T) 28 May 103 100 101 107 100 5.5
Navan  (T) 6 June 109 91 104 114 105 5.1
Foxtrot 7  June 107 86 110 111 99 6.1
Choice 10 June 97 77 105 105 93 5.9
Millennium(T) 14 June 102 95 107 110 101 5.6
Average 100 101 100 103 98 5.9
Significance *** trim irim *** *** ***
Diploid 95 97 99 100 97 6.1
Tetraploid 105 105 102 105 100 5.6
Significance *** **NS * NS***
Early 97 117 94 95 97 6.2
Intermediate 99 99 100 103 99 5.8
Late 104 87 107 110 100 5.7
Significance NS*** ** *** NS**.
27
Although  the genetic-driven  trend for earlier  maturity  to be associated  with higher  spring  
production  is clearly  expressed  among  these varieties,  exceptions  are again evident.  
For example,  the total annual  yield ranking  of Foxtrot  and Millennium  are reversed  in 
spring  and there is a 4% difference  between  Merbo  and AberDart  at this time, despite  
them having  a similar  total yield potential.  Following  the spring  period  the late varieties  
optimise  production  during the main summer  period and the high spring performers  
generally  show  a dip in performance  particularly  in early  summer.  In the autumn  period,  
variety  maturity  has no influence  on performance  but again exceptional  performances  
are evident. For example  AberDart  had the highest  autumn  yields  despite  its low total 
annual  yield, Navan  and Millennium  were consistently  high performing  in summer  and 
autumn  following  their relatively  low spring performance,  whereas  Calibra  excelled  in 
spring  and summer  but its performance  fell in autumn. Clearly  such information  is of 
value to farmers  and seeds merchants  as it identifies  varieties  and helps design  
mixtures  that deliver productivity  instep with the herd requirements  throughout  the 
season.
Sward  morphology  differences
Grass intake rates are a key factor in driving animal performance  at grass. This is 
particularly  true for dairy cows due to their requirement  for up to 20 kg d ' DM and the 
limited time in the day to graze such large quantities  of grass (Gibb, 1998). From a 
grass  variety  evaluation  perspective,  it is known  that grazing  intakes  are greatly  affected  
by the canopy  structure  of the sward  (Forbes,  1988),  including  characters  such as sward  
surface  height,  tiller length,  bulk density  and leaf mass.
The results  in Table 3 show that there are substantial  differences  between  varieties  in 
the structure  of the swards  they form, which can be expected  to impact  on the grazing  
animals  ability  to achieve  high intakes  of herbage.
Table 3. Comparison  of perennial  ryegrass  varieties  for sward morphological  and 
nutritive  characters  under  a simulated  grazing  management  (seasonal  averages)
Sward Tiller Bulk Leaf Leaf WSC WSC In vitro
Height Length Density Stem Weight Content Yield Digestibility
Variety (cm) (cm) (kgm 3DM) ratio (kgha ’DM) (gkg 'DM) (kgha'DM) (%DM)
AberTorch  (T) 17.2 24.0 0.80 0.85 1164 278.1 364.8 80.6
Frances 16.8 22.3 0.72 0.80 972 233.5 272.0 73 9
Sambin 16.5 22.0 0.68 0.75 828 231.7 247.2 71.0
Tetramax  (T) 16.6 23.2 0.77 0.85 1076 259.1 322.4 79.0
Merbo 16.7 22.4 0.71 0.79 943 248.6 288.0 73.5
AberDart 16.7 22 6 0.70 0.86 1027 286.0 332.0 81.5
Calibra  (T) 17.2 23.9 0.79 0.86 1180 277.5 369.8 80.1
Missouri  (T) 17.4 23.9 0.75 0.83 1108 272.4 347.9 77.8
Navan  (T) 15.8 23.2 0.87 0.88 1259 277.6 383.2 80.1
Foxtrot 15.7 21.7 0.85 0.84 1167 272.4 369.9 79.9
Choice 14.9 20.7 0.81 0.87 1094 245.6 297.4 79.5
Millennium(T) 15.4 22.0 0.84 0.91 1215 260.6 330.7 78.9
Average 16.4 22.7 0.77 0.84 1086 261.9 327.1 78.0
Significance*** *** *** ir** *** *** ***
Diploid 16.2 22.0 0.74 0.82 1005 253.0 301.1 76 6
Tetraploid 16.6 23.4 0.80 0.86 1167 270.9 353.1 79.4
Significance NSiMr* ** * **NS* ***
Early 16.8 22.9 0.74 0.81 1010 250,6 301.6 76.1
Intermediate 17.0 23.2 0.74 0.84 1064 271.1 334,4 78.2
Late 15.4 21,9 0.84 0.88 1184 264.0 345.3 79.6
Significance** * ***NS * NS NS***
WSC  = water  soluble  carbohydrate
28
As a general  guide, the larger the values in Table 3 the more favourable  is the 
characteristic  for high grazing  performances.  In all these  factors,  substantial  differences  
existed  between  the varieties  and it was possible  to identify  those with characteristics  
that indicated  a high or low intake potential. For example.  Choice  was a short low 
growing  variety  whereas  the three tetraploid  varieties  AberTorch,  Calibra  and Missouri  
were tall growing  with long tillers. Furthermore,  Sambin  scored  poorly  for density  of 
grovifth  and leaf content  whereas  Millinneum,  which had a sorter  sward  with similar  tiller 
lengths  to Sambin,  had very high leaf contents  in a very dense growth. Across  all 
characteristics,  only the tetraploid  varieties  AberTorch  and Calibra  were above  average  
in all cases,  suggesting  that they could be expected  to provide  greater  levels  of intake  
and support  higher animal productivity  than swards  of many of the other varieties.  
Tetraploids  in general,  displayed  excellent  sward heights,  tiller lengths  and herbage  
density. Sward leafiness  has been consistently  found to associate  with high intake  
potential,  however,  in addition  to the wide range  of differences  between  varieties  in Table  
3, there were much larger differences  during the season linked closely  to variety  
maturity. This makes this aspect of sward structure  difficult  to interpret. Overall,  
however,  the tetraploids  were again clearly  superior  to diploid  varieties  and the top two 
performers  were the late tetraploids  Navan  and Millennium.  This is consistent  with the 
reports  of O'Donnovan  et al., (1999),  who recorded  higher  dry matter  intakes  with dairy 
cows for two late varieties  (Portstewart  and Millennium)  in comparison  with two 
intermediate  varieties  (Spelga  and Napoleon),  with the tetraploids  performing  best in 
each case.
These results  show that existing  recommended  varieties  differ substantially  in such 
grazing  value factors  as leaf content  and herbage  presentation  and that while maturity  
and ploidy may have an influence,  individual  varieties  are not totally subordinate  to 
these influences.
Nutritive  value  differences
Water-soluble  carbohydrate  concentration  of pasture  grasses  increases  the amount  of 
readily  available  carbohydrate,  so affecting  the efficiency  of conversion  of nitrogen  to 
microbial  protein  in the rumen. This has been shown  to increase  live weight  gain in 
sheep (Lee et al., 2000a)  and in cattle (Lee et al.. 2000b)  and to enhance  the milk 
production  and quality  in dairy cows (Miller et al., 2001). In the current  study, WSC  
concentrations  were generally  higher in tetraploids  than diploids,  with the lowest  
concentration  being in Sambin  (Table  3). Despite  this trend, the top variety  was the 
diploid AberDart,  which was specifically  bred for high WSC. Other notable 
performances  included  Foxtrot  in achieving  a similar  WSC concentration  to the majority  
of tetraploids  and to the relatively  low WSC concentration  of Millennium  and Tetramax.  
When  WSC yield was examined,  the high performing  AberDart  no longer  excelled  due 
to its low overall  production  potential,  but Foxtrot  remained  very high and as good as 
almost all the tetraploids,  having a high herbage  yield and WSC concentration  
combination.  The importance  of these variety  differences  of over 50 g kg-i DM are 
apparent  when it is considered  that Miller et al., (2001)  found that WSC concentration  
differences  of 40 g kg-i DM significantly  improved  feed protein  conversion  to milk protein  
in dairy cows.
29
The digestibility  differences  between  the varieties  displayed  a similar  variety  pattern  to 
that found for WSC concentration.  Clearly  high WSC concentrations  promote  higher  
total digestibility,  however  around  30% of the variation  in digestibility  could not be 
accounted  for by WSC differences  alone and so other factors  were also having an 
influence.
Recommending  varieties  for grazing
The presented  variety  data provides  a very complex  pattern  of performances  that are 
not easily translated  into an overall measure  of grazing  value. Moreover,  current  
knowledge  is not sufficient  to permit yield advantages  to be compensated  for in a 
quantitative  way by any of the aforementioned  value indicators.  Clearly  high values  in 
all parameters  are desirable,  but converting  them into a transparent  indicator  of grazing  
worth  is a difficult  task. One possible  approach  is to set positive  and negative  thresholds  
on the range  that exists  among  the varieties  in each character.  A simple  approach  is to 
designate  the top 33 percentile  as a positive  attribute  and the bottom  33 percentile  as 
negative,  with the middle  values  as neutral.  Therefore,  if a variety  produced  a result  that 
put it in the top third of performances  among  a group  of varieties  it would  be awarded  a 
+ 1 (or +2 or more depending  on how important  the character  is for grazing).  Similarly,  
if the result  was in the bottom  third of the performances  the variety  would  score  -1 (or- 
2 etc) and if it was in the middle  third it would neither  gain nor lose any marks. This is 
only one simple example  of many possible  different  ways of how to apply such a 
weighted  scoring  system. The exact one chosen  would depend  on research  backed  
information  on how the different  parameters  interact  and to what extent  they impact  on 
grazing  performance.  Even so, if this simple  example  is applied  to the existing  variety  
results,  with the data combined  to create  four categories;  ‘total yield’, 'sward  structure',  
nutritive  value ’ and ‘sward  density ’, then the variety  comparisons  are as shown  in Table  4.
Table  4. Example  variety  comparison  table for grazing  use rankings.
VarietyTotal
Yield 
Ranking  
+ 1 to -1Sward
Structure  
Ranking  
+5 to -5Nutritive
Value  
Ranking  
+2 to -2Sward  
Density  
Ranking  
+ 1 to -1Ranking
Ranking
Total
+9 to -9
Calibra  (T) + 1 +4 +2 0 +7
AberTorch  (T) + 1 +2 +2 0 +5
Navan (T) + 1 +3 +2 -1 +5
Foxtrot + 1 0 0 + 1 +2
Tetramax  (T) 0 + 1 0 0 +1
Choice 0 0 -1 + 1 0
Millennium  (T) 0 + 1 0 -1 0
AberDart -1 -2 +2 + 1 0
Missouri  (T) 0 + 1 -1 -1 -1
Frances -1 -2 -2 + 1 -4
Sambin -1 -4 -2 + 1 -6
Merbo -1 -3 -2 0 -6
. All parameters  were simply  given the same  weighting  of +1/0/-1. As WSC yield was 
a direct  calculation  of total yield and WSC concentration  it was excluded  from the table
30
to avoid double  counting.  The ranking  total in the last column  of the table shows  how 
the varieties  separated  out overall. It is notable  that the top three varieties  were  
tetraploids.  It is also clearly  evident  that total yield had a major impact  on the overall  
grazing  value ranking  as only AberDart  with its exceptionally  high WSC concentrations 
had a final ranking  that was totally  inconsistent  with its yield performance.  However,  this 
observation  oversimplifies  what is occurring,  as it is possible  to distinguish  between  
varieties  of similar  yield potential  but with different  grazing  values. For example  Choice  
and Frances  had a similar  yield of 97% and 95% of the control  (Table  3), yet their final 
value rankings  of 0 and ~4 respectively,  were very different. Similarly  Foxtrot  and 
Calibra  yielded  107% in Table  3 but had grazing  value  scores  of +2 and +7 respectively.  
Furthermore,  Missouri,  Millennium  and Tetramax  had similar  yields  of 103,102  and 101 
respectively  but this order changed  to -1, 0 and +1 respectively  in the final rankings.
Clearly  the value  of such a ranking  system  is only as good as the information  from which  
it is created. Specific  research  information  is required  to determine  what weighting  
should be applied  to each factor to account  for its individual  influence  on grazing  
performance  and to counteract  the interactions  that clearly  occur  between  the different  
factors  examined  in this study.
Summary
The present  study showed  the existence  of substantial  differences  among currently  
recommended  varieties  for a number of sward structure  and nutritional  factors  
associated  with enhanced  grazing performance.  However,  before this type of 
information  can be incorporated  into routine recommended  testing protocols,  better  
information  is needed  on the quantitative  impact  of each factor  on the performance  of 
the grazing  animal. Furthermore,  the workloads  associated  with assessing  the sward  
structure  parameters  were very high. Some way of reducing  the workloads  is 
necessary,  either  by reducing  the number  of measurements  taken  or by estimating  them  
from other information  that is routinely  measured  on varieties,  such as the detailed  
morphological  examinations  that are made during Plant Breeders  Rights tests. In 
contrast,  assessment  of WSC appears  more achievable  on a routine  basis, particularly  
if it could be conducted  at a single  time of year. Given  the increasing  evidence  that high 
WSC concentration  has measurable  impacts  on animal  performance  with no additional  
Input costs  to the farmer,  inclusion  in testing  systems  would  seem  justified.
Some time will be required  to build up databases  of Information  on all existing  
recommended  varieties  for any of the characteristics  examined.  Before  this can be 
embarked  upon, clear evidence  of the value of the information  to farmers  must be 
established  plus an unambiguous  and non-complicating,  yet scientifically  valid way of 
presenting  the information  must be established.
References
Barrett,  P. D., Laidlaw,  A. S., Mayne,  C. S. & Christie,  H. (2001).  Pattern  of herbage  
intake rate and bite dimensions  of rotationally  grazed dairy cows as sward height  
declines.  Grass  and Forage  Science,  56, 362-373.
Davies,  D. A., Fothergill,  M., & Jones,  D. (1991). Assessment  of contrasting  perennial  
ryegrasses  with and without  white clover, under continuous  sheep stocking  in the
31
uplands.  3. Herbage  production,  quality  and intake. Grass  and Forage  Science  46, 39- 
49.
Gibb, M. J (1998).  Animal  grazing/intake  terminology  and definitions.  Pasture  Ecology  
and Animal Intake. Proceedings  of a Workshop  held in Dublin, September  1996.  
Occasional  Publication  No. 3. pp. 21-37.
Gilliland,  T. J, P. D. Barrett,  R. L. Mann, R. E. Agnew  and A. M. Fearon  (2002). Canopy  
morphology  and nutritional  quality  traits as potential  grazing  value indicators  for Lolium  
perenne  L. varieties.  Journal of Agricultural Science,  Cambridge  (In Press).
Hodgson,  J. (1981).  Variations  in the surface  characteristics  of the sward  and the short­
term rate of herbage  intake  by calves  and lambs.  Grass  and Forage  Science,  36, 49-57.
Lee, M. R. F, Jones,  E. L., Moorby,  J. M., Humphreys,  M. O., Theodorou,  M. K,. Macrae,  
J. C. (2000a).  Production  responses  from lambs  grazing  on Lolium  perenne  selected  for 
high water  soluble  carbohydrate  grazing  management:  the principles.  The Principle  and 
Practice  of Grazing  for Profit  and Environmental  Gain in Temperate  Grassland  Systems.  
British  Grassland  Society  (BGS) Occasional  Symposium  34. (Eds. A. Rook and P. D. 
Penning)  pp 45-50, British  Grassland  Society,  Reading.
Lee, M. R. F, Evans, R. T, Moorby,  J. M., Humphreys,  M. O., Theodorou,  M. K. & 
Macrae,  J. C. (2000b).  Increased  intake responses  from beef steers  zero-grazed  on 
Lolium  perenne  selected  for high levels of water  soluble  carbohydrate.  Proceedings  of 
the British  Society  of Animal  Science  Annual  Meeting,  York.
Miller, L. A., Baker, D. H., Theodorou,  M. K., Macrae,  J. C., Humphreys,  M. O, Scollan,  
N. D. (2001). Efficiency  of nitrogen  use in dairy cows grazing  ryegrass  with different  
water  soluble  carbohydrate  concentrations  in grassland  ecosystems.  In: An Outlook  Into 
the 21" Century,  International  Grassland  Congress,  Sao Paulo,  Brazil.
O'Donnova,  M., Casey,  I., Gowen,  N. (1999), Milk production  potential  of different  sward  
varieties.  In; Moorepark  99’A new  Agenda  for Dairying,  pp. 53-56.  Cork.
Orr, R. J., Parsons,  A, J., Treacher,  T. T, & Penning,  P. D. (1988).  Seasonal  patterns  of 
grass  production  under  cutting  or continuous  stocking  managements.  Grass  and Forage  
Science  43, 199-207.
Penning,  P. D., Parsons,  A. J., Orr, R. J. & Hooper,  G. E. (1994),  Intake  and behaviour  
responses  by sheep  to changes  in sward  characteristics  under  rotational  grazing.  Grass  
and Forage  Science  49, 476-486,
Weddell,  J. R., Gilliland,  T. J. & McVittie,  J. (1997).  Evaluation  procedures:  past, present  
and future.  In Seeds  of Progress,  Occasional  Symposium  No. 31 (Ed. J. R. Weddell)  p, 
202-225.  British  Grassland  Society.
32
Improving  cow performance  at grass,  what  do grass  cultivars  offer?
Noel Gowen,  Michael  O'Donovan,  Imelda  Casey  and Gearoid  Stakelum  
Teagasc,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co Cork.
Introduction
High performance  from dairy cows is central  to achieving  high financial  returns  from the 
farming  enterprise  (Stakelum  et al, 1997). This is achieved  when the cow consumes  
high levels of high quality  feed. Grass  when grazed  efficiently  is by far the cheapest 
feed available  on the farm (Sheedy,  2000). Therefore,  the production  and utilisation  of 
grass has a central  role in maintaining  the competitiveness  of the Irish dairy industry.  
Much of the focus of grassland  research  has centred  on grass utilisation  and grass  
production.  Very little focus  has been given  to identifying  the most  suitable  grass  for the 
grazing  system. Perennial  ryegrass  cultivars  are divided  into three groups  according  to 
the date of ear emergence  viz. early, intermediate  and late. It is known  that differences 
exist in maturity  group  thus, early heading  cultivars  decline  in digestibility  earlier  than 
late heading  cultivars  during  the early summer  period (Gately,  1984). In the past few 
years,  there have been dramatic  changes  in plant breeding  and within  the seed industry.  
Plant breeding  has contributed  a 0.08%  increase  in dry matter  production  annually  over 
the past decade.  However,  the most  recent  published  DAP figures  show  a growing  trend  
of increased  usage  of late heading  grass cultivars.  Early heading  grass cultivars  now 
only constitute  2% of all grass  seed sold.
It is a difficult  task to make meaningful  comparisons  of herbage  cultivars.  All of the 
comparative  work is completed  in terms  of dry matter  production  under  cutting,  which  is 
the method  of evaluation  used by DAF in compiling  recommended  lists. A criticism  of 
this method  is that the cultivars  are not subjected  to an animal  influence  i.e. selective 
grazing,  treading  damage  and the return  of faeces  and urine. It is essential  to compare 
cultivars  by using animal  intake  and performance  as a measure  of their productivity.  
Gately, (1984) examined  an early heading  and late heading  ryegrass  at two stocking  
rates with dairy cows. At low stocking  rate, cows grazing  the late heading  cultivars 
produced  8.8% more milk than cows grazing  the early cultivars,  however  at the high 
stocking  rate the cows grazing  the early heading  cultivar  gave 6.6% more milk. The 
digestibility  of the late heading  ryegrass  was significantly  greater  than that of the early  
heading  ryegrass. Minson  et al. (1960) reported  that early maturing  S24 perennial  
ryegrass  was lower in digestibility  at a given date in spring  than the late maturing  S23 
cultivar. Tetraploid  grass cultivars  now constitute  up to 30% of all grazing  mixtures  
(Culleton  etal. 1998). Vipond  etal. (1993)  found  under  continuous  grazing  with sheep,  
an advantage  to tetraploids  compared  to diploid  grass cultivars.  Lantinga  et al, (1996)  
reported  a milk yield advantage  to tetraploids  relative to diploids over a short  
experimental  period. In a grazing  preference  experiment  (O'Riordan,  1997) found  that 
tetraploid  grasses  predominated  in the highest  ranked  grasses  for grazing  preferences.  
This paper reports  on the results  of a 2 year investigation  on the effect of perennial  
ryegrass  cultivars  differing  in both heading  date and ploidy  on daily milk production  and 
grass dry matter intake of spring calving dairy cows. The difference  in sward  
characteristics  between  cultivars  was also investigated.
Experimental  Methodology
The experiment  was carried  out at the Moorepark  Research  Centre  during  the 1999 and 
2000 grazing  season.  The soil type was a free-draining  acid brown  earth of sandy  loam
33
to loam texture. A permanent  grassland  site (17.2 ha) was reseeded  in August  1998.  
Table 1 shows  details  of cultivar,  heading  date, ploidy,  and seeding  rate. A further  3.9 
ha was reseeded  in April 2000 and incorporated  into the experimental  area in that year.
Table 1. Grass  cultivar,  heading  date, ploidy,  seeding  rate and experimental  land area.
Cultivar Heading  date Ploidy Seeding  rate 
(kg/ha)Land area
(ha)
Millenium 10-June  (L) Tetraploid 42 4.30
Portstewart 07-June  (L) Diploid 34 4.30
Napoleon 20-May (1) Tetraploid 42 4.30
Spelga 17-May  (1) Diploid 34 4.30
Design  and layout
At sowing,  the experimental  area was divided  equally  into the four treatments  consisting  
of 4.3 ha each. This area was divided  into 10 paddocks  ranging  in size from 0.35 to 0.47 
ha. In 2000, the additional  3.9 ha was divided  equally  between  treatments,  thereby  
increasing  the total area and paddock  number  per treatment  to 5.28 ha and 12, 
respectively.  Table  2 shows  the stocking  rate changes  over the grazing  area during  the 
experimental  periods  of 1999 and 2000.
Table  2. Mean stocking  rates (SR) (cows/ha)  of the grass cultivars  during  the grazing  
seasons  of 1999 and 2000.
1999
Date SR2000
Date SR
April - May 4.95 Apr- May 4.70
June - July 4.20 June - July 4.20
Aug - 26 Sept 4.20 Aug - 1 Get 3.80
Animals
In 1999 and 2000, 72 and 80 respectively,  spring  calving  holstein  friesian  dairy cows  
were blocked  into groups  of four. Each animal was randomly  assigned  to a grass  
cultivar  treatment.  Treatments  were applied  for 168 days in 1999 (April 12 to September  
26) and 161 days in 2000 (April 24 to October  01). The trial start date was delayed  in 
2000 due to poor spring  grass  growth. In 1999 and 2000,  treatment  group  size was 18 
and 20, respectively.  In both years  prior to experiment  start up, the animals  grazed  the 
experimental  area and were supplemented  with 5 - 6kg concentrate  per cow/day  during  
this grazing  period.
Grazing  Management
Rotational  grazing  management  as described  by (Dillon et al., 1995) was applied.  
Individual  paddock  residency  time ranged  from 2 to 2.5 days in both years. Grass  
supply  was monitored  weekly  by completion  of a farm grass  cover (O' Donovan,  2000).  
Grass  supply  was considered  to be in excess  when supply  exceeded  280 kg DM/cow.  
When a similar  surplus  occurred  In each cultivar,  grass was harvested  as round bale 
silage. This occurred  on May 5th and July 7th In 1999, and May 8th in 2000. When  a
34
grass surplus  was not common  across  cultivars,  non-experimental  dairy cows were  
used to graze the surplus,  this was recorded  as 'extra cow grazing  days' for each  
cultivar. A total of 1.06 ha and 0.89 ha per treatment  was conserved  as round bale 
silage  in 1999 and 2000, respectively.
A soil moisture  deficit  occurred  in mid July and extended  into mid August  (1999),  during  
which ail treatments  were supplemented  with silage and concentrate.  Each paddock  
was mechanically  topped  or cut as round bale silage  once in 1999. In 2000, only three 
paddocks  were mechanically  topped,  with a further  2 paddocks  from each treatment  
harvested  as round bale silage. Rotation  lengths  in 1999 averaged  24 days from mid 
April to late June, 17 days for July and 23 days from  August  to late September.  In 2000,  
rotation  lengths  averaged  19 days from late April to mid July and 23 days from mid July 
to late September.  In both years  the first application  of nitrogen,  (granular  urea) was in 
early January,  at a rate of 57 kg N/ha. Nitrogen  was applied  in the form of calcium  
ammonium  nitrate  (CAN)  at rates of 33 and 50 kg N/ha after each subsequent  grazing  
for the duration  of the experiment  in both years. Concentrate  supplementation  for the 
experimental  period  averaged  1.40 and 0.28 kg/cow  day in 1999 and 2000, respectively.
Results
Weather  and grass  production
Total rainfall  (mm) for 1999 and 2000 was 973 and 1082 respectively  compared  to the 
33 year average  of 1001 mm. Duration  of sunshine  (hours)  in 1999 and 2000 was 1184 
and 1318 respectively,  compared  to the 33 year average  of 1297 hours. Mean daily 
temperature  (°C) for 1999 and 2000 was 10.3 and 9.9 compared  to the 33 year average 
of 10.0 degrees. Grass production  was measured  in a separate  experiment  at the 
Moorepark  Research  Centre  using the method  described  by Corral  and Felon (1978).  
Total grass production  averaged  15.7 and 15.5 tonnes  of DM/ha  in 1999 and 2000,  
respectively.  This is compared  to the average  of 13.8 tonnes  of DM/ha  from 1982 to 
2000. Therefore,  total grass production  was above  normal  in both years.
Herbage  analysis
Chemical  analysis  of the herbage  consumed  during  periods  of intake  measurement  in 
1999 and 2000 is shown  Table 3. In 1999, during  Intake  period 1, late heading  grass  
cultivars  had significantly  higher (P<0.05)  grass digestibility.  No other chemical  
parameter  was significant.  Herbage  digestibility  did not differ significantly  between  
cultivars  in period 2, however  grass ploidy had a significant  (P<0.05)  effect on ash 
content. In 2000, late heading  grass cultivars  were found to have a significantly 
(P<0.05)  higher  NDF content  than intermediate  heading  cultivars.
Table 3. Chemical  analysis  of the herbage  selected  by the animals  during intake  
measurements  of each grass  cultivar  in 1999 and 2000.
Cultivar Significance
Millennium  Portstewart  Napoleon  Spelga s.e.d Heading
datePloidy
Period  1 (May 14-May  20 & June 30 - July 6) 1999
CP (g/kg)  194.5  186.0  205.3  195.5  12.6 NS NS
NDF (g/kg)  356.8  363.1  362.6 381.7  13.4 NS NS
Ash (g/kg)  86.2 83.5 82.4 77.7 4.7 NS NS
OMD (g/kg)  855.4  850.3  843.9 835.1  6.2 * NS
35
Period  2 (Sept 1 -Sept  6) 1999
CP (g/kg)  
NDF (g/kg)  
Ash (g/kg)  
OMD (g/kg)237.1
379.8
77.6
857.3269.2
376.3
88.5
852.8243.0
369.5
86.2
843.9250.2
378.1
89.2
840.515.0
7.5
3.5
7.7Ns
Ns
Ns
0.08Ns
Ns
*
Ns
(July 9 -July  14) 2000
CP (g/kg) 200.9 176.1 178.0 179.0 18.8 Ns Ns
NDF (g/kg) 387.9 394.0 412.4 413.8 13.4*Ns
Ash (g/kg) 88.7 81.7 82.3 81.1 2.9 Ns Ns
OMD (g/kg) 847.1 837.0 829.8 829.2 10.4 Ns Ns
CP - Crude  protein;  NDF - Neutral  detergent  fibre; OMD- Organic  matter  digestibility
Sward  Measurements
Average  pre-grazing  yields and pre- and post grazing  sward  surface  heights  over the 
1999 and 2000 grazing  seasons  are outlined  in Table 4. Late heading  cultivars  had 
significantly  higher  pre grazing  herbage  yields  (P<0.01)  and post grazing  sward  surface  
height  {P<0.05)  in 1999. Grass  ploidy had a significant  {P<0.05)  effect on pre grazing  
herbage  yield. Tetraploid  cultivars  had lower pre grazing  yield. In 2000, late heading  
cultivars  had significantly  {P<0.001)  higher  pre grazing  herbage  mass.
Table  4. Pre-grazing  herbage  yields,  and pre and post-grazing  sward  surface  height  for 
each cultivar  during  the 1999 and 2000 grazing  season.
Cultivar Significance
Millennium Portstewart  Napoleon  Spelga s.e.d Pleading Ploidy
date
1999
Pre yield 
(kg DM/ha) 2243 2426 2056 2210 96.8■irk *
Pre height  (cm) 19.2 19.2 19.1 18.9 0.65 NS NS
Post height  (cm) 7.27 7.53 7.13 7.21 0.01*Ns
Bulk density
(kg DM/m3) 1.51 1.65 1.40 1.52 0.07 ★ ***
Tiller density/m2 4411 5767 4804 6106 128*** ***
Leaf content 0.65 0.57 0.61 0.63 0.02 Ns ★
Stem content 0.26 0.32 0.30 0.27 0.02 Ns Ns
Dead content 0.09 0.11 0.08 0.10 0.01 Ns 0.064
2000
Pre yield
kg DM/ha) 2384 2601 2235 2579 82.4 NS***
Pre height  (cm) 21.3 21.8 21.0 21.7 0.48 NS 0.07
Post height  (cm) 7.81 7.78 7.41 7.82 0.15 NS 0.07
Bulk density
(kg DM/m3) 1.40 1.47 1.34 1.46 0.05 NS■kk*
Tiller density/m2 4691 6519 5878 6634 0.08 0.076★**
Leaf content 0.68 0.62 0.63 0.63 0.01■k ***
Stem content 0.23 0.28 0.26 0.25 0.02 NS NS
Dead content 0.09 0.10 0.11 0.13 0.01*0.072
36
As each cultivar  has different  seasonality  of production,  the extra DM production  was 
measured  in extra cow grazing  days and higher  pre-grazing  DM yields. Table  5 shows  
the surplus  of grass for each treatment  removed  by non-experimental  cows. In 1999  
late heading  cultivars  had substantially  more cow grazing  days than the intermediate 
heading  cultivars  (163 versus  61). The majority  of the extra  grazing  days were recorded  
in early July and late August. In 2000, there were substantially  less cow grazing  days 
than the previous  year (which was a primary  reseed). The late heading  cultivars 
recorded  a higher amount  of cow grazing days (56 versus 40). However,  the 
intermediate  heading  cultivars  recorded  their extra cow grazing  days in May.
Table 5. Extra cow grazing  days recorded  for each cultivar  during 1999 and 2000  
grazing  seasons.
MilleniumCultivar
Portstewart Napoleon Spelga
1999
May 38 4 20
June 12 12 28 4
July 48 52
August 76 84 70
Total 174 152 48 74
2000
May 64 20
June 86 25
July
Total 86 25 64 20
Milk Production  and milk composition
Table 6 shows the effect of grass cultivar  on milk yield, milk constituents  and milk 
composition  for both years. In 1999, there was a significant  (P<0.05)  interaction  
between  heading  date and ploidy  on milk yield, lactose  yield and milk fat concentration.  
Late heading  grass  cultivars  had significantly  (P<0.05)  higher  milk fat and protein  yields.  
In 2000, milk yield (P<0.01),  fat yield {P<0.05),  protein  yield (P<0.001),  lactose  yield 
(P<0.01)  and protein  concentration  (P<0.01)  were significantly  higher  for late heading  
grass cultivars.  There  was no effect  of grass ploidy  for any milk production  parameter 
in 1999 or 2000. Figures  1 and 2 show  the milk yield, milk protein  and fat yield profiles  
for each cultivar  during  the 1999 and 2000 grazing  seasons.
Table  6. The effect of grass cultivar  on milk production  and milk composition  for 1999  
and 2000.
Cultivar Significance
Millennium Portstewart  Napoleon  Spelga s.e.d Head
datePloidy
1999
Milk yield 
(kg/cow/day) 22.9 22.3 21.2 22.1 0.27*NS
Fat yield 
(kg/cow/day) 0.87 0.87 0 .84 0.82 0.01■kNS
Protein  yield 
(kg/cow  day) 0.74 0.74 0.69 0.72 0.01kNS
Lact yield 
(kg/cow  day) 1.07 1.03 0.98 1.03 0.01kNS
37
Fat cone
(g/kg) 3.83 3.93 3.96 3.77 0.05 NS NS
Protein  cone
(g/kg) 3,28 3.35 3.30 3.25 0.02 NS NS
Lact cone
(g/kg) 4.66 4.62 4,63 4.62 0.01 NS NS
2000
Milk yield 
(kg/cow/day) 21.9 21.9 20.3 20.7 0,33*★NS
Fat yield 
(kg/cow/day) 0,86 0.85 0.79 0.82 0.02★NS
Protein  yield 
(kg/cow/day) 0.75 0.75 0.69 0.69 0.01***NS
Lact yield 
(kg/cow/day) 1.01 1.02 0.94 0.95 0.02★*NS
Fat cone
(g/kg) 3.98 3.95 3.95 4,00 0.05 NS NS
Protein  cone
(g/kg) 3.46 3.45 3.40 3.37 0.02★*NS
Lact cone
(g/kg) 4.62 4.63 4.61 4.54 0.02 0.08 NS
cone - concentration
The different  levels  of grass  dry matter  intake  achieved  with the grass cultivars  during  
four different  grass intake measurements  is shown  in Table 7. In 1999, during intake  
period 1, late heading  cultivars  had a significantly  (P<0.001)  higher  total dry matter  
intake  compared  to intermediate  heading  cultivars  (16.0 versus  14.1). The late heading  
tetraploid  (Millennium)  had a substantially  higher total dry matter intake. In intake  
measurement  3 (autumn)  there  was no significant  difference  between  grass  cultivars.  In 
2000, only one intake  measurement  was completed  (mid June),  during  which  there  was 
a significant  (P<0.05)  effect  of heading  date.
Table  7. The effect  of grass cultivar  on dry matter  intake  (DMI) in 1999 (3 intake  runs)  
and 2000 (one intake  run).
Cultivar Significance
Millennium Portstewart  Napoleon  Spelga s.e.d Flead
datePloidy
DMI 1999
May 14 
(kg/cow/day) 16.7 15.3 14.0 14.1 0.66IrtrkNS
Jun 30
(kg/cow/day) 18.5 17,9 14.3 16.2 0.84*irk
NS Sept 1 
(kg/cow/day) 17.8 16.7 18,6 17,8 0.82 0.07 0.08
2000
July 9
(kg/cow/day) 16.6 16.1 15.8 15.3 0.62■kNS
38
Figure  1. The effect of grass  cultivar  on a) milk yield, b) milk protein,  and c) milk fat in 
1999.
a). The effect  of grass  cultivar  on mean  milk yield 1999
b). The effect  of grass  cultivar  on milk protein  yield 1999
c). The effect  of grass  cultivar on milk fat yield 1999
Week  of experiment
39
Figure  2. The effect  of grass  cultivar  on a) milk yield, b) milk protein,  and c) milk fat in 
2000 .
a). The effect  of grass  cultivar  on mean  milk yield 2000
35
b). The effect  of grass  cultivar  on milk protein  yield  2000
c). The effect  of grass  cultivar  on milk fat yield  2000
40
Table 8 shows  the effect of treatment  on live weight  and body condition  score  for 1999  
and 2000. Cows grazing  intermediate  heading  cultivars  had a significantly  (P<0.01)  
higher  bodyweight  in 1999, However  in 2000, cows grazing  tetraploid  cultivars  had a 
significantly  (P<0.01)  higher bodyweight,  whilst those grazing  diploid  cultivars  had a 
significantly  (P<0.001)  higher  body condition  score.
Table  8, The effect  of grass  cultivar  on live weight  and body condition  score  in 1999  and 
2000
Cultivar Significance
Millenium Portstewart Napoleon Spelga s.e.d. Head
datePloidy
1999
Live weight
(kg) 506.7 503.2 510.6 512.7 3.16*★NS
Condition
Score 2.97 2.84 2.92 2.89 0.03 NS**
2000
Live weight
(kg) 539.5 533.5 538.0 534.3 2.34 NS*rk
Condition
Score 2.87 2,89 2.94 2.93 0.02***NS
Conclusions
Milk production
In 1999, there was a significant  (P<0.05)  interaction  between  heading  date and grass  
ploidy for milk yield, lactose  yield and fat concentration.  The main source of this 
interaction  was the reduction  in milk yield on Napoleon  (intermediate,  tetraploid) 
compared  to Millennium  (late, tetraploid)  swards,  especially  during rotations  2 and 3 
(coinciding  with the cultivars  heading  date). In rotation  2 and 3 the difference  in milk 
yield between  both cultivars  was 1.3 and 2.8 kg milk/cow/day,  respectively.  In 2000, the 
cows grazing  late heading  grass  cultivars  had a significantly  {P<0.01)  higher  milk yield.  
The reduction  in milk yield was again most pronounced  during  rotation  3. The difference  
in milk yield between  late heading  and intermediate  heading  grass  cultivars  was 1.4 kg 
milk/cow/day.  Figures  1 and 2 clearly  illustrate  the reduction  in milk yield between  the 
grass  cultivars  at their  time of heading.  The results  of this study  is consistent  with Gately  
(1984). Grass  ploidy  had no significant  effect  on any milk production  parameter  in this 
study, which is in contrast  to other experiments.  Previously  (Hageman  et al., 1993)  
obtained  promising  results  from experiments  comparing  diploid  and tetraploid  cultivars  
of perennial  ryegrass.  (Castle  and Watson,  1971.,  Vipond  et al., 1993) found  tetraploid  
perennial  ryegrass  cultivars  superior  to diploid  cultivars  in terms  of animal  performance.  
The poor performance  of Napoleon  in both years  of the trial however  may have reduced  
the impact  of tetraploids  in this study. In both years late heading  grass cultivars  had 
significantly  higher  milk protein  and lactose  yield. They also had significantly  higher  fat 
yield (P<0,001)  and protein  concentration  (P<0.01)  in 2000 compared  to intermediate 
heading  cultivars.  The trend for milk protein  yield was similar  to that for milk yield. The 
late heading  grass cultivars  had continually  higher  milk protein  yield during  the main 
grazing  season  i.e. rotations  2, 3 and 4.
41
Dry matter  intake  (DMI)
Previously  Hageman  et a.,I (1990),  and Lantinga  and Groot (1996) both found higher  
grass DMI with tetraploid  cultivars. However,  in this study there was no significant  
difference  in DMI between  tetraploid  and diploid  cultivars.  Whilst  late heading  cultivars  
had superior  DMI relative  to intermediate  heading  cultivars  in all but one intake  
measurement,  intermediate  heading  cultivars  had a higher DMI during the autumn  
measurement  period. The reduced  DMI of intermediate  heading  cultivars  early in the 
grazing  season  would  suggest  that the (heading)  inflorescence  period  is antagonistic  to 
high DMI (Greenhalgh,  1966). High pre-grazing  sward  surface  heights  and low leaf to 
stem ratios during this period decreases  grass dry matter intake. Hodgson  (1982)  
concluded  that tall swards  were more prehensible,  but conceded  that the presence  of 
leaf sheath  in the grazed  horizon  may contribute  to or cause  a decline  in herbage  intake.  
Greenhalgh  (1966) reported  that herbage  intake  falls by 2.2 kg DM/cow/day  between  
vegetative  and reproductive  stages,  however  the difference  in this study was 1.9 kg 
DM/cow/day.
In this experiment  it appears  that leaf and stem content  and their association  with grass  
digestibility  is an overriding  feature  influencing  the DMI from the individual  cultivars.  
During  intake measurements  I, II and IV, the late tetraploid  cultivar  maintained  a high 
leaf to stem ratio, high organic  mater  digestibility  and consequently  highest  DMI. The 
positive  relationship  between  high leaf content  and high DMI of late heading  cultivars  is 
amplified  by the position  of free leaf lamina  lower in the grazing  canopy. (O'Donovan,  
personal  communication)  suggests  that the pseudostem  height  and lowest  ligule height  
of intermediate  cultivars  is higher  than in late heading  cultivars.  This indicates  that as 
the cow grazes  into the sward  canopy  there is a higher  proportion  of leaf material  deeper  
in the sward  especially  at low post grazing  height. Quantifying  the height  and proportion  
of free leaf lamina  within the sward profile  and also the pseudostem  and lowest  ligule  
height (which is mainly composed  of ligin) within the sward could lead to a better  
understanding  of apparent  DM intake  differences  between  grass  cultivars.
Sward  structure  and digestibility
Digestibility  differences  in grazed  swards  are most often associated  with changes  in 
sward structure  such as height, distribution  of leaf material,  sheath  or dead material.  
The intake of green leaves is greater  than the intake of stems even at the same  
digestibility  (Laredo  and Minson,  1975). Therefore  a sward  supporting  a high green  leaf 
mass supports  high dry matter  intake (Parga  et al, 2000). It is clear that green leaf 
content  is directly  related  to digestibility.  A 5.5 percentage  unit change  in leaf content  is 
equal to a 1 unit change  in digestibility  (Stakelum  and O'Donovan,  2000). The higher  
grass digestibility's  recorded  by the late heading  cultivars  during both initial intake  
periods  in 1999 is mainly  due to the proportion  of live leaf available  in the sward. The 
largest  difference  in live leaf content  takes place between  the cultivars  at their time of 
heading.  Post heading,  when the swards  reach  their vegetative  stage,  the differences  
in digestibility  are relatively  small. It is clear that cultivars  with an even DM distribution  
of grass production  (late heading  cultivars)  may produce  more live leaf than cultivars  
which  concentrate  their production  in early summer.
Tiller density
Diploid  cultivars  had a significantly  higher  tiller density  compared  to tetraploid  cultivars  
in both years of the study (22% higher in 1999, 25% higher in 2000). In general  
tetraploid  cultivars  are less persistent  than diploid  cultivars.  This is reflected  in a more  
open sward  attenuated  by tetraploids  having  fewer  but larger  tillers.
42
Conclusions  and implications
The study shows clearly  the milk production  advantage  to using late heading  grass  
cultivars  compared  to intermediate  heading  cultivars.  Therefore,  the use of late heading  
cultivars  in intensive  grazing  systems  is recommended.
References
Castle,  M.E. and Watson,  J.N. (1971). A comparison  between  a diploid  and a tetraploid  
ryegrass  for milk production.  Journal  Agric.  Science.,  Cambridge  77: 69-76.
CorrallA.  J. and Fenlon  J.S. (1978). A comparative  method  for describing  the seasonal  
distribution  of production  from grasses.  Journal of Agricultural  Science,  91: 61 -67.
Culleton,  N., Murphy,  W. E,, and Murphy,  W. (1998). Reseeding  - new perspectives  on 
grasses  and clovers. Farm  and Food 8 (2).
Dillon, R, Crosse,  S., Stakelum,  G., and Flynn, F. (1995). The effect  of calving  date and 
stocking  rate on the performance  of spring calving  dairy cows. Grass  and Forage  
Science  50: 266-299.
Gately, T. (1984). Early versus late perennial  ryegrass  {Lolium  perenne)  for milk 
production.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research  1: (23) 1-11.
Greenhalgh,  J.F.D., Reid, G.W., Aitken,  J.N. and Florence,  E. (1966). The effects  of 
grazing  intensity  on herbage  consumption  and animal  production.  I. Short  term effects  
in strip-grazed  dairy cows. Journal  of Agricultural  Science  67: 13-23.
Hageman,  I.W., Lantiga,  E.A. and Schlepers,  H. (1990). Herbage  intake, digestibility  
characteristics  and milk production  of some diploid  and tetraploid  perennial  ryegrass  
cultivars.  Proceeding  Second  British  Grassland  Society  Research  Conference,  Scottish  
Agricultural  College,  Ayr, 11-13 September  1990, paper  5, session  1.
Hageman,  I.W., Lantinga,  E.A., Schlepers,  H. and Neuteboom,  J.H. (1993). Herbage  
intake, digestibility  characteristics  and milk production  of a diploid  and two tetraploid 
cultivars  of perennial  ryegrass. Proceedings  of the XVII International  Grassland  
Congress.  Palmerston  North, New Zealand,  pp. 459-460.
Hodgson,  J. (1982). Influence  of sward  characteristics  on diet selection  and herbage  
intake by the grazing animal. In: Hacker, J.B. (ed) Nutritional  Limits to Animal  
Production  from Pasture.  CAB International,  Wallingford,  pp.153-166.
Lantinga,  E.A. and Groot, J.C.J. (1996). Optimization  of grassland  production  and 
herbage  feed quality  in an ecological  context. EAAP  Publication  No 84, pp 58 -67. 
Laredo,  D.A. and Minson,  D.J. (1975). Journal of the British  Grassland  Society,  30 73- 
77.
Minson,  D.J., Raymound,  W.F.,Harris,  C.E. and Millford,  R.J. {I960). Studies  in the 
digestibility  of herbage.  Journal  of the British  Grassland  Society,  15: 174- 180.
O'Donovan,  M.A. (2000). The relationship  between  the performance  of dairy cows and 
grassland  management  on intensive  dairy farms in Ireland. Phd Thesis, National  
University  of Ireland,  366pages.
O’Riordan,  E.G. (1997). Grazing  preference  among lolium perenne  cultivars. In: 
Proceedings  of Agricultural  Research  Forum  1997 pp139-140.
Parga, J., Peyraud,  J.L. and Delagarde,  R. (2000). Effect of sward structure  and 
herbage  allowance  on herbage  intake  by grazing  dairy cows. In: Grazing  management,  
the principles  and practice  of grazing  for profit and environmental  gain in temperate 
grassland  system. 29 February-2  March,  Harrogate,  British  Grassland  Society.
43
Sheedy,  S.J. (2000). The competitive  of grass  silage. UCD Publication  2000.
Stakelum  G. and O’Donovan,  M. (1997). Grazing  severity,  sward  digestibility  and intake  
and farm cover  targets  for profitable  summer  milk production.  In: The production  of high  
quality milk from  grass  and other  feeds, Cahir, 1998.
Vipond,  J. E., Swift, G., McCelland,  T.H., Milneand  J.A., and Hunter,  E.A. (1993). A 
comparison  of diploid  and tetraploid  perennial  ryegrass  and tetraploid  ryegrass/white  
clover  swards  under  continuous  sheep  stocking  at controlled  swards  heights.  2. Animal  
production.  Grass  and Forage  Science  48: 290 -300.
44
The impact  of grazing  management  on improving  milk solids
production
John McNamara  
Teagasc.  Bandon
Introduction
The information  presented  here is derived  from a number  of monitor  farms,  which are 
part of a Joint programme  between  Carbery  Milk Products  and Teagasc,  Carbery  Milk 
Products  is the processing  arm of the four West Cork Co-ops;  Bandon,  Barryroe,  
Drinagh  and Lisavaird.
In looking  at milk solids production,  the main focus should  be on protein,  as this is not 
constrained  by quota. However,  increasing  milk protein  is only one of several  ways of 
increasing  the value of milk output from a farm in a quota situation. The impact  of 
grazing  management  on milk protein  production  can be considered  under  four headings:  
Topping,  Grass  Allocation,  Leader-Follower  system  and Overgrazing.
Topping
It is the view of the author  that topping  should  always  err on the side of undergrazing.  It 
is accepted  that there will be some wastage  of grass In this way, but the cost of this 
wastage  is small relative  to the benefit  in cow performance.  There is little point in 
topping  in order  to have the field looking  nice for the neighbours.  If you are going  to top 
anyway,  get the benefit  from the cow performance  by erring  on the side of undergrazing.
Figure  1 illustrates  the protein  graphs  for Farms  A and D, Farm A achieves  a minimum  
of -1-0.05 increase  per month after March each year. This contrasts  with the typical  
spring  calving  protein  profile,  which we see for Farm D. Farm A is topping  after most 
rotations.  Herd performance  is not hit on the current  rotation  and the quality  of grass is 
always  excellent  on the next rotation,  because  if anything,  grazing  is always  to a height  
greater  than 6 cms.
Provided  there is a topper  on the farm, then in practise  the cost of topping  is mainly  the 
man-hours  involved.  It is contended  that for the farm mentioned  here the opportunity  
cost of the labour  was small, and that the farmer ’s time was well spent by doing the 
topping. Obviously  at some point topping  does become  unprofitable.
Farm A 3.48®/o Farm D 3.387#
4.10
4.00
45
Figure  1. Milk protein  profile  (2001)  for Farms  A and D involved  in the Joint 
programme  between  Carbery  Milk Products  and Teagasc
Grass  Allocation
It can be argued  that the strip-wire  as a method  of grazing  should  be banned  when  there  
is plenty  of grass  on the farm. If it is accepted  that grazed  grass is the cheapest  source  
of dry matter  we can produce,  then the objective  must be to get as much as of this 
product,  as possible,  into the cow each milking. Surely  the cow is the best judge of 
how much grass she will eat between  each milking? If this is so, then she should  be 
allowed  to make  that decision  as often as possible.  Allocate  the herd sufficient  grass  for 
up to three milkings  at a time. This way the herd is only restricted  in grass  intake  once 
every  day and a half. The added  bonus  is less time and effort  shifting  strip-wires.
Figure 2 shows  for Farm B the change  in milk protein  over three years. Note the 
dramatic  difference  in protein  between  May 1999 and May 2000. In late April 2000, this 
farm began allocating  grass for up to four milkings  at a time. There was no other  
significant  change  in either the management  or the herd in 2000 over 1999. The 
improvement  in milk protein  was 0.08. From  the graph  it can be seen that there  was an 
issue regarding  grass quality during the mid-season  2000, as there had been each 
previous  mid-season.  In 2001 a regime  of topping  after each grazing  was put in place,  
which helped  to correct  this mid-season  grass quality  issue. Milk protein  increased  a 
further 0.10. The challenge  now is how to achieve  this same effect more cost 
effectively?
Figure  2. Milk protein  profile  from 1999 to 2001 for Farm B involved  in the Joint 
programme  between  Carbery  Milk Products  and Teagasc
1999 -3.32%  2000-  3.40%  2001 -3.50%
Leader  - Follower  Grazing
Anyone  currently  grazing  drystock  on land that could be grazed  by milking  cows should  
assess  the possibility  for a leader-follower  cow system. Figure 3 shows  the protein  
percentage  for a split autumn  / spring  calving  herd. This farm is achieving  exceptional  
protein  levels  and averaged  3.60%  protein  for 2001.
In a leader-follower  system,  the followers  need to be at least 30% of the L.U. of the cows
46
to derive  benefits  from the system. The demand  for grass  from the drystock  followers 
decides  when  the cows move  on from the paddock.  The higher  the cover  the cows are 
leaving  behind,  the higher  the quality  of material  they will have grazed. Well-laid  out 
paddocks  with good access  and entrances  make operating  this system  non-labour  
intensive.  Some  labour  can be saved  due to the reduced  need for topping.
Ideally  all stock  should  be in and out of the paddock  in three  days (i.e. three milkings  for 
cows and then 36 hours, the equivalent  of three milkings,  for the drystock).  If all the 
paddocks  are the same  size it simplifies  the system.
Based  on visual  estimates,  performance  of the followers  (drystock)  is not compromised.  
In fact it maybe  that grass quality  is higher because  they are on cow ground. This 
system is a compromise  between  grazing hard and immediately  affecting  cow 
performance,  or grazing  laxly and affecting  grass quality and therefore  subsequent 
performance.
Figure  3. Milk protein profile (2001) for Farm C 
between  Carbery  Milk Products  and Teagascinvolved  in the Joint programme
2001 - 3.60%
Overgrazing
Despite  guidelines  from Moorepark  re. grazing  recommendations,  there is considerable  
confusion  as to what a field grazed  to 6 cm looks like during  the different  months  of the 
year. Arguably,  on some  farms  we are erring on the side of overgrazing.
The following  farm is typical  of an overgrazing  scenario.  Ironically  the same situation  
occurs  on a farm where  grass  quality  deteriorates  midseason.  The quality  of the grass  
on this farm in front of the cows is always  excellent.  However  this quality  is not being  
exploited  to the maximum.  Figure  1 shows  the milk protein  production  for 2001 for Farm  
D. This farm has improved  its solids production  since 1998. However  the target of 
increasing  protein  percentage  by a minimum  of 0.05 each month from March is not 
being achieved.  The high volume  milk months  from April to August  are showing  too flat 
a protein curve. These are the months  that even a small improvement  in milk 
composition  can yield significant  milk cheque  increases.
47
Conclusion
At farm level, grazing management  can have a significant  impact on milk solids  
production.  Regular  topping  and a 36-hour  grass allocation  have a positive  effect on 
milk composition.  Running  milking  cows as the leaders  in a leader-follower  system  also 
has a positive  effect. Each of the farms profiled  have increased  farm profitability.  
Increasing  milk composition  is a clear objective  and the results  are easily identified.  
However,  it may not increase  profit if it is achieved  through  increased  costs. The overall  
cost benefit  of the grazing  management  methods  mentioned  here will vary from farm to 
farm. The decision  to use any of them should  be based on their effect on your farm 
profitability  not just milk solids  production.
Acknowledgment
The author  is indebted  to the farmers  involved  for allowing  the use of data collected  from 
their farms.
48
Dairy  cow improvements  using  selection  and crossbreeding
Dorian  J. Garrick
Institute  of Veterinary.  Animal  & Biomedical  Sciences,  Massey  University.  Palmerston
North.  New  Zealand
Introduction
Genetic  change  is readily  obtained  by the selection  of individuals,  strains  or breeds  \A/ith 
performance  that differs  from average.  In contrast,  genetic  improvement  is more difficult  
to achieve  - it requires  a balance  of genetic  change  in favourable  characteristics  without 
simultaneous  erosion  in others  - this does not typically  come  about  by chance  - but from 
careful  analysis  of the impacts  of the likely genetic  change  in the context  of the whole 
farm system.
Farmers  have been the architects  of genetic change far more often than the 
beneficiaries  of genetic  improvement.  They have for example,  changed  breeds or 
strains  without  careful  consideration  of consequences  from a whole  farm perspective.  
This paper  introduces  a systematic  approach  to animal  improvement.
Determination  of the Goal
The first step in the logical  development  of an improvement  programme  is definition  of 
the goal. Suppose  the selection  or breeding  goal is to improve  farm profitability.  
Livestock  Improvement,  an artificial  breeding  company  in New Zealand,  summarises 
this thinking  in one of its advertising  campaigns,  “if you are not breeding  for profit, we 
wish you well in your hobby ”.
Defining  the Selection  Objective
A selection  objective  cannot  be developed  until the goal has been clearly  defined.  The 
selection  objective  can then be developed  in a two-step  procedure.  First, the list of traits 
that influence  the goal must be identified. This is usually a straightforward  task. 
Second,  the relative  emphasis  that should  be placed  on each trait in the list must be 
determined.  This is a difficult  task in practice,  due to the complexity  of the farming  
system  and the predictive  nature  of future  circumstances.  Many  of the disappointments  
that have been experienced  by farmers  that have changed  breeds  or strains  may have 
been avoided  if those  individuals  had given  careful,  comprehensive  prior  thought  to their 
selection  objective  in the context  of their farm system.
The construction  of a selection  objective  can be simplified  by partitioning  the problem  
into manageable  pieces. Given  a profit-based  goal, and recalling  the obvious  definition  
of profit as income  less expenses,  the objective  should  include  all traits that influence  
income  and all traits that influence  costs. The income  traits include  those influencing  
milk revenue  and beef revenue.  The cost traits might include  those  that influence  feed 
costs, reproductive  costs, replacement  costs and animal  health  costs. Fixed  costs  such 
as rates, or accounting  need not be included  as these  apply  to the farm business  rather  
than the individual  animals.
The systematic  approach  quantifies  the economic  impact  of the traits in the list, before  
consideration  of the availability  of information  on individual  cows and bulls for each trait 
in the list. This calculation  needs  to be undertaken  for each trait in the list one at a time, 
and must consider  the impact  on profit of a unit change  in the trait with all other  traits in 
the list being held constant.  The calculation  can be undertaken  using a partial budget
49
of the farming  system.  Bear in mind that due to the time delays  between  ranking  parents  
and the milking  of the resultant  offspring,  it is the future  economic  and management  
circumstances  that must be considered  in this partial  budget  exercise.
In practice,  a common  error has been to discard  many traits (such as fertility)  from 
further  consideration  at this stage, due to the absence  of information  allowing  animals  
to be ranked. One could easily  reduce  the list to including  only those  traits influencing  
milk revenue,  such as milk volume  and concentrafions  of fat and protein. This leads  to 
undue  focus on per head milk income,  and ignores  feed costs, body size and fertility.  
Accordingly,  farmers  may be tempted  to alter their milking  strain solely  on the basis of 
per head income  wifhout due account  for changes  in feed costs, stocking  rates,  
reproductive  costs and replacement  rates. Such an oversight  was one of the main 
factors  responsible  for the rapid Holsteinisation  of international  dairying.
Including  milk volume  and composition  traits  in the selection  objective
One approach  to determining  future milk payment  is based on the current  industry  
payment  system.  This might  be appropriate  in a perfect  market  system  but few markets  
are perfect. In New Zealand,  farmers  have been paid the average  international  market  
returns  of their dairy products,  less the processing,  marketing  and transport  costs.  
Payment  has been partitioned  according  to an assessment  of the relative  contributions  
of fat and protein. In respect  to the value of fat in the form of butter,  the actual  market  
realisation  often varies  markedly  according  to the product  destination.  Some butter  is 
sold at high prices whereas  the remainder  may be sold at prices below the cost of 
production.  The market  signals  based  on these  average  returns  do not reflect  the real 
market  circumstances.  Rewarding  farmers  for fat sold below  its marginal  cost does not 
make long-term  economic  sense.
A more informed  approach  to value  future  milk is to model  the collection  and processing  
of milk and the marketing  of dairy products  in order  to derive  the true value  of milk from 
the expected  market  realisation  of the resultant  products,  less manufacturing,  marketing  
and transport  costs. The value of milk assessed  in this manner  is shown  in Table 1. 
More details  on this topic are in Garrick  & Lopez-Villalobos  12000).
Table 1. The value of milk (EUR/litre)  of average  composition  and from Holstein  (H), 
Holstein-Friesian  (HF), Jersey  (J), crossbred  (XB) and Ayrshire  (A) breeds  when 10% or 
70% milk is processed  as a fluid product  and the residual  is processed  into cheese,  or 
a mixture  of cheese,  whole  milk powder,  skim milk powder,  casein  & buffer.
Product  Mix Milk Source
Fluid Residual Average H HF J XB A
10% Cheese 0.21 0.19 0.20 0.24 0.21 0.21
10% Mix 0.23 0.21 0.23 0.26 0.24 0.23
70% Cheese 0.39 0.38 0.39 0.40 0.39 0.39
70% WMP-Cheese 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.40 0.40 0.39
Table 1 shows  that the value of the milk varies  markedly  depending  upon the breed it 
comes  from (i.e. its composition)  and the product  mix for which  the milk is used. Milk 
has its greatest  value  when used for fluid supply. The difference  in value between  milk 
of different  breeds  is greatest  when most of the milk is processed  rather  than sold in 
standardised  fluid form.
50
The marginal  value of each milk component  can be calculated  from the true value of 
milk, accounting  for the average  composition  of the milk supplied  and the product  mix 
for which the milk will be used. Some milk payment  systems  based  on milk-solids  or 
yields  of fat and protein  less volume-related  costs are shown  in Table 2 for a subset  of 
the circumstances  in Table 1.
Table  2. A milk-solids  (EUR/kg)  and multi component  payment  systems  for fat, protein  
and volume  of milk from Holstein  (H), Holstein-Friesian  (HF), Jersey  (J) and crossbred  
(XB) cows when 10% is used for fluid milk and the residual  processed  into a 
comprehensive  mix (Row 2 Table 1) or 70% fluid and residual  into whole milk powder  
and cheese  (Row 4 Table 1).
Multi-component  payment
Market Breed Milk-solids Fat Protein Volume
10% H 3.15 1.20 6.17 -0.03
70% H 5.83 0.65 12.04 -0.02
10% HF 2.90 1.45 5.62 -0.03
70% HF 5.05 2.36 9.03 -0.02
10% J 2.65 1.33 5.26 -0.03
70% J 4.10 2.14 7.39 -0.02
10% X B 2.81 1.40 5.50 -0.03
70% X B 4.67 2.29 8.47 -0.02
The results  in Table 2 show  that the value of milk-solids  varies  with the breed (i.e. milk 
composition)  and the product  mix. Even when 70% milk is used for fluid sales, a yield 
based  payment  system  would  be characterised  with a small volume  charge. The fat to 
protein  relativity  varies  with the milk composition  and product  mix. Note in Table  2 that 
for a given product  mix the value  to a processor  of marginal  components  such as fat or 
protein  depends  upon the nature  of the milk provided  by other suppliers.
Farmers  need to appreciate  that the calculation  of milk value is not trivial. Ideally,  the 
assessment  of milk value and the value of its components  should  not be based  on the 
current market circumstances,  but an informed  analysis  that accounts  for future 
expectations  in terms  of milk supply,  its composition,  resultant  products  and consumer  
demands.
Cow size as an objective  trait
in comparing  dairy breeds  such as Jerseys,  Friesians,  Holstein-Friesians  and Holsteins,  
farmers  have noted the larger  strains  tend to produce  more milk. Farmers  have also 
identified  the fact that within a breed or strain, larger cows tend to produce  greater  
volumes.  Some  farmers  may therefore  have deliberately  selected  for cow size, in order  
to improve  production.  Given a goal of income  per cow, larger cows would be an 
advantage.  However,  given a goal of profit per farm (or per unit of land or unit of feed)  
the implications  of selection  including  the size of cow needs  to be carefully  considered.
Suppose  mature  cow size and production  is known  for a strain of cows. A feed and 
financial  budget  can be undertaken  to determine  the likely physical  and economic  
performance  of such a farm system  (Garrick  1996). The resultant  economic  information  
can then be used to determine  the worth of any cow given knowledge  of her likely  
performance  with respect  to each of the traits in the objective.
51
Consider  a simple  calculation  to demonstrate  this thinking. Suppose  a herd of cows  
produce  an average  of 200 kg fat, 183 kg protein,  5500 kg of milk and weigh 500 kg. 
From the viewpoint  of animal  improvement,  the actual profitability  of this herd is of no 
particular  interest.  What really matters  is the extent  to which  profit changes  when herd 
performance  is modified.
Suppose  fat production  increased  by 1 kg, all other factors unchanged.  The milk 
revenue  would increase  by the value of 1 kg fat. In addition,  the feed requirements  
would  increase.  Assuming  it requires  56 MJ ME (metabolisable  energy)  to produce  1 kg 
fat, an animal  fed pasture  would require  almost  6 kg DM (dry matter)  to produce  the 
additional  fat. The economic  value for a unit increase  in fat would therefore  be the 
income  from the extra fat less the cost of supplying  about 6 kg DM. The cost of 
supplying  the DM could be obtained  from the cost of purchased  feed, or from the 
opportunity  cost of DM in the production  system. Suppose  the fat price was €l 00 per 
kg, DM opportunity  cost was €0.15  per kg, the economic  value  for fat would  be .00 - 
6 X 0.15 = *-0.10. That is profit would increase  by €0.10  for a unit increase  in tat, all 
other  traits held constant,  A similar  approach  can be used to obtain  an economic  value  
for protein  and for milk volume.
Suppose  the mature  live-weight  of the cows  was increased  by 1 kg. This would  increase  
the maintenance  feed requirements  and the beef revenue  and may be associated  with 
an increase  in lactation  production.  It is not necessary  to calculate  the value of extra  
milk production,  (as shown  in the previous  paragraph)  if milk yield traits are included  in 
the list of traits in their own right. To determine  the value of cow size, only the beef 
revenue  and feed costs need be assessed.  The aggregate  worth of an individual  
animal,  strain or breed,  will then be obtained  using the assessed  performance  for each 
trait in the objective  along with its associated  economic  value.
Assuming  a 49% dressing  out percentage  and a beef price of €3 per kg carcass,  the 
beef revenue  would increase  by 3 x 0.49 = €1.47  per kg live-weight.  However,  if the 
average  cow has five lactations,  only 1 /5 of the herd will have  a salvage  value  each year. 
Accordingly,  the beef revenue  component  of the live-weight  increase  is 1/5 x 1.47 = 
€0.29. The maintenance  feed costs of a cow on an annuri  basis is about 231 MJ ME 
per kg°^5. Assuming  a ME concentration  of 10.8 MJ ME per kg DM, a 500 kg cow 
requires  (231 x 500°^^)/10.8  = 2261,6  kg maintenance  and a 501 kg cow requires  
2265.0,  an increase  of about  3^2 kg DM. The value  of cow size is therefore  €0.29  less 
the cost of 31/2 kg DM, Assuming  the DM cost €0.15  per kg, the value of cow size is 
0.29 - 31/2 X 0.15 = - €0.24. That is, the profit erodes  by €0.24  for a unit increase  in 
live-weight,  other traits held constant.
Combining  the above results it is apparent  that a 1 kg heavier  cow would need to 
produce  an extra 0.24/0.10  = 2.4 kg fat to have the same  profit as the lighter  cow, given  
the assumed  feed costs, milk fat and beef prices.
The values  of fertility  and longevity
The economic  values of longevity  and fertility are much more difficult  to calculate  
compared  to lactation  yields  or live-weight.  Modifications  to longevity  can alter the age 
structure  of the herd, which  will in turn alter its productivity  and its feed requirements  as 
younger  cows and very old cows produce  less than mature  equivalent  cows. Longevity  
can also influence  the number  of replacements  required,  therefore  modifying  beef 
revenue,  A1 and feed costs. It also affects  the level of voluntary  and involuntary  culling,  
therefore  modifying  salvage  beef returns  and the influence  of culling on production.
52
Changes  to fertility will influence  longevity,  In addition  to modifying  the calving  
distribution  of the herd, which  will influence  milk production  and Al costs with carryover  
effects  for a number  of years. In contrast  to measures  of lactation  yield, there are no 
universally  accepted  methods  of describing  fertility  or longevity.  The economic  values  
for these traits are also sensitive  to the average  levels of performance.  Economic  
values  are higher  in seasonal  calving  than in continuous  calving  herds. In herds with 
high reproductive  performance,  fertility  is less important  than in herds  that are struggling  
to obtain  sufficient  Al-bred  early born heifer replacements.
The NZ selection  objective
The development  of a selection  objective  for dairy cattle in New Zealand  has been  
rapidly  developing  and further  changes  are likely. The original  selection  objective  was 
based  solely  on milk-fat  yield and the index was Fat Bl (Breeding  Index). In 1986, the 
objective  was modified  to reflect milk payment,  by the addition  of milk volume  and 
protein  yield. The resulting  a+b-c  index was known  as Payment  Bl and was really an 
income  rather  than a profit index. In 1991, an index known  as Total  Bl was developed  
to include  live-weight  and survival  information.  It was not until 1996  that the feed costs  
for lactation  traits were introduced  to the index. At that time, the indexing  went across  
breeds  and was renamed  Breeding  Worth  (BW).
The index is currently  being revised  to directly  include  fertility  and will likely involve  the 
lactation  yields  of milk volume,  fat and protein,  mature  live-weight,  functional  longevity  
(days of productive  life adjusted  for lactation  yield) and fertility. The economic  values  
are updated  annually  and the most recent update (excluding  fertility) is in Table 3 
(www.aeu.org.nz ). The principle  behind  the calculation  of these  weights  is as discussed  
in this paper,  although  the derivation  is much more involved  to account  for future  prices  
and costs, to discount  traits based on the timing and numbers  of expressions  and to 
account  for the calving  distribution  and age structure  of the herd.
Table  3. Economic  values  and traits in the NZ selection  objective
Milk-fat Protein Volume Live-weight Longevity
Trait (kg) (kg) (litres) (kg) (days)
Economic  Value 1.23 5.97 -0.07 -0.92 0.03
It is worth noting  that type traits such as udder  scores  are not explicitly  included  in the 
selection  objective,  as these  do not directly  influence  income  or costs. Scores  for all the 
recorded  traits other than production  (TOP) are used along with other information  to 
predict  the remaining  life of cows that are currently  still alive in the national  herd - the 
influence  of these traits is therefore  through  their impact  on longevity.  However,  type 
scores  may also be the basis of independent  culling,  regardless  of BW.
Concurrent  changes  in cow size and production
Analysis  of the economic  trade-off  between  cow size and lactation  yields using the 
weights  in Table 3 demonstrates  that a 1 kg heavier  cow would need to produce  an 
additional  0.92/1.23  = 0.75 kg fat or 0.92/5.97  = 0.15 kg protein  to have the same  profit  
as a lighter cow. If, as a consequence  of being heavier,  the production  increase  is 
greater  than 0.75 kg fat or 0.15 kg protein,  the heavier  cow will be more profitable  and 
will be favoured  in index selection.
This approach  to valuing  the worth of cows neither  favours  nor discriminates  large or 
small cows specifically.  Rather  it values  their production  while accounting  for their costs
53
of production.  Larger  cows or strains  will be rewarded  if their extra productivity  more  
than pays for their increased  maintenance.
A consequence  of these  tradeoffs  between  size and production  is that there  exists  large  
efficient  dairy cattle and small efficient  dairy cattle. Inspection  of the bull evaluations  in 
terms of their BW index and their live-weight  EBV will quickly  confirm  this finding. A 
consequence  of this fact is that if the goal is to improve  economic  efficiency  (defined  as 
profit) it is better  to select  for profit  than to select  on indirect  indicators  such as cow size. 
This is particularly  true when selection  is across  breeds  or strains  of cows.
Industry  determinants  of within-breed  rate of improvement
The dairy industry  is often held up as a glowing  example  of a livestock  industry  with a 
high rate of annual  genetic  progress  relative  to say beef cattle  or sheep  industries.  Most 
dairy farmers  probably  pat themselves  on their backs  when they hear such comment.  
However,  in considering  the people  that control  the nature and direction  of industry  
progress,  it turns out that farmers  have little direct  influence.
Dairy improvement  programmes  in use today are, at best, fine-tuned  examples  of a 
scheme  that was researched  and communicated  some 50 years ago. The rate of 
progress  achieved  in the scheme  is determined  by the ages of the animals  and the 
selection  practices  that exist in the four so-called  pathways  of selection.  The scheme  
involves  two conceptual  populations  - one for breeding  replacement  bulls and the other  
for breeding  replacement  cows. The pathways  represent  the selection  of bull fathers,  
bull mothers,  cow fathers  and cow mothers.  The number  of young  bulls that are progeny  
tested,  the number  of graduate  sires required  and the number  of progeny  per bull are 
major  determinants  of both the rate of gain and the cost of the breeding  scheme.  
Farmers  choose  the cows they will use to produce  replacements.  However,  In the 
absence  of yearling  Al, the opportunity  to select  among  cows is negligible  when one 
accounts  for the sex ratio, calf losses  and the calving  spread. Farmers  choose  the bulls 
they will mate to their cows to produce  replacements,  but this is only among  the bulls 
the AB company  has chosen  to make  available  to them.
The AB companies  choose  the bulls they will use to produce  sons, and the elite cows  
they would like to mate with these bulls. Farmers  of course  decide  whether  to accept  
such contract  matings.  About  five years  later, the AB company  chooses  among  the bulls 
graduating  the progeny  test to determine  those  that will be made  available  to the farmer.  
Thus three of the four pathways  are controlled  by the AB company  rather than the 
farmer. The path the farmer  controls  is the one with the least impact  on industry  gain. 
The primary  basis for selection  in the three pathways  controlled  by two major NZ AB 
companies  is BW using weights  such as presented  in Table 3. The within-breed  
response  to this selection  on BW, accounting  for the four pathways  of selection,  is an 
annual  increase  of about 1.5 kg fat/cow,  1.6 kg protein/cow,  23 litres volume/cow  and a 
negligible  change  in live-weight.  Note that the response  in the component  traits is 
determined  by the genetic  relationships  between  the traits as well as their economic  
values. Despite  a negative  economic  value for volume,  it increases  as a result of 
selection.  Further,  the negative  economic  value  for live-weight  does not result in cows  
getting  smaller.
This four pathway  co-operative  scheme  will continue  to be successful  providing  a 
significant  proportion  of farmers  herd test (allowing  identification  of prospective  bull 
mothers),  use Al (providing  linkages  between  herds and cash flow to the AB company  
to pay for fhe progeny  testing)  and relinquish  sons from elite matings  for subsequent  
progeny  test.
54
strain  comparison  and selection  among  strains
The previous  section  argued  farmers  have relatively  little impact  on the annual  rate of 
progress  provided  they continue  herd-testing  and purchasing  semen from their 
respective  breeds/AB  companies.  In contrast,  farmers  can have enormous  impact  on 
genetic  progress  and AB company  business  by their choice  of breed/strain/AB  company.  
In some countries  farmers  have changed  strain (e.g. to Holstein)  eroding  the semen  
revenue  of their existing  AB companies.  In extreme  cases,  AB companies  may have 
been forced  out of business.  From  the perspective  of the farmer,  such quantum  genetic  
change  is highly  desirable  if it results  in progress  towards  their goal. However,  genetic  
improvement  may not result if proper  account  has not been considered  for the effects  
on all the traits (particularly  feed costs and fertility)  in the selection  objective.
Given a sound selection  objective  and knowledge  of breed and heterotic  effects,  it is 
possible  to make objective  comparison  among  existing  and new strains  of dairy cattle.  
In NZ production,  management  and economic  circumstances,  such analysis  (Figure  1, 
from Lopez-Villalobos  et al., 2000) shows  that farming  systems  using crossbred  cattle  
are more profitable  than purebred  Holstein-Friesian  (F), Jersey (J) or Ayrshire  (A) 
systems.
Figure  1. Profitabilities  of straight-breeding  and some  cross-breeding  systems.
600
500 -
g 400
^ 300
200
100
l-'xJxA
However,  with respect  to individual  bulls or cows there is enormous  overlap  between  
strains.  A list of the most profitable  bulls will likely include  Jerseys,  Holstein-Friesian  and 
Holstein  representatives  and these strains  will also be represented  in the list of least 
profitable  bulls. In such circumstances,  uninformed  breed change is unlikely  to 
guarantee  an increase  in farm profitability.
Summary
Animal  improvement  schemes  in practice  are all about  compromise.  In selection,  there  
needs  to be compromise  between  the progress  in individual  traits that contribute  to the
55
objective,  and compromise  in terms  of the rate of progress  in relation  to the cost of the 
progress. In comparing  strains or breeds  there is never a perfect  animal - some  
attributes  will normally  be enhanced  whereas  others  will be eroded. Such compromises  
must be quantified  in order  to provide  informed  decision  among  alternatives.
A systematic  approach  to making  informed  decisions  about dairy cattle selection  and 
strain choice begins  with the definition  of a goal, followed  by the construction  of a 
selection  objective.  The objective  includes  a list of traits that influence  the goal and the 
relative  emphasis  that should  be attributed  to each trait in the list. The calculation  of 
relative  emphasis  should account  for future production,  economic  and management  
circumstances  including  the manner  in which milk sales will be rewarded.
Dairy farmers  are part of an integrative  business  that requires  many skills to achieve  
repeated  success. It is important  that dairy farmers  and other players  in the dairy  
industry  work together  with animal  breeders  and animal  recording  agencies  if they are 
to be early exploiters  of new opportunities  while avoiding  costly  mistakes.
References
Garrick,  D.J. (1996). Genetic  improvement  in your herd - improving  profit through  
genetic  gain. Proceedings  of the 1996  Massey  Dairy  Farmers ’Conference,  48:129-135.  
Garrick,  D.J., and Lopez-Villalobos,  N. (2000). Potential  for economic  benefits  to the 
producer  from altering  the composition  of milk. British  Society  of Animal  Science.  
Occasional  Publication  No. 25:93-108.
Lopez-Villalobos,  N., Garrick,  D. J., Holmes,  C. W., Blair, H. T. and Spelman,  R. J. 
(2000). Profitability's  of some  mating  systems  for dairy herds  in New Zealand.  Journal  
of Dairy  Science,  83:144-153.
56
Breeding  objectives  for a seasonal  calving  pasture  based  system
of milk production
R Dillon, 3 R Buckley,  R. Evans,  J. Kennedy,  D. Berry, B. Horan  and R.F. Veerkamp^  
^Teagasc,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork, Ireland  
^ID-Lelystad,  P. O. Box 65, 8200  AB Lelystad,  The Netherlands
Introduction
Milk production  in Ireland  is characterised  by relatively  low milk production  per cow and 
low costs of production.  This is primarily  due to the pasture  based, seasonal  calving  
system  of milk production  (Dillon  etal., 1995). For the foreseeable  future,  it is envisaged 
that this system  of milk production  will pre-dominate  in Ireland,  making  the country  
unique  within Europe.
Irish dairy farmers  have many  options  to breed herd replacements.  In recent  times,  the 
practice  has been to use semen from Holstein-Friesian  dairy bulls sourced  mainly  
abroad. However,  the potential  of other breeds to replace Holstein-Friesians,  or 
crossbreeding  is attracting  much interest,  the latter originating  from the perceived  lower  
reproductive  performance  and survival  of to-days  Holstein-Friesian  dairy cow, and from 
questions  about the suitability  of Holstein-Friesian  cows to Irish production  systems.  
The objective  of this paper  is to investigate  ways of producing  dairy herd replacements  
that result in the highest  profit under Irish milk production  systems.
Irish trends  in milk production  and reproduction
Until the mid-1980's,  the predominant  dairy cow breed in Ireland was the British  
Friesian,  which  had been upgraded  from the dairy Shorthorn  from the late 1960 ’s. Table  
1 shows the change  in the proportion  of North American  Holstein-Friesian  genes  
(NAHF)  in cows registered  with the Holstein  UK and Ireland  (HUKI)  from 1977 to 1998.  
This proportion  of NAHF in bulls has increased  from 10% in 1977 to 80% in 1998.  
Therefore  in the Irish dairy cow population,  replacement  of the British Friesian  by the 
NAHF  has occurred  at a rapid rate since the late 1980 ’s. Average  milk production  per 
cow, for all milk recorded  cows, increased  from 5,400  kg in 1990 to 5,884  kg in 2000, or 
an increase  of 19 kg per cow per year (ICBF  2000).
Table 1. Change  in the proportion  of Holstein-Friesian  (HF) genetics  in cows (by year 
of birth) registered  with Holstein  UK and Ireland  (HUKI)  from 1977 to 1998.
Year of Birth Holstein  %
1977 <10
1990 50
1998 80
The reproductive  performance  of the Irish dairy herd was accessed  in a number  of early  
surveys (Crowley  et al., 1967; Roche et at., 1978; Cunningham  et at, 1978;  
Cunningham  and O'Byrne,  1980). All of these surveys  indicated  a calving  rate to first 
service  in excess  of 60 %, and a culling rate for infertility  of less than 10%. However  
since these surveys,  milk production  per cow has almost  doubled  as a result of the 
increased  genetic  merit for milk production,  as well as better  feeding  and management.  
A more recent  survey  on 32 spring  calving  herds  showed  that calving  rate to first service  
decreased  from 59% in 1991 to 54% in 1998 (Mee et. at, 1998). Over  this period  there
57
was a significant  decline  in calving  rate to first service  of approximately  0.9 % per year. 
This reduction  in reproductive  performance  was associated  with a significant  increase  of 
108 kg in milk yield per cow per annum.
Table 2 shows  the results  of three long-term  strain comparison  studies  carried  out at 
Moorepark  in recent  years. The objective  of these  studies  was to compare  the biological  
and economic  efficiency  of different  genotypes  in seasonal  grass  based  systems  of milk 
production.  The results  show  that cows  with higher  genetic  potential  for milk production  
and a greater  proportion  of NAHF genetics  had reduced  reproductive  performance  
(Buckley  et al., 2000). As the proportion  of NAHF genetics  approached  100%,  
conception  rate to first service  was reduced  to approximately  40%, calving  to conception  
interval  increased  to > 90 days, and the proportion  of cows empty at the end of the 
breeding  season  was greater  than 20%.
Table 2. Studies  at Moorepark  (CRT = Curtins;  CLY = Castlelyons)  comparing  milk 
production  and reproduction  from high genetic  merit (HM) and medium  genetic  merit  
(MM) cows.
CRT (96-97)
HM MMCRT (99-00)
HM MMCLY (96-00)
HM
Proportion  of Holstein-Friesian  (%) 92 50 80 60 94
Milk yield (kg) 7779 6862 7841 6855 6471
Submission  rate (%) 88 93 85 90 75
Pregnancy  rate to 1st service  (%) 41 53 48 54 37
Calving  to conception  Interval  (days) 87 89 91 89 99
Services  per cow (No) 2.1 1.8 1.9 1.8 2.8
Empty  rate (%) 23 6 19 13 26
In the past three years a more comprehensive  study on 74 commercial  spring  calving  
herds  in the south of Ireland  has been carried  out (Evans  et at., 2002). In the first year 
of this study the average  calving  to conception  interval,  pregnancy  rate to first service  
and proportion  of cows conceiving  in the first 200 days of the breeding  season  were 90 
days, 48% and 87% respectively.  Similar  results  have been obtained  in the second  year 
of the study. The pregnancy  rate of 48% to first service  is much lower than that found  
in previous  studies.  The average  proportion  of NAHF  genetics  of the cows in the study  
was 51%. This figure  may be an underestimate  since the proportion  was calculated  as 
50 %* sire plus 25 %* maternal  grand  sire, and it was assumed  that the maternal  grand  
dam had zero NAHF.
Table 3 shows  the genetic  correlation  between  milk production  and fertility  traits for 
spring-calving  Holstein-Friesian  cows in Ireland,  after adjusting  for both milk yield and 
fertility  for proportion  of NAHF (Evans  et al., 2002). The results  indicate  that selection  
for milk yield alone leads  to deterioration  in fertility  performance.
Table  3. Genetic  correlation  (and standard  errors)  between  milk production  and fertility  
traits for spring-calving  Holstein-Friesian  cows in Ireland.
Trait®Milk yield
Correlation  s.e.
Calving  to first service  interval  (CFS) -0.09 (0.25)
Number  of services  per cow (NS) 0.98 (0.35)
Pregnancy  at day 42 of the breeding  season  (PR42) -0.51 (0.51)
Pregnancy  rate to first service  (PRES) -0.51 (0.61)
58
Figure  1 shows  the genetic  trend  for calving  interval  and survival  for bulls born between  
1984 and 1995 (Olori etal.. 2002). These  latest results  from ICBF show  that in genetic  
terms, calving  interval  has increased  by about 0.5 days per year for the last 6 years.  
Similarly  survival  has decreased  by about 1 % the over the last 4 years.
These results confirm the international  trend that a reduction  in reproductive  
performance  in the Irish dairy cow population  can be ascribed  to both selection  for 
higher  milk yield, and an increased  proportion  of NAHF  genetics.
Selecting  within  the Holstein  Friesian
(aj Using  the Economic  Breeding  Index  (EBt)
Selection  of bulls for improved  reproductive  efficiency  is one possible  solution  to the 
problem  of reduced  reproductive  performance.  Careful  genetic  selection  may allow  
dairy producers  the use of high milk production  genetics  from NAHF  and still maintain  
acceptable  reproductive  rates. Reproductive  traits have a low heritability,  but the 
coefficient  of variation  of reproductive  traits is very large (Philipsson,  1981; Evans  et al., 
2002). A recent  study  in the Netherlands  showed  genetic  standard  deviations  of 9 days,  
for days to first service  and calving  interval,  0.25 for number  of services,  and 5 % for 
conception  to first service  (Veerkamp  et al., 2001). Therefore,  genetic  selection  for 
improved  daughter  fertility is feasible  in dairy cattle. Scandinavian  breeding 
programmes  have included  non-production  traits (fertility,  mastitis  resistance  etc.) in 
addition  to production  traits in their selection  indices  for many  years (Philipsson  et al., 
1994). Prior  to 1990  the genetic  trend in days open (reduced  reproductive  performance)  
was increasing,  but this has now reversed.  Although  progress  towards  increase  milk 
production  is less, their models  suggest  that better economic  efficiency  is achievable  
when functional  non-production  traits are included  in selection  programmes.
In Ireland,  the Irish Cattle Breeding  Federation  (ICBF) introduced  a new economic  
breeding  index (EBI) for dairy  cattle breeding  in Spring  2001. The new index is different  
to the old 'RBI' in that it contains  2 new traits (survival  and calving  interval)  as well as 3 
milk production  traits (Veerkamp  et al., 2002). The weightings  on the five traits in the 
new index are as follows:-
EBI (€) = -0.76* PD milk (kg) + 0.9* PD fat (kg) + 5.7* PD protein (kg) + 11.4* PD 
survival  (%) - 2,0* PD calving  interval  (days)
59
Therefore  the index indicates  that increasing  protein  yield at farm level \A/ill improve  farm 
profit by €5.70/kg produced.  Reduced  culling percentage  by 1 % will increase  farm 
profit by about  €11.40  for each cow in the herd. Likewise  each one-day  increase  on 
calving  interval  will reduce  farm profit by €2.00  for each cow in the herd. In terms of 
relative  importance  of the traits, improving  protein  yield is the most important,  followed  
by survival  and milk yield, calving  interval  and fat yield. Survival  and calving  interval  
contribute  almost  30 % of the weighting  in the EBI index.
The EBI index was further improved  in 2002, to include  more information  (multiple  
lactation  data, type traits and condition  score)  to improve  the reliability  of the survival  
and calving  interval  traits. Data are also available  on survival  and calving  interval  for 
most imported  semen.  The new index has resulted  in the re-ranking  of many  sires. The 
best example  of this is Delta Cleitus  Jabot (DCJ), which in the old RBI system  was 
ranked  No.1 in Ireland,  now ranks  954 in the new EBI Index. This is mainly  because  of 
his + 8.6 days in calving  interval  and - 3.4 % in survival. For the spring  of 2003, Irish 
dairy farmers  should  first look to the top 25 active sires ranked  in EBI. If fertility  and 
longevity  is an issue  for the herd, more  cognisance  should  be placed  on the survival  and 
calving  interval  traits in the index. There is a selection  of bulls available,  which will 
improve  survival  and reduce  calving  interval,  and simultaneously  increases  milk yield.
(b) Current  research  within  the Holstein-Friesian
Genotype  by feeding  system  comparison  studies : A study compared  2 levels  of genetic  
merit by 3 levels of concentrate  feeding  on a spring calving  system  of milk production  
over three years at Moorepark.  A total of 48 high genetic  merit (HM) and 48 medium  
genetic merit (MM) Holstein-Friesian  cows were randomly  assigned  to the three  
concentrate  feeding  levels. The mean PD (00) for fhe HM and MM groups  is shown  in 
Table 4.
Table 4. Predicted  difference  PD (00) and (SD) for the high genetic  merit (HM) and 
medium  genetic  merit (MM) cows.
Milk
(kg)Fat
(kg)Protein
(kg)Fat
(g/kg)Protein
(g/kg)Holst
(%)
HM -r276 +8.9 +9.7 -0.03 +0.01 75
(100.1) (4.75) (3.19) (0.086) (0.035)
MM -f81 +3.8 +4.3 +0.013 +0.031
(94.9) (4.95) (2.59) (0.099) (0.036) 65
All cows were first lactation  animals  in 1998. In May 1998, cows were grouped  into 
blocks of three within genotype,  on the basis of calving date and milk yield, and 
randomly  assigned  to one of three  concentrate  feeding  levels. Cows  remained  on these  
feeding  systems  for the duration  of the trial. The low concentrate  (LC), medium  
concentrate  (MC), and high concentrate  (HC) feeding  sysfems  were allocated  376, 810 
and 1540 kg/cow/lactation,  on average  over the three years. The aim was to have 
similar  grazing  management  across  all three concentrate  feeding  levels and this was 
successfully  carried  out for each of the three years of the trial.
Both genotype  and concentrate  feeding  level had a significant  effect on yield of milk, 
SCM, faf, protein  and lactose  (P<0.001)  (Table  5). There  was a significant  genotype  by 
concentrate  feeding  level interaction  for fat yield and milk fat concentration.  Regression  
analyses  showed  a significant  interaction  (P<0.05)  between  concentrate  feeding  level
60
and Predicted  Differences  (PD) for milk and protein  yield (as used) (Figure  2). Similarly  
when pre-experimental  milk and milk protein  yield were used as covariates,  interactions  
approached  significance  (P = 0.08 for milk yield: P = 0.12 for protein  yield). The 
differences  in protein  yield between  the concentrate  feeding  systems  increased  as both 
pre-experimental  protein  yield and pedigree  index for protein  yield increased.
Figure  2. The relationship  between  predicted  difference  (PDOO)  for protein  yield and 
pre-experimental  protein  yield on cow performance  (' ' JC; □ nMC; ---------- FIC)
Predicted  Difference  (PDOO);  Protein  Yield (kQlOM/)
Pre Experimental  Protein  Yield  (kg/day)  
61
Table  5. The effect  of genotype  and concentrate  feeding  on milk production  1998 - 2000
Genotype HM MM P Value
Feed LC MC HC LC MC HC SE Feed Geno G X F
(kg/cow)
Milk 7389  7739 8461 6421 6681 7196 86,4*** ***0.21
Fat 274 288 313 247 269 272 4.0irtrk0.07
Protein 247 261 288 217 232 250 3.0irk* *★*0.02
(9/kg)
Fat 37.2 37.3 37,2 38.6 40.6 38.0 0.50***0.03
Protein 33.5 33,8 34.1 34.0 34.8 34.9 0.24**0.60
Responses  to concentrate  varied  from 0.44 kg milk per kg of additional  concentrate  for 
cows with PD Milk of less than 100 kg, up to 1.33 kg milk for cows with PD Milk of 200 
to 300 kg. The results  suggest  the value  of increased  genetic  merit for milk production  
is much less on a low concentrate  grass  based  system  than on a high concentrate  grass  
based system,  and also that feeding  additional  concentrates  to HM is much more  
beneficial.  Genotype  had no significant  effect on live-weight,  however  the condition  
score  of the medium  genetic  merit cows  was higher  at all stages  of lactation.  There  was 
a significant  {P<0.05)  genotype  by feeding  system  interaction  for body condition  score  
at the end of lactation  (Figure  3). These  results  indicate  that even in a high concentrate  
system  the HM cows continued  to direct feed towards  milk production  rather than 
repletion  of body reserves.
Figure  3. The effect of genotype  (HM and MM) and feeding  system  (LC, MC and HC) 
on condition  score  at the end of lactation.
3.5
3.4 
3 . 3 
3 . 2 
3 . 1
3
2 . 9 
2 . 8 - 
2.7
2.6
2.5HC
M C
LCHC
LC M c
M M H M
Genotype  or feeding  system  had no significant  effect on reproductive  performance,  
however  there was a tendency  for poorer reproductive  performance  with the high 
genetic  merit cows, especially  in the third year of the trial. Cows  that did not conceive  
to first service  had greater  weight  loss from calving  to Al and lower energy  balance  in 
the first three weeks  of the breeding  season.
62
Condition  score: Because  of the low heritability  of ferfility  traits (Evans  et al.. 200f),  
there is increasing  interest  in accruing  alternative  traits which may be more easily  
measured,  possess  moderate  to large heritabilities  and are genetically  correlated  with 
fertility. These  traits will allow  indirect  selection  tor improved  fertility  within  the HF breed.  
Examples  of such traits include  body condition  score (BCS),  live weight,  and other  type 
traits. BCS throughout  lactation  has shown  moderate  heritabilities  (0.27 to 0.37) (Berry  
et al.. 2002), this means  that 27 % to 37 % of the variation  in BCS observed  on Irish 
dairy farms is due to the genetic  background  of the animal. The heritability  for BCS 
tended  to be greatest  when mean BCS was minimum  (Day 60). BCS change  in early  
lactation  exhibited  a lower heritability  (0.09) but was still greater  than that of all the 
fertility  traits measured  on the same  data set (Evans  et at.. 2001). Genetically  superior  
milk producing  cows  tend to have genetically  lower  BCS and lose the most BCS in early  
lactation.  Most recent  results  confirm  strong  and significant  genetic  correlation  between  
BCS and fertility  traits. There  are indications  that mating  a sire with an EBV for BCS at 
calving  of +0.5 BCS units, with an average  cow, will result in a genetic  reduction  in 
calving  interval  of 1.25 days and an increase  in pregnancy  rate to first service  of 3.7 
percentage  units in the subsequent  progeny
In the current  trial on Curtins  Farm, Moorepark,  obvious  different  phenotypic  trends  in 
BCS have been observed  between  the three HF strains  (Figure  4). All animals  were in 
first lactation  and were managed  in a simiiar  manner. The HM strain consists  of HF 
cows selected  intensively  tor increased  miik yield while the MM strain animals  were  
selected  tor both improved  milk yield and management  traits (e.g., muscularity)  The NZ 
strain originated  from embryos  imported  from New Zealand,  and have less than 20 % 
NAHF  genetics.  The NZ strain  had a significantly  greater  BCS throughout  lactation  than 
either  of the other  two HF strains. Although  the difference  between  fhe HM and the MM 
were not significantly  different  at first calving,  significant  difference  did arise at Week  40. 
with the MM having  significantly  higher  body condition  that their HM counterparts.  No 
difference  in reproductive  performance  was observed  in the first year of the study (when  
all animals  were first lactation).
Figure  4. Body Condition  Score (BCS) of Medium  Merit (MM), High Merit (HM) and 
New Zealand  (NZ) Holstein  Friesian  cows
Alternative  breeds  and crossbreeding
At present  greater  than 95 % of the dairy cow population  in Ireland  is Holstein-Friesian.  
Therefore,  in the short term, the best practicai  way to introduce  a new breed  or strain of 
dairy cow is through  cross breeding. Cross breeding  has an advantage  in that we
63
normally  would expect  the offspring  to produce  mid-way  between  their parents  (on 
average),  but in crosses  heterosis  (hybrid  vigour)  is expected  to play a role. This is 
illustrated  in Figure  5. Hybrid  vigour is generally  important  for traits associated  with 
reproduction,  survival  and overall  fitness,  and the effect might be that the offspring  are 
better than either of the parents. This approach  may also represent  a “fast track ” 
solution  for the improvement  of the reproductive  performance  of Irish dairy cows. Cross  
breeding  can be a step towards  breed or strain substitution,  or it can be used in a 
systematic  way to maximise  hybrid  vigour. It should  be noted  however  that hybrid  vigour 
is only expressed  in a crossbred  animal  and is not all passed  on to the offspring.  When  
the crossbred  is mated  to one of the original  breeds,  half of the hybrid  vigour  is lost in 
the offspring.  However  the additive  genetic  merit is passed  on to the offspring,  and it is 
then that the average  breeding  values  of each bull from the alternative  breed become  
very important.
In New Zealand  and to a lesser  extent  in Australia,  systematic  crossbreeding  has been  
used to maximise  hybrid  vigour. Table 6 shows  the results  of a study  that investigated  
the milk production,  live weight,  fertility  and survival  of Jersey  (J), NZHF,  NAHF  and their 
crosses  in New Zealand  (Harris  et al., 2001). Crossbreeding  increased  milk production  
and live-weight,  but also a favourable  effect  on the fertility  and survival  traits. The hybrid  
vigour  effect  was largest  for the NAHF*Jersey  cross, and smallest  for the NAHF*NZHF  
cross. Crossbreeding  increased  the proportion  of cows surviving  from 1st to 2nd 
lactation  and from 1st to 5th lactation.
Figure  5. Heterosis  or hybrid vigour is defined  as the advantage  in performance  of 
crossbred  animals  above  the mid-parent  mean of the two parent  breeds.
64
Table  6. Estimates  of heterosis  effect  for breeds  in New Zealand
NZHF  X Jersey NAHF  X Jersey NZHF  X NAHF
Fat yield (kg) 7.5 9.6 2.6
Protein  yield (kg) 5.5 6.2 2.1
Milk yield (kg) 147 157 67
Live weight  (kg) 9.2 10.4 5.0
Successful  Al calf {%) 6.8 10.1 3.3
Survival  1st to 2nd lactation  (%) 3.4 8.8 2.7
Survival  1st to 5th lactation  (%) 9.6 18.3 6.3
The decision  on whether  to opt for a crossbreeding  breeding  strategy  in an Irish scenario 
may depend  on the system  of milk production  being carried  out. in low concentrate,  
seasonal  calving grass-based  systems,  the relative difference  in milk production  
between  Holstein-Friesian  and alternative  dual-purpose  breeds  will not be as large as 
high concentrate  input systems.  Recent  results  from Moorepark  showed  a higher  milk 
yield response  to concentrate  supplementation  at pasture  (>1 kg milk per kg concentrate  
DM) with high merit Holstein-Friesian  cows than with lower genetic  merit dual-purpose  
breeds  such as the Montbeliarde  and Normande  {<0.75  kg milk per kg concentrate  DM). 
Therefore,  in a low concentrate  input system  the milk production  of the FI cross (i.e. the 
first cross)  will be much closer  to the Holstein-Friesian  milk production  than it will be in 
the high concentrate  system. Likewise,  health  traits such as reproduction,  survival  and 
overall  fitness  may be more important  in a low concentrate,  seasonal  calving  grass-  
based  systems.  Therefore  the reproductive  performance  and survival  of the Irish cow 
population  could be improved  by crossing  the Irish Holstein-Friesian  with a dairy breed  
already  selected  for important  production  and non-production  traits. The two breeds  that 
could be considered  at present  are the Montbeliarde  and the Scandinavian  Red breeds.  
The Jersey  breed could not be recommended  in a milk quota  scenario  because  of the 
large increase  in milk fat content  and reduced  cull cow and calf values. However,  it is 
important  to remember,  that similar to the Holstein-Friesian  breed, there is large  
underlying  genetic  variation  within both the Montbeliarde  and the Scandinavian  Red 
breeds. Until it is possibile  to include  alternative  breeds  within  the EBI, the selection  of 
bulls from an alternative  breed  will be based  on proofs  from the country  of origin, and it 
will have to be assumed  that a superior  animal  in the country  of origin will retain its 
superiority  in Ireland.
Summary
The future economic  efficiency  of Irish dairy farmers  will be affected  by the genetic  
make-up  of the dairy cow population.  The reproductive  performance  of the Irish dairy  
cow population  has reduced  in recent years. Genetic  selection  for improved  
reproductive  performance  has a role to play in reversing  this decline. This will be 
achieved  by including  functional  non-production  traits in a selection  index,  as in the new 
EBI index. Further  development  of the index in the future  will be important,  including  
other important  traits relevant  to Irish dairy farmers. There is a requirement  for an 
increased  level of milk recording  and progeny  testing  in the Irish dairy industry. In the 
short-term  there may be a place  for crossbreeding  with breeds  like the Montbeliarde  and 
the Scandinavian  Red breeds.  The genetic  merit  for milk production  of these  two breeds  
would not be as high as the Holstein-Friesian,  however  their genetic  merit for fertility 
traits would on average  be better. However  for this to be a success  all breeds  and 
strains  require  to be evaluated  within  the one index,  as differences  between  sires within  
a breed  for any one trait may be as large as between  breeds.
65
References
Berry, D.P, Buckley,  R, Dillon, R, Evans, R.D., Rath, M. and Veerkamp,  R.F. (2002).  
Genetic  Parameters  for level and change  of body condition  score and body weight  in 
Dairy cows. Journal  of Dairy  Science  (In Press)
Buckley.  R, Dillon, R, Rath, M. and Veerkamp,  R.F. (2000). The relationship  between  
genetic  merit for yield and liveweight,  condition  score, and energy  balance  of spring  
calving RIolstein-Friesian  dairy cows on grass based systems  of milk production.  
Journal of Dairy  Science  83. 1878-1886.
Cromie, A.R., Kelleher,  D.L., Gordon, F.J. and Rath, M (1998). Genotype  by 
environment  interaction  for milk, fat and protein  yield in RIolstein-Friesian  dairy cattle in 
Ireland. Proceedings  of ihe British  Society  of Animal  Science,  p.52.
Crowley,  J.P., RIarrington,  D. and Lacey, M. (1967) A survey  of reproductive  efficiency  
in cattle. 1. The reproductive  performance  of Irish cattle artificially  inseminated  Ir. J. 
Agnc Res. 6: 237,
Cunningham,  E.P. and O Byrne,  TM. (1980) Survey  of AJ. Results  1979:  Final  Report  
Trinity  College  Dublin.  Applied  Research  and Consultancy  Group.  Dublin  2. 
Cunningham,  E P, O'Byrne.  TM. and Murphy,  N. (1978) Survey  on A.I. Results  1978:  
Final  Report  Trinity  College  Dublin. Applied  Research  and Consultancy  Group,  Dublin  
2.
Dillon, R, Crosse,  S., Stakelum,  G. and Flynn, F. (1995). The effect  of calving  date and 
stocking  rate on the performance  of spring-calving  dairy cows. Grass  and Forage  
Science  50: 286 299.
Evans,  R D , Buckley,  F, Dillon, P. and Veerkamp,  R.F. (2002) Genetic  parameters  for 
production  and reproduction  of spring-calving  Holstein-Friesian  dairy cows In Ireland.  
Irish Journal of Agricultural  Research  (Accepted).
Harris, B.L., Holmes,  C.W., Winkelman,  A M. and Vu, Z.Z. (2001). Comparisons  
between  fertility  and survival  of strains  of Holstein-Friesian  cows, jersey  cows and their 
crosses  in New Zealand.  In: Diskin,  M.G. (Ed) Fertility  in the high producing  dairy  cow. 
Occasional  publication  No. 26, British  Society of Animal  Science  pp. 491—493.
ICBF (2000) Irish Cattle  Breeding  Statistics.  Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation,  Shinagh  
House,  Bandon.  Co. Cork.
Mee, J.F., Fahey,  J. and Crilly, J. (1999). Breeding  the dairy cow of the future  - today's  
challenges.  In: Dairying  in the new millenium.  Teagasc  National  Dairy Conference,  
Adare, pp7-16,
Olori, V.E., Meuwlssen,  T.H.E.  and Veerkamp,  R.F. (2002). Calving  interval  and survival  
breeding  values  as measures  of cow fertility  in a pasture-based  production  system  with 
seasonal  calving. Journal  of Dairy  Science  85: 689-696.
Philipsson,  J., Banos,  G. and Arnason,  T, (1994). Present  and future  uses of selection  
index methodology  in dairy cattle. Journal of Dairy  Science  77: 3252-3261.
Roche, J.F., Sherington,  J., Mitchell,  J.P and Cunningham,  J.F, (1978), Factors  
affecting  calving  rate to Al in cows. Irish Journal of Agricultural Research  17: 149-157.
Veerkamp,  R.F, Dillon, P, Kelly, E., Cromie,  A.R. and Groen,  A.F. (2002). Dairy cattle  
breeding  objectives  combining  yield, survival  and calving interval  for pasture-based  
systems  in Ireland. Livestock  Production  Science  (In Press)
Veerkamp,  R.F., Koenen,  E.P.C. and de Jong, G. (2001). Genetic  correlatir'ns  among  
body condition  score, yield, and fertility in first parity cows estimated  by random  
regression  models. Journal of Dairy  Science  84
66
Crossbreeding  results  at farm level in the Dungarvan  area
Brian Hillard
Teagasc,  Dungarvan,  Co. Waterford
Introduction
Five years  ago in 1997, a number  of farmers  in a local discussion  group  embarked  on 
a 3 year project  to compare  crossbred  heifers  from different  dual-purpose  breeds  to 
Holstein  Friesian  heifers  within their own herds, under the same management  and 
conditions.
The breeds  used for crossing  in 1997, 1998 and 1999 were Montbeliarde,  Normande,  
and Robunt.  In 1999  a fourth  breed,  Norwegian  Red was also Included.  Friesian  heifers  
(New Zealand  or otherwise)  could also be considered  for crossing  but may not exhibit 
as high levels  of hybrid  vigour. In the future  it may be possible  to include  some  Swedish  
Red semen  in this comparison.
Dual-purpose  breeds  cross well, with most benefit  derived  from crossing  them on the 
more extreme  Holstein  type cows. Crossbreds  can produce  good levels  of fat & protein  
through  high percentages,  which increases  the value per gallon. Crossbreeding  also 
increases  the sale value  of calves,  stores  cattle,  finished  cattle & cull cows (see Table 5).
Why Crossbreed?
Profitable  Spring  milk production  in Ireland  is based  on a compact  calving  pattern,  with 
cows calving  as close as possible  to early grass. However,  maintaining  a compact 
calving  pattern,  without  a high replacement  rate, is proving  difficult. Infertility  associated  
with increased  usage  of high milk volume  Holstein  bulls is now a significant  problem  on 
many farms. This has come about because  in general  the Holstein  breed societies  
concentrated  mostly  on milk production  at the expense  of health factors  and fertility.  
Also many of the Holstein  bulls are related and unless proper records  are kept, 
inbreeding  can easily occur. In contrast,  the Scandinavian  countries  have included  
health  and fertility  in their bull selection  programs  since the 1970's.
The crossing  of two different  breeds  results  In hybrid  vigour. This in turn should  result  
in healthier  animals  with better  fertility  and higher  milk solids/milk  price per gallon.
Bull Selection  Criteria:
High protein  bulls within each breed were selected,  with similar  or lower fat figures,  
medium  milk volume,  and above  average  muscularity.  It was the intention  that bulls 
would not increase  the size of heifers  when crossed  with the more extreme  Holstein  
cows (big, heavy  cows are not desirable  for a grass based  system,  they have a higher  
maintenance  requirement  and are not suitabie  for heavy  land).
The Rotbunt  and Norwegian  Red heifer crosses  are small, compact  animals. The 
Normande  & Montbeliarde  crosses  are bigger  - the Montbeliarde  bull used initially  had 
an above average  figure for stature,  which was not taken into account  at the time. 
Subsequently,  average  stature  was added  to the selection  criteria  for bulls.
The Montbeliarde  and Normande  distinctly  mark  their  progeny  when crossed  with black  
and white. The first crosses  when crossed  back with a Holstein  (i.e. Holstein,  25% 
Montbeliarde)  still look like Montbeliarde/Normande.  The Rotbunt  crosses  are similar  to 
Holstein  Friesian  but can still be picked  out. Some  are red and white. The Norwegian  
Reds are mostly  black or dark red.
67
Production  Performance  - 1st and 2nd Lactation:
The average  overall  performance  of each breed in their first and second  lactations  are 
summarised  in Tables 1 to 4. A total of 29 crossbred  heifers (9 Montbeliardes,  10 
Normandes,  10 Rotbunts)  and 28 Holstein  Friesians  heifers are now in their first 
lactation.  The Montbeliardes  are off the bulls Electro  (ELO), and Vassal (VSL). The 
Normande  are off Diametre  (lAM), Bunuelo  (BNO) and a stock bull on one farm. The 
Rotbunts  are mostly  off Parole  (PAE)  and also Pebe. The Holstein  Friesians  are off the 
positive  protein  Dairygold  bulls MALI, JOS, ELC and 1 LEW. These  are now in their 3rd 
lactation  with more crossbreeds  following  on in their 1st and 2nd lactation.
The average  production  of all crossbreds  taken together  is slightly lower than the 
Holstein  Friesians.  The average  protein  % for all breeds,  including  the Holsteins  is very 
good. Individually  the Montbeliardes  in their 1®* lactation  had the highest  kg and % of 
fat and protein,  and milk value. This is interesting  because  most of the Montbeliarde  
heifers  are off Electro  whose  milk lift proof has fallen  to zero since 1997 - yet the '.eifers  
have done well.
The Rotbunts  also performed  well and produced  good cattle.
Normandes  had the lowest production  figures  - even heifers  off Diametre  who was 
ranked  as one of the top bulls in that breed  in 1997. There  were no foot problems  worth  
talking about, which found favour with some farmers. The Norwegian  Red heifers  
milking this year are smaller,  more compact  than the other crossbreds.  The 2nd 
lactation  results  show similar  production  and milk value for the Holstein  Friesian  and 
Rotbunts.  The Montbeliardes  had the highest  price per gallon  in both lactations.
Fertility:
All crossbreds  went back in calf, but three of the Holstein  Friesians  did not. Two more  
did not make it to their second  lactation  - injury/TB.  Farmers  find that heifers  that milk 
very well in their first lactation  are difficult  to get back in-calf,  end up calving  late or not 
going in-calt at all. Most of the crossbred  heifers  were subsequently  bred back to a 
Holstein  bull (Eastland  Cash) and Norwegian  Red (Kommisrud  and Nordbo).
Calves/Cattle:
The bull calves  from these breeds  sold well and commanded  a higher  price than their 
black & white counterparts.  Most of the crossbred  cattle that were finished  at 2 years  
graded  O with a small number  making  the R grade  and slightly  better  kill out.
Summary
Caution  must be exercised  with the results  as they are from a small base. However  they 
show that dual-purpose  breeds can cross well giving satisfactory  production.  The 
biggest  benefit  may be healthier  cows with better  fertility. It is however  important  that 
there are good Holstein  Friesian  cows to cross with, and that the better  dual purpose  
bulls within  each breed are used.
Crossbreds  can produce  good levels of fat & protein  through  high percentages.  This 
increases  the value per gallon. Crossbreeding  also increases  the value of the bull calf 
and store  cattle  with smaller  benefits  in finished  cattle  and cull cows. Crossbred  heifers  
are very docile/easy  to milk from the start (their  SCC's  were also lower  than the Holstein  
Friesians  in the first lactation).
68
Acknowledgements
Our Thanks  to the Farmers  Journal  Trust for supporting  this project and the Al 
companies  and breed societies  involved.
Table 1. 1 St Lactation  - 2000
Montbeliarde  (9) Normande  (10) Robunt  (10) Flolstein/
Friesian
Calving  Date 12/2/00 17/2/00 14/2/00 14/2/00
Production  Index 104 92 99 100
Price/gal 1,08 1.03 1.04 1.05
Milk Value 1114 1015 1084 1087
Table 2. 1 st Lactation  - 2000
Montbeliarde  (9) Normande  (10) Robunt  (10) Holstein/
Friesian
Days Milking 259 163 258 255
Yield 1037 971 1041 1038
Fat % 3.93 3.75 3.69 3.93
Protein  % 3.61 3.42 3.52 3.45
Kgs Fat & Protein 366 326 351 358
Table  3. 2nd Lactation  - 2001
Montbeliarde  (9) Normande  (10) Robunt  (10) Holstein/
Friesian
Calving  Date 3/3/01 14/2/01 21/2/01 24/2/01
Calving  Interval 386 363 373 374
Production  Index 105 96 105 109
Price/gal 1.14 1 09 1.09 1.10
Milk Value 1354 1334 1415 1414
Table  4. 2nd Lactation  - 2001
Montbeliarde  (9) Normande  (10) Robunt  (10) Holstein/
Friesian
Days Milking 243 273 257 255
Yield 1188 1230 1301 1282
Fat % 3.94 3.80 3.65 3.86
Protein  % 3.60 3.41 3.48 3.43
Fat & Protein  (kg) 416 411 433 436
Table 5. Cattle  sales - 2000
Average Live Weight Carcase  Wt.
Breed Birth Date 3/3/00  10/3/00  Kill Out Value
(kg) (kg) (%) {€)
Flolstein/Friesian  (6) 14/2/98 658 344 52.3 857
Montbeliarde/
Normande  (4) 1/3/98 684 371 54.2 923
All the cattle  graded  04L/04H  except  for 1 Montbeliarde  - R5
69
Table  6. Two year old steer performance  - 2000
BreedLive Weight
7/2/00
(kg)Carcase
10/2/00 
(kg)Kill Out 
(%)Price
cent/kgValue
{€)
Holstein/Friesian 634 314 50 246 772
Normande  (2) 608 322 53 249 801
Montbeliarde  (2) 628 333 53 249 825
Table  7. Two year old steer performance  - 2001
Breed Carcase Price Value
(kg) cent/kg (€)
Holstein  Friesian  (10) 286 240 687
Montbeliarde  (7) 296 244 724
Rotbunt  (3) 335 244 819
Table  8. Two year old steer performance  - 2001
Carcase
Breed Birth Date 23/2/01
(kg)(kg) Price  
cent/kgValue
(€)
Holstein  Friesian  (6) 19/02/99 344 229 789Montbeliarde  (5) 12/02/99 340 231 785
Rotbunt  (2) 03/03/99 353 232 819
70
A blueprint  for growing  maize
J.G. Crowley
Teagasc,  Crops  Research  Centre,  Oak Park, Carlow
Introduction
Research  and practical  experience  have established  that, when a high proportion  (50- 
75%) of grass silage is replaced  by alternative  high dry matter  forage like maize or 
whole-crop  cereals,  there invariably  follows  an increase  in DM intake. Whether  this is 
converted  into increased  output (beef or milk), depends  largely  on the quality  of the 
alternative  feed offered  - quality  being measured  in terms  of dry matter  content  (>25%),  
starch  content  (>22%)  and digestibility  (>65%). Over the past number  of years maize  
has become  a significant  feature  on many  livestock  farms. In cropping  terms,  at around  
20,000  ha (50,000  ac) it is now the third largest  crop in the country  after cereals  and 
sugar beet. While good quality  maize (DM @ 28%; starch @ 25%) is the best winter 
forage  to have on the farm, much of the maize  harvested  in recent  years falls short of 
these  targets.
With the huge expansion  in the maize  area over the past two years,  the country  is fast 
approaching  the point where Area Aid on maize will be reduced  in line with the % 
overshoot  of our National  Base Area of 345,500  ha. This is unlikely  to have any effect  
on the maize area sown in the more favourable  areas of the country,  but could (and 
possibly  should),  slow expansion  into the more marginal  areas  in the country.
To grow maize  successfully  every  effort must be made  to produce  a high quality  product  
at minimum  cost by following  carefully  the well-established  guidelines  outlined  below.
How much maize  to grow?
The answer  depends  on a number  of factors  including  the expected  yield and the length  
of the feeding  period  (see Table 1).
Table 1. The area (ha) of maize  required  assuming  daily intake  = 15 kg forage  DM x 
number  of cows x 200 day feeding  period x inclusion  levels, divided  by the expected  
yield (12.5 t/ha DM =16 tonnes  fresh at 27% DM)
Inclusion  rate (% of forage)
No. of cows 30 40 50 70
20 1.5 2.5 2.5 3.5
40 3.0 5.0 5.0 7.0
80 6.0 10.0 10.0 14.0
120 9.0 15.0 15,0 21.0
To benefit  from feeding  good quality  maize  silage an inclusion  rate of at least 50% is 
required.  The optimum  for dairy cows  is closer  to 75%. Fattening  beef can be fed 100%  
maize.
The real benefits  of maize  follow  only if the crop meets  the following  standards  of yield 
and quality. A DM yield of 12.5 t/ha with a DM % between  26-30%  and starch  levels  of 
20-25%.  The main factors  affecting  performance  are site, seedbed  preparation,  variety,  
sowing  date, weed control  and, at the end of the season,  harvest  date.
71
Where  to sow?
Maize can be successfully  grown south and east of a line roughly  from Limerick  to 
Dundalk,  but site selection  is more critical  than location.  Avoid fields over 120 m (400 
ft) above sea level and heavy poorly drained  soils (remember  that heavy harvest  
machinery  will be working  up to the end of Octoberl).  Equally,  light drought-prone  soils 
will in the odd drought  years, produce  poor yields. Ideally  sites should  have immediate  
access  to a roadway.  Maize  can be grown  on a wide range  of soil types provided  the 
pH is above  6.0. If pH is 6.0 or below,  spread  lime and postpone  growing  maize  for a 
year. Soil sampling  is an essential  first step, particularly  where  planning  to plough  up 
grassland.
Seedbed  preparation
Perennial  weeds  such as docks and scutch should be eliminated  before ploughing.  
These  weeds  are very difficult  and costly to control  once maize is sown. As a crop, 
maize  is very sensitive  to compaction,  and with its deep rooting  requirement,  will suffer  
badly if the site is compacted.  Where compaction  is known  to be a problem,  sub-soiling  
will be necessary.  Sub-soiling  is best carried  out in late summer  when soils are dry.
Plough deep (25-30 cm) and bury all trash and organic  manures. Ideally organic  
manures  should  be spread  as early as possible  and ploughed  in immediately.  Early  
ploughing  is recommended  on heavy  soils. A single  slow pass of a power  cultivator  tiller,  
fitted with deep wheel-track  eradicators  (to at least 10 cm) is the best approach.  The 
seedbed  does not need to be too fine, but should  be ready  by mid-April.  Drill the seed 
at 104 - 112,000  seeds/ha.  (Maize  can be established  via a one-pass  cereal  drill, but 
results  are variable.  Calibration  of the drill is difficult  and must be undertaken  for each 
variety. Research  figures  suggest  that in well-distributed  stands,  yields are marginally  
increased  but the starch  content  is reduced  relative  to precision  drilling).
Varieties
The value  of maize  lies in its ability  to produce  high DM (+28%)  and high starch  (+25%)  
conserved  feed. To achieve  these values  it is essential  to use early or medium-early  
varieties  described  in the Department  of Agriculture ’s recommended  list published  each 
year. Match  the variety  to the potential  of the site e.g., Alcyone  for very favourable  sites;  
Loft, Hudson  etc. for less favourable  ones.
Sowing  date
Sow early but not too early. The optimum  date is from mid-April  to May 10. Later  sowing  
can lead to reduced  grain yield (% starch)  and DM content  - the two quality  factors  that 
gives  maize  its advantages  over grass. The trends  shown  in Tables  2 and 2a have been  
repeated  in many  trials.
Table  2. The effect  of sowing  date on the yield and quality  of maize  silage
Sowing  date April  3 April 11 April 23 May 3 May 13
DM yield (t/ha) 13.9 13.0 14.3 14.1 13.2
DM%
Feed value ME33.7 33.4 31.6 30.2 28.4
(MJ/kg  DM) 11.3 11.4 11.3 11.1 11.0
*Normal  light, MGA. UK 1992
72
Table  2a. The effect  of sowing  date on yield (t/ha), DM% and grain yield (t/ha)
Sowing  date April 10 April 20 May 10 May 20
DM yield (t/ha) 11.75 13.38 12.50 11.9
DM% 30.00 28.9 24,8 22.1
Grain yield (t/ha) 5.27 6.02 5.0 3.88
*J. Crowley,  Teagasc,  Oak Park, 1996
In the two sets of data the best combination  of yield and quality  was recorded  at the late- 
April sowing.
Sowing  under  plastic
Growing  maize  under  plastic  film is one way of significantly  increasing  total DM yield and 
quality  of the maize  crop. On average  the Punch  Plastic  system  has increased  DM yield 
by 4.2 t/ha (1.7 t/ac) within  the range  2.5-5.0  t/ha. The higher  increases  were obtained  
in poor production  years, on marginal  sites, or in late-sown  crops where the 
conventional  or no-plastic  crops  failed  to reach a good level of maturity.  For most crops  
grown under plastic,  over 80 % of the measured  yield increase  comes  in the form of 
grain.
The complete  Cover or X-Tend  system  (first introduced  in 1996) has given variable  
results  over the years. Trial results  at Oak Park have shown  that at best this system  
produces  yields equivalent  to those produced  by the Punch system,  with a slightly  
higher  grain yield. Damage  caused  to the young  plants  during  the period  of three  to four 
weeks  while they break through  the plastic  cover significantly  reduces  the potential  of 
the system. This was particularly  evident  in the results  from Oak Park trials in 2001 
(Figure  1).
Figure  1. Dry matter  yield (t/ha) of three maize  varieties  using  three production  systems  
- sown  April 23, 2001
□ No. PI. 
SP P
□ X-Tend
73
In general,  2001 was a very good year for maize,  with a long warm growing  season.  
High autumn  temperatures  combined  with no frost, meant  that the conventional  (no 
plastic  plots) produced  high yields  of mature  maize. The data (Fig. 1) shows  clearly  that
(a) different  varieties  behave  differently  under the X-Tend  system  and (b) the Punch  
system  produced  the highest  yield across  all three  varieties.  Due to the strength  of the 
plastic  film used, not all varieties  will suit the X-Tend  system.  Selecting  the wrong  variety  
will result in significant  yield losses. Changes  from year to year in the nature and 
strength  of the plastic  film used in the X-Tend  system  mean it is not possible  to predict  
the outcome  for 2002 .
Fertiliser
The fertiliser  recommendations  for maize  are presented  in Table 3. 
Table  3. N, P and K fertiliser  recommendations  for maize  (kg/ha)
N, P, K Index Nitrogen Phosphorus Potassium
4 75 Nil Nil
3 100 40 190
2 110 50 225
1 150 70 250
*Assumes  no slurry applied
Since most maize receives  organic  manure,  an application  of 54,000  I/ha (5000 g/ac) 
will supply  all or most of the P and K requirements  of the crop. Nitrogen  supply  is more  
difficult  to predict. For ground  that has not received  regular  applications  of slurry, an 
application  of 125 kg/ha of N is sufficient.  On ground  receiving  regular  application  of 
organic  manures  this can be reduced  to 60 kg/ha. Too much nitrogen  will delay crop 
maturity  without  increasing  yield.
Maize  sown without  plastic  should  receive  at least 20 kg/ha  of phosphorus  drilled with 
the seed in the form of superphosphate  or one of the proprietary  maize  starter  products  
which  will deliver  24 kg N and 20 kg/ha P at a rate of 125 kg/ha  of product.
Potassium  is vital for maize and the crop requires  more potassium  than nitrogen. It 
plays a vital role is the transfer  and conversion  of soluble  sugars  into starch  and should  
not be restricted.
Pests  and Diseases
Frit fly, leatherjackets,  wireworms  and rooks are the main pests of establishing  maize  
crops. All maize seed is now treated  with fungicides  and Mesurol,  which gives full 
protection  against  bird damage  and almost  100% protection  against  Frit fly. Where 
maize  is preceded  by grass,  wireworm  and leatherjackets  must be controlled  for a year 
or two. In this situation  spray Dursban  on the seedbed  and incorporate  before  sowing,  
or use Yaltox  drilled  with the seed. There  is no need to use insecticides  in continuous  
maize  or where  maize  is grown  in an arable  rotation.
The only leaf disease  to cause  concern  is Eyespot  {Kabatulla  zeae). It has shown  up 
on many crops in the last few years but rarely causes  yield loss. The fungus  spreads  
under  cool damp  conditions  appearing  in September.  It has been more prevalent  in the 
West Cork area. Since there is no way of applying  a fungicide  to maize in 
August/September,  good hygiene  practice  and the use of resistant  varieties  are the only
74
control  methods  available.  The spores  overwinter  on maize  stubble  and trash. Maize  
ground  should  be ploughed  as early and cleanly  as possible.  There  is some  suggestion  
(from field observations),  that some  varieties  are more resistant  than others,  but to-date  
no variety  is fully resistant.
Weed  control
Despite  its size and growth rate from July onwards,  maize cannot  tolerate  weed  
competition  from sowing  to late June. Effective  herbicides  are available  but timing of 
application  is vital. The crop must be kept clear of weeds at all times and post­
emergence  herbicides  must be applied  to small weeds,  i.e. before  the four-leaf  growth  
stage. The following  herbicide  programmes  are the best available:  -
(i) For fields/farms  new to maize apply Atrazine  @ 3.75 to 5.0 I/ha. Atrazine  
incorporated  before  sowing  will produce  the most reliable  results. It can be applied  
post-sowing  or post-emergence.
(ii) From year two onwards  Atrazine  resistant  weeds, Nightshade,  Orache,  and 
Groundsel  will appear, so switch to the following  post-emergence  control 
programmes:-
(a) Atrazine  -r Bromotril-P  at 2.0 + 2.5 I/ha In two splits
(b) Atrazine  -r Lentagran  at 2.0 I -r 2.0 kg/ha again in two splits
(c) Atrazine  -r Stomp  at 2.0 -r 3.7 I/ha; one application  when  weeds  are emerged
(d) Stomp  -r Lentagran  3.75 I + 2.0 kg/ha; one application  when the crop is at 
the 2-4 leaf stage
Docks, thistles and volunteer  potatoes  can occasionally  cause problems  in maize.  
Starane  at 0.5 to 1.0 I/ha will control  docks and potatoes  but will set back the maize.  
Dow Shield at 1 I/ha will control  thistles. It is expensive  and is best used as a spot 
treatment  on dense  patches  only. Once  the crop is well established  and weed  free (mid-  
to late-June),  no further  action is required  until the crop approaches  maturity  from late 
September  to late October.
Harvesting
The decision  as to when  to harvest  can have a very profound  effect  on the quality  of the 
silage  produced.  The objective  is to harvest  the crop when the cob has matured  to the 
extent  that the cob DM%, (i.e. grain + central  core (rachis)  minus  the covering  leaves)  
has reached  50 to 55% and the stover  (stem -r leaves)  are still in a healthy  green  state.  
This will result in a total crop dry matter  content  of 28-33%. Crops harvested  much  
before  or too far beyond  this stage  will reduce  the value of the ensiled  crop (Table  4).
Table  4. The relationship  between  crop DM%, quality  and ensiling  losses
Whole  crop 
DM%Organic  matter  
Digestibility  (%) Effluent  lossesFermentation  
losses  %
15 66.7 6.9 17.7
20 69.6 4.2 14.5
25 70.3 2.0 11.4
30 71.1 0.2 8.3
35 71.9 Nil 5.1
The best field guide as when to harvest  is provided  by the maturity  of the cobs,  
relationship  between  cob maturity  and overall  crop DM is set out in Table 5.The
75
Table  5. The relationship  between  cob maturity  (cob DM%)  and crop dry matter  content
Cob DM% Crop DM% % Cob DM*
30 18-22 25-35
40 21-26 35-45
50 27-33 45-55
*% of the total DM made up of cob material
The optimum  harvest  point is when  the cob reaches  a dry matter  content  (DM%)  of 50% 
or more. Once  this point is reached  it does not matter  if the rest of the plant is green.  
Harvest  date should  be based on the cob rather  than on the overall  look of the crop. 
With a little experience  the DM% of the cob can be very accurately  assessed  by an 
examination  of individual  grains  on the cob (Table  6).
Table  6. Stages  of maturity  in maize  cobs
Cob DM% Description  of maize  grains
20-25 Completely  formed  but white
30-35 Milky soft-pale  yellow
35-40 Some  milky material  - darker  yellow
40-45 Beginning  of dough  stage
50-55 Grain hard - bright  yellow
For confirmation,  select  3-5 cobs at random  from the crop. Chop into 1 cm thick rings,  
and dry overnight  in an oven at 100°C. This will confirm  your visual assessment.
Dry wt.
DM% - X 100
Fresh  wt.
Ensiling
Since all maize harvesting  is carried  out by contractor,  the biggest  problem  in getting  
maize  cut at the optimum  stage is getting  the contractor  to turn up on time. The main 
focus  now should  be on chop length  and the degree  to which  the grain is processed.  No 
grain should  get through  without  some  “damage ”. The harvester  must be set to deliver  
a fine chop of 4-6 mm, or animals  will not eat leaf portions.  If you have mature  grains,  
then insist  that the machine  "corn cracker ” is being used.
A narrow  clamp  filled quickly,  with the cut material  spread  out in thin layers — inches  
rather  than feet thickness  is essential  for successful  ensiling. Roll the pit continuously 
and use salt at 3-5 kg/m^  on the surface  to avoid spoilage,  particularly  at the corners.  
Sheet down and maintain  close contact  between  the plastic cover and the maize.  
Protect  the clamp  and the open face from birds. Most growers  now use a net. Bait to 
prevent  rats invading  the pit.
Maize ensiles  easily and preservation  rarely causes  problems.  If pit management  is 
good, additives  will not be necessary  when ensiling  maize. However,  there are two 
situations  where  maize  silage  will benefit  from a good inoculant,  (i) where  the DM% of 
the harvested  crop is above  35% and (ii) where  there is the intention  of relocating  the 
clamp  later in the year.
76
Environment
With all agricultural  systems  under  close scrutiny  regarding  pollution  it is only a matter  
of time before  the spotlight  falls on maize. On the continent  and particularly  in France,  
maize  production  has acquired  a very bad reputation  regarding  pollution.  Maize  has a 
very strong  visual impact  on the environment  and has the potential  to cause serious  
nitrogen  and phosphorus  pollution  of waterways.  Now that the area sown in Ireland  has 
exceeded  20,000  hectare,  the crop will not go unnoticed.  The overuse  of organic  and 
inorganic  fertiliser,  both nitrogen  and phosphorus  is of no benefit  to the crop and will 
increase  rather  than reduce  production  cost.
Allowing  maize  stubble  to lie bare over the winter  can lead to nitrogen  leaching,  and soil 
erosion  may carry phosphorus  into waterways.  While  ploughing  early across  the slope  
will reduce  run-off,  it does little for nitrogen  leaching.  Maize  stubble  would  benefit  from 
a green cover  crop over the winter. Undersowing  or in some case establishing  a crop 
after the harvest  would significantly  reduced  worries  about nutrient  losses from the 
system.
There is little doubt that the use of plastic will be questioned.  With the continuing  
improvement  in maize  varieties  the use of plastic  is becoming  no longer  necessary  in 
many areas. Unless  the degradability  of the plastic  film on offer to growers  improves  
significantly  it will become  more and more difficult  to justify  its use.
Conclusions
• Maize  will give high yields (12.5-15  t/ha DM) at a competitive  cost with or without  
Area  Aid.
• Achieving  high yields  of high DM, high starch  maize  is vital in achieving  increased  
output.
• The provision  of a high DM, high starch  feed such as maize  fed in conjunction  with 
grass  silage  will help in improving  both the performance  and well-being  of animals  
in intensive  beef, dairying  and possibly  sheep  enterprises.
• To achieve  high returns  on maize  particular  care and attention  must be paid to the 
details  outlined  in growing  and ensiling  the crop.
References
Crowley,  J.G. (2000).  Guidelines  for growing  maize. Todays  Farm,  V 10 No. 5, pp11-13.  
Crowley,  J.G. (1998). Improving  yield and quality of forage maize. End of Project  
Report. Teagasc,  ISBN 1 901138  72 0.
Crowley,  J.G. (1996). Growing  maize under photodegradable  polythene  film. 
Agricultural Research  Forum,  UCD, pp173-174.
Crowley,  J.G. and Keane,  G. (2000). Maize  and Plastic. MGAAnnual  Conference.  Jan. 
2000 .
Crowley,  J.G. (2002). Maize  - proceed  with more caution. Todays  Farm,  Vol. 12 No. 5, 
pp.34-35.
Crowley,  J.G. (2001). Maize and Other Forage  Crops as Cash Crops for the Tillage  
Farmer. National  Tillage  Conference,  Teagasc,  pp53-66.
Teagasc  2001: Growing  and Feeding  Forage  Maize.
Teagasc  2001: Nutrient  and Trace Element  Advice  for Grassland  and Tillage  Crops.  
ISBN 1 84170-246-3.
77
What  are the advantages  to using  maize  silage  for a 
spring  calving  system
Eamon  Phelan
Ballyneety,  Dungarvan,  Co. Waterford.
Introduction:
After leaving  school  in 1981, and following  a 2-year  certificate  in Agricultural  Science  at 
Waterford  Regional  & Kildalton  Agricultural  College,  the author  spent  9 months  in New 
Zealand  working  tor Marvin Farm Relief Services,  managing  herds up to 280 cows.  
Next came Australia  where he worked  in Western  Australia  during  the wheat-planting 
season.
On returning  home  with the intention  of starting  farming,  I quickly  realised  that the home  
farm was too small and the father too young,  to allow me to realise my ambitions.  
Subsequently,  I left and went to work for Masstock  Saudia  Ltd., where  I spent  five years  
managing  a 1200 cow herd (average  yield of over 9,000  litres on 4 times  a day milking).  
Here I came  to experience  maize  for the first time and subsequently  learned  a lot about  
this crop. I also travelled  to America  with Masstock  and have visited  large dairy herds  
in Phoenix  Arizona,  Chino  Valley,  California  and Masstock  Macon  in Georgia. During  
this time I also got married,  returning  to Ireland  permanently  during the Gulf War of 
1990,
The home  farm
In 1990, the home  farm comprised  85 acres, 10 of which  were rented. A 78,000-gallon  
milk quota included  14,000  gallons  of liquid milk and winter  milk. Of the total quota,  
10,000 gallons  were leased. Ten acres of land and 5,000 gallons  of quota were  
purchased  in 1991, which  was reclaimed,  drained  and fenced  in 1992.
In 1994 a 52-acre  block of land with 25,500-gallon  quota  was leased. This land was in 
poor order  and needed  a lot of work, but it had a modern  wintering  unit with 44 cubicles  
and a slatted  tank. Subsequently  this property  was bought  in 1998 and is still being  
developed  to-day.
Tablet,  Farm profile  - 2002
Adjusted  acres owned 126
Acres  rented 29
Total acres 155
Quota  (gallons) 114,439
Cows 80
Bulling  heifers 20
Bullocks  for autumn  sale 22
Male bull calves 20
Female  replacement  calves 24
Bulls 2
78
Farm Profile:
The farm is divided  into 4 blocks:  -
1. Home  Farm (52 adjusted  acres);
This is the only land available  to the milking  cows to graze and is divided  into 21 
paddocks.  Silage  is cut here only when grass is in surplus.
2. Killadangan  (25.5 adjusted  acres);
This is used for a 2 cut silage  system  and grazed  in the autumn.
3. Quinlans  (49 adjusted  acres);
Comprises  15 acres of maize  and 34 acres of grazing.  The grazing  area is under  
development  and has yet to reach It's full potential.  At present  15 acres have been 
re-seeded  and Improved.  More work remains  to be done.
4. Rented  Block  (29 adjusted  acres);
This block is in one field and will be sown to maize  for sale.
Why Maize?
With only 52 acres of grazing  available  tor 80 cows, this represents  a stocking  rate of 
0.65 acres/cow  for the year. Prior  to 2000  the farm serviced  a winter  milk scheme.  2000  
was the first year in spring  milk. Initially  maize  was grown  as an alternative  forage  for 
winter  milk production,  but as the farm is aiso susceptible  to drought,  maize  is an ideal 
supplement  during  grass shortage.  This proved  very successful,  easy to operate  and 
held milk yield while keeping  cows happy.
As a member  of the Dungarvan  Discussion  Group,  most of who were in spring milk, I 
looked  at them and was jealous  of their life sfyle. I had 80 cows, a fragmented  farm,  
was in winter  milk and was working  life a fool and for what? After examining  the costs  
with my Teagasc  advisor  (Figure  1), I finally  made  the decision  to opt out of winter  milk.
Figure  1. Cost kg Dry matter  of various  supplements
Cost  kg 8 
D.M(P) 6□ G R A S S
□ MAIZE  WITH  AREA  AID
□ MAIZE  NO AREA  AID
□ GRASS  SILAGE
□ CONCENTRATE
Foodstuff
It is intended  to replace  acres  of grazed  grass  with acres  of maize  silage. At present  the 
farm is two years into the system. It is too early to give a definitive  answer,  but the 
system  is a lot easier  than winter  milk, with feeding  confined  from July to December  as 
opposed  to starting  in October,  and continuing  for the following  12 months. I feel I am 
competing  financially  with other spring  calving  systems  despite  my small grazing  base.
79
Table  2. Dairy MIS 2000
Yield
(gal)Cone, fed
X 50 kgsCost
(p/gal)Margin  over feed & fertilizer  {£)
0; £1,000£/cow £/acre  ,,gall
E. Phelan 1478 13 6 1284  1130 921
Gp. average 1176 11.1 6 1044  951 887
Table  3. Profit monitor  2000
Dairy Dairy Dairy Total Farm
G M/acre G M/cow GM/gallon GM/acre Net margin/ac
(£) {£) (E) (E) (E)
E. Phelan 1020 1200 0.81 731 495
Gp. average 832 940 0.80 518 293
The system:
Growing  the crop:
"Drill and Shut the Gate ’’ - as crops  go, maize  is very easy to grow. Dairy  farmers  as a 
rule are not good  tillage  farmers  but most dairymen  succeed  in growing  excellent  maize  
crops  with high yields  of consistent  quality.
Husbandry  is as follows:
1. 5,000  gals/acre  slurry
2. Plough  in immediately
3. Sow early to mid April
4. Spray 1. Mid May. 1 ''/2 pts/acre  Atrazine
11/2 pts/acre  Stomp
5. Spray  2. Mid June. 1/2 pt/acre  Bromotril
6. Harvest  as early as possible,  usually  late September  to mid October.  
No additive  added.
Table  4. Maize  costs {£)/acre  - 2001
Rented  ground Owned  ground
(E) (E)
Rent 50
Ploughing 20 20
Power  harrow 22.5 22.5
Sow 22.5 22.5
Spray 10 10
Seed 50.32 50.32
Fertilizer 80.71
(No Slurry) 35
Slurry  spreading 16
Chemicals 7 17
Harvesting 80 80
Total cost 343 273
Area aid 112
Net cost 343 161
Cost/ton  DM @ 5.5 t DM/acre 62 29
80
Feeding  the Crop:
The aim is to start calving  on February  1, and to be out on grass by day as soon as
In wagon  from 2 pm - 1 amweather  allows. The cows are feda complete  i
Concentrate  (28%) 5 kg
Molasses 1 kg
Straw 0.2 kg
Minerals 0.15 kg
Grass  silage 1 kg
Maize  silage 6 kg
Table  5. Concentrate  formulation
Maize/grass  silage  (%)
Hi-Pro  Soya 35
Maize  distillers 28
Barley 16
Citrus  pulp 16
Molasses 5
Cows  are left out after am milking  and brought  in as determined  by weather.  Because  
of the small land base, no risk is taken that pastures  will be damaged,  and for this 
reason I am not as consistent  at leaving  cows out as many other farmers. “If the 
weather  is dodgy  the cows  stay in’’ - weather-dial  is useful  for this purpose.  This system  
will remain  in place until cows go out by night, which is usually  early  April.
In general  there is adequate  grass  until early July, or if it rains in June  or July then grass  
supply  will be fine until August.  As soon as grass  supply  comes  under  pressure,  maize  
comes  back into the system. Feeding  just a few kg DM will hold milk well. However  in 
August  or September,  up to 6 kg DM can be fed as maize. At this stage  0.75 kg/DM/day  
of soya is introduced.  This is fed in the parlour,  and works  well to prevent  milk drop due 
to lack of protein. Cows  will now be fed maize  silage  until they are dried off. The maize  
is used to supplement  grass supply  as necessary,  with cows being brought  in by night  
from mid to late October,  and out by day as long as weather  permits  or grass  runs out
Tips:
Always  feed cows after milking  to avoid having  them congregate  at exits of paddocks.  
Aim is to reduce  labour  input by having  cows feed themselves.  For this reason  I have 
made  a long low maize  pit beside  the milking  parlour,  with the intention  of allowing  the 
cows to self feed the maize.
Conclusions
Maize  silage  is an important  crop as it is the cheapest  alternative  feed source  to grazed  
grass. It allows  the utilization  of some  of the out-farm  land in it’s most  economic  manner  
within  the dairy enterprise.
Each year approximately  80 tons of dry matter  is fed as maize.
This costs:  (80 tons maize  @ E35/ton  DM = £2,800).
Alternatively,  if it were replaced  with citrus pulp it would  cost?
81
Citrus  Pulp (80 tons citrus  pulp @ £113/ton  DM = £9,040)
This equates  to a saving  of approx.  £6,000. Having  the necessary  land and using it in 
its most economic  fashion,  facilitates  leaving  cows out early in February  and having  
enough  grass  to last until April 10. It also allows  for keeping  grass  in the system  as long 
as possible  in the autumn.  However,  in an ideal world  where  land area was not limiting,  
there would be no need to grow maize - instead  a simpler  system  would operate,  
concentrating  on growing  and utilising  what is after all “the cheapest  feed - grazed  
grass
82
Complementary  forages  for dairy  production
T. Keady
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  Co Down,  BT26  6DR
Introduction
Recently  there has been a major increase  in interest  in the production  and feeding  of 
alternative  forages  for dairy cattle during  the indoor  feeding  period. This interest  has 
been driven mainly by the improvement  in cow genetics,  and producers  wanting  to 
increase  milk production  as cheaply  as possible  from home produced  feed. 
Furthermore,  the cost of producing  alternative  forages  may be reduced  if land is eligible  
for arable  aid, and recent  costings  have shown  that the costs of producing  maize and 
whole crop wheat can be similar to grazed grass when arable aid payments  are 
involved.  However  grass  silage is, and will remain  the main forage  offered  to the vast 
majority  of dairy cattle in Northern  Ireland  during  the winter  period  for the foreseeable 
future. Given  the increasing  interest  in alternative  forages,  particularly  forage  maize,  a 
series  of studies  have been undertaken  at Hillsborough  to investigate  factors  influencing  
both the growing  of forage  maize and effects  on feeding  value when offered  to dairy  
cows.
In the last year the area of maize silage has increased  considerably.  Recent  
developments,  namely  new varieties  and the use of plastic mulch, has enabled  the 
consistent  production  of high feed value maize silage. Research  from Hillsborough  
clearly illustrates,  from the mean of 5 years of studies,  that, on average,  the use of 
plastic  mulch increases  crop yield by 2.5 t DM/ha,  cob yield by 3.2 t DM/ha,  crop dry 
matter content  by 7 % units and crop starch content  by 9 % units. However,  the 
response  to plastic mulch is greater  with later maturing  varieties  compared  to early  
maturing  varieties.  To achieve  a high forage  yield, which is one of the most important  
factors  affecting  the cost of production,  the crop should  be planted  early, i.e. mid-April,  
using medium  to late maturing  varieties  and covered  with plastic  mulch. When  selecting  
varieties  it is important  to take into consideration  the site on which the crop is to be 
grown.
Studies  from Hillsborough  have  clearly  illustrated  that inclusion  of high feed value  maize  
silage  in the diet increases  milk yield and composition,  consequently  increasing  margin  
over feed costs, relative  to high quality  grass silages. To obtain optimum  levels of 
animal  performance  from maize  silage:
1. Ensile  the crop at about  30% dry matter  (Table  1).
2. The extent  of the benefit  obtained  from including  maize  silage depends  on grass  
silage quality. For poor quality grass silage, responses  will be obtained  by 
replacing  up to 70 % of the forage  component  as maize  silage. For high quality  
grass silage,  most of the benefit  will be obtained  from offering  maize  silage  as 40 
% of the forage  component.
As maize  silage  has lower  crude protein  concentration  relative  to grass  silage  it is 
necessary  to increase  the protein  content  of the concentrate.  Formulate  the diet so 
that with cows in early lactation,  total diet crude protein  concentration  is 17-18 % 
whilst  for cows in mid-lactation  16-17  % will suffice.
Reduce  the starch  content  of the concentrate  to 15-20  % of the dry matter.  
Including  high quality maize silage will enable concentrate  feed levels to be 
reduced  by up to 3.3 kg/cow/day  to produce  a given quantity  of milk in a quota  
situation.3.
4.
5.
83
6. Under good grazing  management  in spring/early  summer,  buffer feeding  maize  
silage can replace  grazed  grass in fhe diet of the dairy cows whilst maintaining  
animal  performance.
Whole  crop wheat  can be ensiled  between  35 and 70 % dry matter. Delaying  harvest  
results  in increased  yields and starch concentration  of the resultant  forage. Studies  
undertaken  in the UK using whole crop wheat, ensiled  at a dry matter  concentration  
ranging  from 30 to 58 %, have shown  that inclusion  of whole  crop wheat  increased  food 
intake  but had no beneficial  effect on milk yield, milk composition  or margin  over feed 
costs.
It is concluded  that alternative  forages  should  only be included  in the diet of dairy cattle  
if there is evidence  to show increased  animal  performance  or better cow health and 
consequently  improved  margins  over feed.
The data from Hillsborough  clearly  illustrates  that good quality  maize  silage inr.-eases  
animal  performance  and margin  over feed, whereas  whole  crop wheat  has little ettect.
Table  1. The effect  of maize  maturity  at harvest,  when offered  as 40% of the forage,  on 
animal  performance
Maturity  of maize
Grass  silage Immature
(20% DM)Mature
(29% DM)Very Mature  
(38% DM)
Food intake (kg DM/day)
Grass  silage 10.9 7.3 7.4 7,4
Maize  silage 4.9 4.9 5.0
Total 16.9 18.2 18,3 18,4
Milk (kg/day) 26.8 27.2 27.8 27.8
Fat (%) 3.98 4.24 4.15 4.02
Protein  (%) 3.15 3.23 3.23 3.25
(Keady  et al., 2002)
84
Understanding  the N cycle  and the pathways  of N loss
Michael  Ryan
Teagasc,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford
Introduction
Nitrogen  (N), the most widely  used plant nutrient  in fertilisers,  is long recognised  as a 
key to improving  crop yields  and economic  returns.  That which is utilised,  be it fertiliser,  
manure  or soil N comes  from the atmosphere  and ultimately  returns  there In gaseous  
form via the N cycle (Figure  1) maintaining  the atmospheric  content  at a stable  78%.
N Cycle
The earth is habitable  due to Its constantly  changing  physical,  chemical  and biological  
cycles. The N cycle  is one of many  cyclic  changes  on earth,  which  redistribute  elements 
that are essential  for life, e.g., sulphur,  carbon,  and hydrogen.  Much of the Interest  in 
the N cycle  focuses  on the parts of it that human  activities  influence  e.g., the role of soils,  
plants  and atmosphere,  yet only about  2% of the world's  N Is Involved  in those  aspects,  
almost  all of the remainder  is present  in rocks. In grassland  N cycling,  there  are several  
aspects of interest, e.g., N fixation, mineralisation,  nitrification,  assimilation,  
immobilisation,  volatilisation,  denitrification  and leaching.  Consideration  of these  terms  
and their role In the movement  of N through  soils - plants  - animals  forms  the basis of 
this paper.
Figure  1. Simplified  N Cycle
rjttrooon  FJxotJof*
N fixation
This is a biological  process  whereby  symbiotic  and non-symbiotic  organisms  fix 
atmospheric  N gas into organic  forms; fertiliser  manufacture  is the non- biological  
equivalent.  The best-known  organisms  which symbiotically  fix N, are the Rhizobia  
(bacteria),  living within  the roots of legumes  such as peas and clover. Rates  of fixation,  
in pastures  containing  35-40%  white  clover,  have been estimated  in this country  at 90- 
190 kg N/ha. Non-symbiotic,  free-living,  bacteria  such as Azotobacter,  Clostridium  and 
blue-green  algae,  fix N, but to a less Important  degree.
85
Mineralisation
Organic  N occurs  naturally  as part of the soil organic  matter  fraction.  It is incorporated  
in soil from manure,  plant residues  and biological  N fixation,  etc. Microbes  and soil 
animals  break down, I.e., use organic  matter  in soil as an energy  source  and excrete  
nutrients  in excess  of requirements  e.g., N in the form of ammonium.  A very high 
proportion  of the N in surface  soils is present  in organic  forms, and can vary in Irish 
grassland  soils from 5 to 15 t per ha. Assuming  a mineralisation  (break  down) rate of 
1.5% of the mean value, approximately  150 kg N/ha/annum  are released  from organic  
sources.  Trial results  support  this. Data from 26 sites averaged  over 4 years, indicate  
a N harvest  in DM from zero N plots of 219 kg/ha  (Ryan,  1976). Release  may be much  
higher  - 12 year old swards  in the UK released  321 to 420 kg N per ha, due to a build­
up of the soil N pool.
Nitrification
The decomposition  of organic  substances  in soil leads  to release  of N and the formation  
of ammonium.  When  oxygen  is present,  soil microbes  transform  ammonium  to nitrate  
in a rapid process  (nitrification),  which is completed  In a few days. Nitrification  is 
primarily  carried  out by bacteria,  Nitrosomonas  spp, which  convert  ammonium  to nitrite  
and Nitrobacter  spp, which oxidise  nitrite to nitrate. It is the primary  route whereby  
ammonium  released  from plant residues  or added  as fertiliser  i.e., in urea or calcium  
ammonium  nitrate  (CAN)  is converted  to nitrate. The rate of nitrification  increases  with 
increase  in soil pH and soil moisture  content  up to field capacity,  reflecting  the biological  
nature  of the process.
Assimilation
Plants obtain most of the N required  for growth  from soil by uptake  of soluble,  low 
molecular  weight  compounds,  particularly  nitrate  and ammonium.  When nitrate  taken  
up by plants  and microorganisms  is assimilated,  it is first reduced  to ammonium  prior to 
incorporation  of its N into amino compounds.  The energy  for reduction  comes  from 
photosynthesis  or oxidation  of organic  carbon.  The reduction  proceeds  via the enzymes  
nitrate  reductase  and nitrite reductase.
Immobilisation
Even though ammonium  is the preferred  form, soil microbes  can convert  either  
ammonium  or nitrate  to satisfy  their needs  for N. This assimilation  of N into organic  N 
constituents  of cells and tissues Is called immobilisation  by the soil biomass.  
Immobilisation  of nitrite and nitrate  to organic  forms is sometimes  due to enzymatic  
activities  associated  with plant or microbial  N uptake and N utilisation  processes.  
Disappearance  of mineralised  N is sometimes  due to such immobilisation.  The soil 
biomass  can compete  effectively  with plant roots for available  N and microbial  biomass  
has the capacity  to immobilise  N rapidly. The lack of detectable  change  in soil inorganic  
N levels  when high fertiliser  N is added  to soils Is Indicative  of a high buffering  capacity  
for N, perhaps  through  a rapid uptake  into plants  and into the soil biomass.  Therefore,  
this process  may result  in accumulation  of N over time, with rates  varying  from 56 to 190 
kg N/ha/year.  Ploughing  of such soils provides  quick release  of part of the immobilised  
N.
86
Volatilisation
Ammonium  ions and ammonia  in soil water exist in equilibrium  with each other.  
However,  soil water ammonia  is subject to volatilisation  (gaseous  loss) to the 
atmosphere  and the amount  that occurs is very much dependent  upon soil pH and 
concentration  of ammonium  in the soil solution.  As soil pH increases,  the fraction  of soil 
solution ammonium  plus soil solution  ammonia,  in the gaseous  ammonia  form,  
increases  tenfold  for every unit of pH above 6.0, thereby  increasing  the loss of soil 
solution  ammonia  to the atmosphere  (Follett,  2001). Volatilisation  of ammonia  is of most 
importance  on calcareous  soils; losses  increase  with increasing  temperature  and can be 
appreciable  for neutral  soils as they dry out. It is greater  in sandy  soils and can be high 
when N wastes  such as manure  decomposes  on the soil surface. Losses  can be high 
from urea applied  to grass but losses  from soil and fertiliser  N are reduced  by growing  
plants. Decomposition  of urea by ureases  is an important  reaction  in the ammonification 
process  and the major input of ammonia  to the atmosphere  is thought  to result from 
animal  production  through  the return  of excreta,  particularly  urine. The amount  of N in 
the dietary  intake influences  the extent and form of excreted  N. There is a strong  
positive  relationship  between  the N concentration  of the herbage  at the start of the 
grazing  period  and the amount  of ammonia  (kg/animal/day)  lost during  the period. The 
N concentration  in the diet affects both the total returns of N in excreta  and the 
distribution  between  dung and urine. Urine  has by far the greatest  potential  for ammonia 
loss since 53 to 75% of total urinary  N may consist  of urea. In urea metabolism,  urea is 
converted,  through hydrolysis  to ammonium  and carbon products. The process  
consumes  hydrogen  ions allowing  hydroxyl  ions to react with ammonium,  releasing
ammonia  gas i.e., NH^ OH = NH3 gas + H2O. Ammonia  losses from surface
splashplate-applied  cattle slurry range 25-75%  of applied  N after 10 days; losses  from 
this source  and housing  each amount  to 40% of the total (Hyde,  pers. com.).
Denitrification
Mineralisation  and nitrification  processes  in soils form ammonium,  nitrite  and nitrate  ions 
from organic  soil N. Nitrate and nitrite can be lost to the atmosphere  through  
denitrification,  which is the biological  conversion  by bacteria  of nitrate to the gases,  
dinitrogen,  nitrous  oxide, nitric oxide or other gaseous  N oxide compounds.  Nitrous  
oxide  is a greenhouse  gas and is linked  to thinning  of the ozone  layer. Dinitrogen  is the 
product  of the complete  denitrification  process,  nitrous  oxide results  from incomplete  
denitrification  and to a small extent  from the nitrification  process.  Basically,  nitrous  oxide  
production  in the soil, via denitrification,  is the primary  route  for most losses  of gaseous  
N to the atmosphere.  The conditions  required  for denitrification  to occur include;  (i) 
ample  carbon  substrate;  (ii) reduced  oxygen  availability;  (iii) adequate  concentration  of 
N oxides, nitrite, nitrate, nitric oxide or nitrous oxide, and (iv) presence  of bacteria  
capable  of denitrifying.  Topsoils,  high in moisture  status and well fertilised  with N 
fertiliser  or manures,  provide  ideal conditions  for denitrification.  Factors,  which  increase  
the proportion  of nitrous oxide to dinitrogen  in denitrification,  include decreasing  
temperature,  pH and carbon  availability,  increasing  oxygen  and sulfide  and low nitrous  
oxide-reducing  enzyme  (Betlach  and Tiedje  1981).
Runoff/leaching
Research  shows  that the most important  factor in determining  the extent of losses  
through  runoff on vulnerable  soils, is how quickly  the rainstorm  which causes  runoff.
87
occurs  after spreading  slurry  or fertilisers.  If a storm  occurs  within  forty eight hours  it is 
not unusual  to record  losses  of 20 to 40% of the N applied  from poorly  drained  soils i.e., 
10 mm of rain may be sufficient  to cause  runoff  from impermeable  soils whereas  high 
rainfall  of 25 mm in 24 hours may not cause  runoff  from gravel  and sandy  soils. If the 
rain does not come for 1 week there is a dramatic  drop in the organic  matter  and N, 
potassium  concentration  in the runoff water. Experiments  show that winter rain, 
collected  as runoff, is 17, 30 and 43 % for free draining,  imperfectly  and impermeable  
soils (Sherwood,  1984, 1986, 1990). Runoff of ammonium  and nitrate has been  
recorded  from N fertilised,  grazed  grass  plots in spring  and autumn  on moderately  heavy  
and heavy  soils (Kurz, pers. com.).
Leaching,  the movement  of water  down the soil profile  can be an important  source  of 
nitrate  loss from soil. Leaching  of ammonium  is generally  not important  because  it is 
adsorbed  by the soil, except  perhaps  in sands  and soils having  low retention  capacities.  
As nitrate  is a negatively  charged  ion, it is repelled  by the negatively  charged  clay and 
is readily  leached  below  the bottom  of the root zone into the deeper  layers  from which  
it may eventually  reach groundwater.  Leaching  occurs  mainly  from October  to March,  
when rainfall  exceeds  evapo-transpiratlon  and soil water  movement  is downward.  The 
start - to - end, and amount  of drainage  varies yearly, which In turn determines  the 
amount  of nitrate-N  leached. Soil type has a significant  effect. Nitrate-N  can be 
expected  to move  450, 300 and 200 mm deep with 100 mm effective  rainfall  (rain minus  
evapotranspiration)  in sandy,  loamy  and clayey  soils respectively.  Water  quality  impact  
areas for leached  N, are wells, ground  water supplies,  streams  and surface  water  
bodies.
Irish research  results-grassland
At present  there is much interest  in nitrate-N  loss to water. The knowledge  base with 
regard  to nitrate-N  loss is very limited  but new experiments  under  way will significantly  
broaden  that base. Published  information  on leaching  in Ireland,  divides  along the 
following  lines; trials on grass plots with fertiliser  or slurry, fertiliser  plus slurry, and 
fertiliser  on cultivated  soil. A summary  of results  of leaching  to 1 m from grass plots is 
shown  in Table 1.
Table 1. Mean nitrate-N  leaching  results  from cut (*grazed)  grass  plots.
Soil
Drainage Fertiliserkg N/ha 
Appliedmg/I
NDepth
(m)Yrs
leachedkg N/ha Reference
Mod.Free Pig Slurry 412 3 1 3 13 Sherwood,  1981
Impeded Pig Slurry 403 2 1 3 8 ibidem
Mod.Free CAN* 51 2 0.9 1 15 Sherwood  & Ryan,  
1990
Mod.Free CAN* 408 4 0.9 1 29 ibidem
Mod.Free CAN 40 2 1 5 11 Shenwood,  1986b
Mod.Free CAN 200 6 1 5 34 ibidem
Mod.Free CAN 300 15 1 5 81 ibidem
Mod.Free CAN 400 22 1 5 119 ibidem
Mod.  Free CAN 240 9 1 3 NA Shenwood,  1988
88
Table  2. Mean nitrate-N  leaching  and concentration  in drainage  water  from cut grass  in 
soil columns  (lysimeters).
Soil
Drainagetype
Appliedkg N/ha 
Nmg/I
(m)Depth
leachedYrs kg N/ha Reference
Mod.Free* CAN-rwcsIry 422 2 1 2 14 Ryan & Fanning, 
1999
Mod.  Free* CAN-rscsIry 423 1 1 2 7 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN-f  wpsiry 419 5 1 2 35 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN-rspsIry 420 1 1 2 6 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN-r  wcsiry 250 0.3 1 2 2 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN+scsIry 250 0.3 1 2 2 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN-r  wpsiry 250 0.3 1 2 2 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN-rspsIry 250 0.3 1 2 2 ibidem
wcsiry  = winter  cattle  slurry;  scsiry  = spring  cattle  slurry;  wpsiry  = winter  pig slurry;  spsiry  
= spring  pig slurry.  *low N reserves  in soil.
Apart  from two values,  nitrate-N  concentrations  were generally  well below  the drinking  
water  EU maximum  admissible  concentration  (MAC)  of 11.3 mg/litre.  The soils with low 
N reserves  had grown  barley  for 6 years  (thus depleting  organic  N). They  then had a 3- 
month  fallow  period,  following  the first grass  experiment,  resulting  in a flush of released  
N prior to sowing  grass  for the second  experiment.  The soils were thus depleted  in soil 
N contributing  to the low nitrate-N  concentrations  measured.  Allied  with dropping  the N 
input from 420 to 250 kg N/ha brought  nitrate-N  concentrations  in drainage  water (at 1 
m deep)  to very low levels  of 0.3 mg/I. Higher  concentrations  would  be expected  under  
grazing  conditions.  Also it must be remembered  that leaching  results  at depths  of 1 m 
do not represent  corresponding  concentrations  in deeper  groundwater.
The effects  of CAN fertiliser  (300 kg N/ha) plus cattle or pig slurry (120-123  kg N/ha),  
applied  in winter/spring  as before, on nitrate-N  leaching,  at 1 m deep, under grass-  
cutting conditions,  were compared  (Ryan and Fanning,  1996; 1999) in another 
experiment  on five soils. After two years the soils were cultivated,  fallowed  for four 
months  and resown  to grass. Results  are shown  in Tables  3 and 4.
Table  3. Two year mean effects  of soil and N application  (kg/ha)  on nitrate-N  leaching  
(kg/ha)  and nitrate-N  concentration  in grassed  soil lysimeters,  1 m deep.
Soi DrainageSlurry
type AppIN
LeachCone.
mg/INSlurry
type AppIN
LeachCone.
mg/IN
Comer Poor wcsiry 423 16 3 spsIry 420 10 1
CIrch Free wcsiry 423 54 7 spsIry 420 65 8
Elton Free wcsiry 423 66 10 spsiry 420 44 6
Okprk V.free wcsiry 423 79 10 spsiry 420 35 5
Rthgn Poor wcsiry 423 47 7 spsiry 420 38 6
Comer Poor wpsiry 420 28 4
CIrch Free wpsiry 420 87 12
Elton Free wpsiry 420 63 9
Okprk V.free wpsiry 420 100 13
Rthgn Poor wpsiry 420 71 11
Comer  = Castlecomer;  CIrch = Clonroche;  Okprk  = Oakpark;  Rthgn  = Rathangan.
89
Table 4. Pooled  effects  of cultivation,  50 kg fertiliser  N/ha, sowing  grass (Yr 3) and 
fertiliser  (200 kg/ha) + slurry (50 kg/ha) N applications  (kg/ha) in years 4 and 5 on 
nitrate-N  leached  (kg/ha)  and nitrate-N  concentration.
AppIMean yr 3 
Leached mg/IN AppIMean yrs 4 and 5 
Leached mg/IN
Comer CAN 50 177 23 251 1 0.3
CIrch CAN 50 195 24 251 4 0.8
Elton CAN 50 286 36 251 4 0.8
Okprk CAN 50 294 35 251 2 0.4
Rthgn CAN 50 266 34 251 2 0.5
The drainage  water  from the Clonroche  and Oakpark  soils (receiving  fertiliser  plus winter 
pig slurry) breached  the MAC, while water from the Rathangan  soil was borderline.  
Fertiliser  plus winter  cattle slurry resulted  in high values  for the Elton and Oakpark  soil 
water (Table  3). In years  4, 5 reducing  the N input severely  reduced  the loss of N. This 
was also influenced  by a flush of released  N which occurred  in year 3 from cultivation,  
4 months  fallow  and a small fertiliser  input of 50 kg/ha at sowing,  giving high nitrate-N  
concentrations  of 23-36  mg/I (Table  4). Mineralisation  of soil organic  N and absence  of 
a crop to utilise  released  N would have caused  elevated  nitrate-N  concentrations  in the 
drainage  water.
Irish research  results-cereals
Cereal  crops stop assimilating  N around  July but soil microbes  continue  to liberate  soil 
organic  N into the autumn,  resulting  in the accumulation  of large amounts  of nitrate-N,  
which may leach to groundwater  with the autumn-winter  rains. Studies  (Ryan and 
Fanning,  1999; Ryan, Sherwood  and Fanning,  2001) at Johnstown  Castle  in lysimeters  
show that loss of N, as measured  at a depth of 1 m, is high from fallow  land declining  
over time (Table  5).
Table  5. Effect  of crop (barley,  winter  wheat  and fallow)  and treatment  (kg N/ha applied)  
on mean nitrate-N  concentration  (mg/I) and loss (leach)  of nitrate-N  in drainage  water.
Fallow
CropYrs in kg N/ha 
tillage AppI leachmg/lkg N/ha 
N AppI leachmg/I
Nkg
AppIN/ha
leachmg/I
Nkg
AppIN/ha
leachmg/I
N
Barley 1-3 0 86 12 100 50 11 . _ . 0 171 21
Barley 10 0 13 2 120 32 5180 36 6 0 76 12
Wheat 12 0 11 3150 11 3200 18 6 0 56 16
Table  5 shows  high nitrate-N  concentrations  in the drainage  water  from the cereal,  early 
on in the rotation, which declines  significantly  over time so that by year 10 
concentrations  are very low. Fallow  soil releases  high amounts  of organic  N resulting  in 
high nitrate-N  in the drainage  water  to year 12; it was year 14 before  the mean  value  in 
the fallow treatment  declined  below 11.3 mg/I (MAC). The 76 kg N/ha lost from the 
fallow land is the same amount  estimated  as lost from ploughed  land to rivers in the 
south-east  in 1985-86  (Neill, 1989).
90
Losses  in practice
Little is known  in Ireland  re: losses  from farm-size,  grazed  plots. However,  estimates  of 
excretion  can be made  e g., a 250 kg steer ingesting  6 kg forage  DM containing  3% N 
will ingest  180 g N/day, retain about  20 g (12%) and excrete  the remaining  160g N/day.  
Excretion  as faeces  and urine both result  in volatile  losses  of ammonia.  About  74% of 
the total N excreted  is in the urine and a single  urine spot can have an N concentration 
corresponding  to 600 kg N per ha. Some of the N is released  to the atmosphere  as 
volatile  ammonia  while the N remaining  in the excreta  and associated  plant residues  
returns  to available  N pools in the soil. At times of low pasture  growth  and downward 
movement  of soil water,  such returns  to the N pools in autumn  increase  the risk of nitrate  
leaching  (Sherwood  and Ryan, 1990; Follett,  2001). In denitrification  studies,  loss of 
4.6% of 362 kg/ha  applied  N, as nitrous  oxide,  was measured  on a slightly  impeded  soil 
over 1 year. Wetter  soil would  have higher  loss for the same N input.
Conclusions
Lysimeter  studies  have shown  that winter  application  of slurry  in addition  to high fertiliser 
N, creates  risk of nitrate  leaching  on some free-draining  soils; lower risk is associated  
with spring slurry applications.  In small plots, Mulqueen  et al. (1999)  found very low 
nitrate  leaching  from pig slurry  application  to grass  in December  on Athenry  soils; similar 
results were obtained  from low N inputs to a range of N- depleted  soils. Runoff  
experiments  have shown  the impact  weather  conditions  can have on nutrient  losses  to 
water; only one third of Irish soils are vulnerable.  Nutrient  loss is important  because  
when waters become  too enriched,  the aquatic  environment  can become  eutrophic.  
Leaching  losses  from well - managed  grass are lower  than from early rotation  barley;  
continuous  cereals  leach very little nitrate. Cover  crops could reduce  winter  leaching  
from uncropped  land, which tends to leach easily; the management  required  to 
successfully  achieve  this without  harm  to succeeding  crops  requires  research.  Gaseous 
N losses  Ireland,  especially  with regard  to ammonia,  are not well documented;  limited  
information  exists  on nitrous  oxide loss.
References
Betlach,  M.R. and Tiedje,  J.M. (1981). Kinetic  explanation  for accumulation  of nitrite,  
nitric oxide and nitrous  oxide during bacterial  denitrification.  Applied  Environmental  
Microbiology  42: 1074-84.
Follett,  R. (2001). Nitrogen  transformation  and transport  processes,  pp 17-44. In R. F. 
Follett and J. L. Hatfield  (eds) Nitrogen  In the environment:  sources,  problems  and  
management  Elsevier  Press, London.
Mulqueen,  J., Rodgers,  M and Bouchier,  H. (1999). Land application  of organic  
manures  and silage  effluent. Teagasc  End of Project Report  50pp.
Neill, M. (1989). Nitrate  concentrations  in river waters  in the south-east  of Ireland  and 
their relationship  with agricultural  practice. Water  Research  23 (11) 1339-1355.
Ryan, M. (1976). Grassland  productivity  2; effect  of fertiliser  nitrogen  on herbage  N yield 
at 26 sites. Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research  15: 1-10.
Ryan, M. and Fanning,  A. (1996). Effect  of fertiliser  N and slurry on nitrate  leaching  - 
lysimeter  studies  on five soils. Irish Geography  29: 126-136.
Ryan, M. and Fanning,  A. (1999). Leaching  studies  in lysimeter  units. Teagasc  End of 
Project  Report. 27pp.
91
Ryan, M., Sherwood,  M, and Fanning,  A. (2001). Leaching  of nitrate-N  (N03-N)  from 
cropped  and fallow  soil - a lysimeter  study with ambient  and imposed  rainfall  regimes.  
Irish Geography  34: 34-49.
Shenwood,  M. (1981), Nitrate  leaching  following  application  of slurry  and urine to field 
plots, pi 50-157,  In A. Dam Kofoed,  J. H. Williams  and P. L'Hermite  (eds) Efficient  land  
use of sludge  and manure.  Elsevier  Press,  London.
Sherwood,  M. (1984). Nitrogen  is too valuable  to waste. Farm  & Food  Research  15, 
(4), 114-115.
Sherwood,  M. (1986a).  Pollution  in livestock  farming  - its causes  and avoidance.  Irish  
Grassland  & Animal  Production  Association  Journal  20: 69-75.
Sherwood,  M. (1986b). Impact  of agriculture  on surface  water in Ireland. Part 11. 
Prospects  for the future. Environ.  Geol. Water  Sci. 9; 1-14. Springer  Verlag  New York. 
Shen/vood,  M. (1988). Water pollution  and possible  EC constraints  on fertiliser  use. 
Teagasc  Fertiliser Seminar,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford,  Ireland.
Shenwood,  M. (1990). Runoff  and leaching  following  landspreading  of fertilisers  and 
animal manures. Teagasc  Advisors  Seminar,  Johnstown  Castle, 9pp, Wexford,  
Ireland.
Sherwood,  M. and Ryan, M. (1990). Nitrate  leaching  under  pastures  pp323-333.  In (ed 
R. Calvet)  Nitrates,  agriculture,  EAU. INRA, Paris.
92
Environmental  legislation,  current  and pending  and its implications
S. Regan
Teagasc,  Rural  Development  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.  
Introduction
The scope  of this paper  is confined  to environmental  legislation  of immediate  concern  to 
farmers.  This includes  the major  EU Directives  which  Ireland  is currently  under  pressure  
to implement,  notably  the Nitrates  Directive  {91/676/EEC)  and to a lesser extent  the 
Waste Directive  (91/156/EEC).  The on-going  implementation  of domestic  water  
pollution  legislation  is also considered  including  agricultural  bye-laws  and mandatory  
nutrient  management  planning. The Nitrates  Directive  has generated  a particularly  
vigorous  debate  in farming  circles not least because  it seeks to limit the maximum  
amount  of manure  from livestock  that may be applied  to land each year. In order to 
comply, some intensively  stocked  farmers  may have to reduce stock numbers  or 
alternatively  arrange  for some manure  to be spread  off fhe farm on less intensively  
stocked  land. The paper  is primarily  focused  on this Directive.
Nitrates  Directive  Overview
The Nitrates  Directive  is in place  since 1991. The objective  is to reduce  water  pollution,  
caused  or induced  by nitrates  from agricultural  sources  and to prevent  further  pollution.  
Member  States  are required  to identify  waters  affected  by pollution  and waters  that could  
be affected  by pollution  in the absence  of corrective  action,  and to designate  these  areas  
as Nitrate Vulnerable  Zones (NVZs) on the basis of the monitoring  results. Action  
Programmes  containing  mandatory  manure  management  measures  are required  to be 
implemented  in NVZs. In addition,  a Code  of Good  Agricultural  Practice  (CGAP)  has to 
be established  and implemented  within  NVZs. Alternatively,  Member  States  may decide  
to adopt a 'whole  territory'  approach  which implies  that the CGAP is binding  on all 
agricultural  holdings  in the state. Member  States  are obliged  to monitor  the nitrate  
concentrations  in waters  and to assess  the impacts  of the measures  put in place. The 
designation  must be revised  every  four years, taking  into account  changes  and factors  
unforeseen  at the time of the previous  designation.
Nitrate  Vulnerable  Zones
The 'whole  territory ’ approach  was adopted  in Austria,  Denmark,  Finland,  Germany,  The 
Netherlands  and Luxembourg.  This does not automatically  imply  that the whole  territory  
is exceeding  the EU norm of 11.3 mg NO3-N/I in ground  and surface  waters.  The degree
of pollution  does not explain  why a country  may choose  the whole  territory'  or NVZs,  
otherwise  The Netherlands  and Finland  would  not be in the same group. It seems  that 
these countries  wish to maintain  a level playing  field between  farmers  in different  
geographical  locations. They also commit themselves  to uniform environmental  
standards  and to promoting  environmental  awareness  among  all farmers.  In Ireland,  the 
whole territory  approach  would also facilitate  national  regulations  to implement  the 
Waste  Directive,  also overdue.
In other Member  States,  regions  with significant  nutrient  surpluses  are differentiated  as 
NVZs. A large part of Belgian  livestock  production,  for example,  takes  place  in Flanders  
and causes  severe  nutrient  surpluses.  Several  sensitive  areas in Flanders  have been  
identified.  In other intensive  production  zones  such as Brittany  in France  and the Po
93
valley in Italy, governments  designated  NVZs and introduced  measures  to rectify  
nutrient  imbalances.
Whole  territory  versus  NVZs
Reasoned  arguments  for and against  both options  can be made. However,  lack of 
knowledge  of possible  derogations  that may be negotiated  on organic  N limits is a major  
drawback  in this debate. In addition,  economic  assessments  of either  the whole  country  
or NVZ option  for the proposed  range  of organic  N limits are not available.
With the 'whole  territory ’ approach,  all farmers  in the country  would  be obliged  to comply  
with a national  action programme.  This would be likely to improve  national  manure  
management  practices  and water quality and provide  the basis for negotiating  a 
derogation  to retain an organic  N limit of 210 kg/ha after the first four years with 
provision  for up to 250 kg/ha organic  N in certain  circumstances.  All farms would be 
treated  the same and there would be certainty  that there would be no further  widening  
of the designated  area. An important  disadvantage  of this approach  is that it affects  
farmers  in areas where  the level of nitrates  in water is minimal. Compliance  costs for 
agriculture  (particularly  in regard  to additional  manure  storage)  would  be higher,  though  
these could be offset against  the cost of compliance  with the similar measures  
(excluding  organic  N limit) to be applied  on a national  basis under the EU Waste  
Directive.
The mam disadvantage  of the NVZ approach  is the likelihood  that water quality  may not 
improve  in the first four years prompting  a reduction  in the organic  N limit to 170 kg/ha.  
Given  that the proposed  NVZs  account  for the more intensive  agricultural  areas in the 
country  covering  large areas  of the east and south  of the country  this would  be a severe  
blow to future expansion.  The NVZ option would generate  uncertainty  for farmers  
outside  the NVZs in that the four yearly reviews  of water quality may require  the 
designation  of further  areas. This has been the experience  in other countries.  The 
advantages  of the NVZs are the targeted  approach  to dealing  with nitrate-polluted  
waters and only farmers  in the NVZs would be required  to comply  with the action  
programmes.
Action  Programmes
Action programmes  are key requirements  of the Nitrates  Directive. They require  
mandatory  restrictions  on farming  activities  in NVZs including  balanced  nutrient  inputs  
(i.e. the sum of nutrients  from organic  and mineral  fertilizers  must not exceed  the crop 
needs)  and a maximum  application  of 170 kg N/ha/year  from animal  manure  (210 kg 
N/ha/year  in the first four years). The Directive  allows  a Member  State to negotiate  a 
derogation  from the 170 kg per ha restriction  after the first four years,  but only where  this 
is justified  on the basis of objective  criteria,  and does not prejudice  the achievement  of 
the objectives  of the Directive.
Denmark  has recently  won a derogation  for its dairy farmers  to apply all the manure  
produced  on their farms  on their own lands. This implies  that the 170 kg N/ha would  no 
longer  be binding  as long as the N demand  of the crops  is significantly  higher  than the 
N supplied  by the manure.  The derogation  is limited  to existing  grassland  farmers  and 
the milk quota will limit extensions  to other areas. The derogation  applies  to 5 % of 
agricultural  soils in Denmark  and to 6 % of the total N in animal  manures.  In winning  
their case the Danes  had the following  supporting  data — over the last 15 years  there  
has been a significant  reduction  in fertilizer N inputs  as well as reductions  in the N levels  
at the root zone. Agriculture  had reduced  its point sources  by 28 %, The nitrate
94
concentrations  in rivers  draining  agricultural  areas  had dropped  by 20 %. Eutrophication  
of coastal  waters  had begun  to decline.  They had data  from trials to show  that with good  
management  practices  there  was no difference  in N pressures  between  170 and 230 kg 
organic  N inputs. They also have a limit of 140 kg organic  N/ha for the rest of the 
country.  (O.T Carton,  pers. communication).
An action programme  can reiate to all NVZs or to each one separately.  Portugal,  for 
example,  has designated  three NVZs and has set up a different  action programme  for 
each of these,  while Sweden  has designated  five NVZs in which the same programme  
is implemented.  In the countries  with the whole territory  approach  there is only one 
action  programme  which  may vary in certain  respects  across  the territory.
Seeking  a national  derogation
The responsible  Government  Department  has indicated  a preference  for the 'whole  
territory'  approach  to the implementation  of the Nitrates  Directive.  In the event  that this 
approach  is adopted,  Ireland  needs  to negotiate  a derogation  to retain  a national  210 kg 
organic  N/ha limit after four years  with provision  for up to 250 kg/ha N for high stocked  
farms where in can be demonstrated  that this is not in conflict  with the water quality  
objectives  of the Directive.  Clearly,  there would be income  implications  for intensive  
grassland  farms particularly  on the higher  stocked  farms if an organic  N limif of 170 
kg/ha were imposed. This would reduce  the stocking  rate equivalent  from 2.5 to 2 
LU/ha. There would also be serious  cost implications  for intensive  pig and poultry  
enterprises  in relation  to securing  spreadlands.
A coherent  negotiating  strategy  will be required  based on the overall impact of the 
national action programme.  This will revolve around the scientific  input to the 
development  of the action programme,  the quality and degree of commitment  to 
implementation  and the advice and investment  support available  to underpin 
implementation.  Reductions  in nitrate  emissions  from Irish agriculture  to water  will be 
achieved  through  improvements  in farmyards,  manure  and fertilizer  management  rather  
than by controlling  stocking  rates. Ironically,  the latter is likely to be the easiest  to 
enforce  using Area Aid and Herd Regisfer  data. Making  the case for a derogation  
represents  a significant  challenge,  Germany  recently  (March  2002)  failed in its attempt  
to achieve  a higher  national  organic  N limit.
In addition  to monitoring  water quality,  a baseline  survey  of facilities  and practices  at 
farm level is required. A repeat  survey  will be needed  after the four-year  period to 
monitor  improvement.  Water quality  responses  to changes  in nutrient  management  
practices  at farm level need to be demonstrated.  Success  or failure  will depend  on the 
recorded  changes  associated  with the action  programme  as well as the recorded  impact  
on water  quality.
Code  of Good  Agricultural  Practices
Codes of Good Agricultural  Practices  have been introduced  in all Member  States.  
These codes regulate  manure  storage  capacity,  spreading  conditions  and timing,  
spreading  technology  and the application  norms  for different  crops. In some countries  
the codes  are very detailed  and intended  as advisory  instruments  for farmers  (e.g. UK). 
Some  include  the requirement  for mineral  accounting  (e.g. some  regions  in Spain),  while  
others  only contain  the bare minimum  of requirements  (e.g. Greece).  Point  sources  are 
a major problem,  for example,  inadequate  or leaking manure  storage  facilities  or 
uncontrolled  silage effluent  runoff. In this context,  improved  technical  standards  are 
very efficient  in preventing  pollution. Storage  tanks and equipment  can be easily
95
inspected  for compliance  with existing  norms. In France  regulations  are implemented  
which require  bigger  farms  to be certified  in the same way as industrial  plants  with an 
environmental  impact  assessment.  This is similar  to the IPC licensing  arrangements  for 
certain  pig and poultry  units in Ireland.
The practicability  and cost of the control measures  need also to be considered.  
Extensive  on-farm  research  and courses  are used in The Netherlands  to make  farmers  
familiar  with legislation.  In Denmark  a considerable  effort is required  by farmers  each 
year to adjust their fertilizer  plans depending  on plant growth forecasts. The 
effectiveness  of these measures  is closely linked with the control mechanism 
administered  by the government.  Some other countries  have comparable  control  
systems,  but in many, the implementation  of the measures  is not scrutinized.  Although  
a certain  level of control  is required  to implement  the policies,  extensive  control  is costly  
and time consuming.  If, according  to the EU ‘polluter  pays' principle,  the costs  are to be 
passed  on to farmers,  this will be an extra burden  on farm incomes.
Infringement  Procedure
The infringement  procedure  gives the Commission  powers  to take legal action  against  
a Member  State that is not respecting  its obligations.  Infringement  procedures  are 
ongoing  against almost all Member  States except Denmark  and Sweden. The 
infringement  procedure  contains  several  possible  actions.  A 'Letter  of Formal  Notice ’ is 
the first step. In the light of the reply from the Member  State, the Commission  may 
decide  to address  a ‘Reasoned  Opinion'  or second  written  warning.  If the Member  State  
fails to comply  with the ‘Reasoned  Opinion',  the Commission  may decide  to bring the 
case before  the European  Court  of Justice. Finally,  Article  228 of the Treaty  gives the 
Commission  power  to act against  a Member  State. In April 2000, 9 countries  (Belgium,  
France,  Greece,  Germany,  Italy, Luxembourg,  The Netherlands,  Spain  and the UK) were  
facing  a charge  before  the European  Court  of Justice  regarding  the implementation  of 
the Nitrates  Directive  (Environment  Daily, 2000), Ireland  has now joined this list for 
failure  to implement  the Nitrates  Directive.
The Nitrates  Directive  and the CAP rurai deveiopment  pian
At the insistence  of the Commission,  Ireland's  Rural Development  Plan included  a 
commitment  to implement  the Nitrates  Directive  by the end of 2001. The Commission  
has indicated  that it may suspend  the co-financing  of the Compensatory  Allowances,  
REPS,  Forestry  Measure  and the Early Retirement  Scheme  if action  on our commitment 
is further  delayed.  The Commission  has already  decided  to block Ireland's  proposed  
amendment  to the Compensatory  Allowances  measure.  While it was made clear that 
the amendment  itself is acceptable,  it appears  the Environment  Commissioner  is not 
prepared  to agree  to it until Ireland  has taken  action  to implement  the Nitrates  Directive.  
At least 100,000  farmers  are claiming  aid under  one or other  of the schemes  in the Rural  
Development  package.  Eleven  years  after  the Nitrates  Directive  was published  and with 
legal proceedings  pending,  Ireland  is in a vulnerable  position  compared  to most other  
Member  States given the dependence  on EU transfers. The Commission  has the 
means  to penalize  Ireland  without  recourse  to the European  Court  of Justice.
Manure  Regulations  at Farm Level
The Department  of the Environment  and Local Government  has signaled  the need for 
legally binding Regulations  to give effect to the Waste Directive  and the Water  
Framework  Directive  in addition  to the Nitrates  Directive.  The established  CGFP is
96
expected  to form the basis for these Regulations.  The Department  has indicated  that 
an unduly onerous  regulatory  regime is not intended. It is envisaged  that the 
Regulations  will allow  for flexibility  to reflect  regional  variation  due to climate,  rainfall  and 
soil conditions.  This would provide  for differences  in slurry storage  requirements  and 
non-spreading  periods  across  the country. There  is an assurance  that farmers  will not 
require  licenses  or permits  to landspread  animal manures  on their lands, but it is 
proposed  that all farmers  will have to register  with a Local Authority  and provide  some  
basic information  on the location,  nature  and scale  of their activities.  Additional  controls  
are proposed  for inter farm transfer  of animal  manures.
Waste  Regulations  for Contractors
The Waste  Management  (Collection  Permit)  Regulations  (2001)  will govern  the activities 
of agricultural  contractors  involved  with the landspreading  of animal manures.  
Implementation  of the Regulations  for agricultural  contractors  has been deferred  until
the 30^*^ June this year (2002). The regulations  will place a general  obligation  on 
contractors  who ‘collect  waste  for the purpose  of reward  or profit' to obtain a permit.  
Collection  includes  the 'transport  of waste' and ‘acceptance  of control of waste ’.
Contractors  will be required  to submit  records  of work carried  out by the 28^^ February  
each year. The permit fee is €1,200,  though there is provision  for the licensing  
authorities  to refund or waive all or part of the fee. There is concern  that smaller 
operators  may find the new Regulations  too onerous  to continue  and this should be 
taken  into account  in regard  to the waiving  of the permit  fee. More rather  than less slurry  
spreading  capacity  is required  and the emergence  of more contractors  who are 
prepared  to supply  slurry  spreading  services  in tandem  with silage  making  operation  are 
especially  needed.
Additional  Local  Authority  Powers
The sanctions  available  to Local Authorities  under  the Water  Pollution  Act (1990)  have  
been strengthened  to include agricultural  bye-laws  and compulsory  nutrient  
management  planning  (NMP). Bye-laws,  introduced  under Section  21 of the Act, are 
now in force in parts of five local authority  areas  (Cavan,  Cork, Offaly,  Tipperary  NR and 
Westmeath).  They have been adopted  in all cases  to deal with specific  problems  in 
specific  catchments  listed by townland.  Six more  local authorities  have made  proposals  
to bring in bye-laws  and a further  five are assessing  the need for them. So far, bye-law  
slurry storage  requirements  vary from 14 weeks  in Offaly to 24 weeks  in Cavan, in 
general,  where  a farmer  submits  a full nutrient  management  plan the bye-laws  permit  a 
4 week reduction  in the storage  requirement.  REPS  farmers  are generally  exempt  from 
bye-laws  provisions  on the basis they are aiready  in compliance.  Up to 2,000  farmers  
are currently  affected  by this measure.
Under  a separate  section  of the Water Pollution  Act (Sec. 21 A) local authorities  have  
powers  to compel  individual  farmers  to submit  nutrient  management  pians where  this 
approach  is considered  necessary  to prevent  or alleviate  water  pollution.  As is the case 
with bye-laws,  a REPS nutrient  plan is deemed  to meet the requirements  of this 
measure. At least 18 Local Authorities  have indicated  their intention  to introduce  
mandatory  nutrient  management  planning  (NMP)  mostly  in the short term (2002). The 
Department  of the Environment  and Locai Government  has issued  detailed  guidelines  
on the preparation  of nutrient  management  plans to local authorities.  The guidelines  
provide  criteria  for identifying  “hot spots ’’ including  sensitive  lake and river catchments  
where resources  are to be focused. Three  factors  are required  to be addressed  as
97
follows: -
manure  storage  and management  practices  in the farmyard;
land application  of manures  and chemical  fertilisers;
controlled  use of chemical  fertilisers  (ie. in line with crop requirements).
It is understood  that this measure  will be implemented  once specialised  training  of local 
authority  staff, currently  in progress,  is completed.  In contrast  to the bye-laws  this 
measure  does not have to be voted in by local authority  members.
There is significant  overlap  between  these measures  and the requirements  of the 
proposed  National  Regulations  under  the Nitrates  Directive.  There  is speculation  that 
the latter may remove  or reduce  the need to enforce  the bye-law  and mandatory  NMP  
provisions  of the Water Pollution  Act. This would make sense. Farmers  would then 
have to cope with the record keeping  etc. associated  with just one set of regulations  
rather  than several  separate  sets. This would  favour  the 'whole  territory'  appr...ich  to 
the implementation  of the Nitrates  Directive.
Conclusion
It is widely  accepted  in farming  today that agriculture  must respect  the environment.  
This is impacting  positively  on farming  methods  and practices.  It is also clear  that more  
needs  to be done. While  regulation  has a place it is only part of the solution.  The vital 
roles of awareness  building,  education  and investment  assistance  needs greater  
acknowledgement.  It must  be understood  that broad-based  farmer  consent  and support  
for environmental  objectives  is necessary  if regulation  is to have the desired  effect.
References
De Clercq,  P. and Sinabell,  F. (2001). EU legislation  and multinational  environmental  
legislation  with respect  to nutrient  management.  In: Nutrient  Management  Legislation  in 
European  Countries  (Chapter  3). Faculty  of Agriculture  and Applied  Biological  Sciences,  
University  of Wageningen,  The Netherlands.
Department  of the Environment  and Local Governmei:*  (1998). Water Quality  
Standards  for  phosphorus  Regulations  (S.l. No. 258 of 1998)  Water  pollution  Act (1977).  
Dublin.
Department  of the Environment  and Local Government  (2001). Waste Management  
(Collection  Permit)  Regulations  (S.l. No. 402 of 200, Waste  Management  Act (1996).  
Dublin.
Department  of the Environment  and Local Government  (2002). Information  Paper  on 
Good  Agricultural  Practice  and Protection  of the Environment.  Dublin.
Environmental  Protection  Agency (2001). Phosphorus  Regulations,  National  
Implementation  Report.  EPA, Wexford.
Environmental  Protection  Agency  (2001), An Assessment  of the Trophic  Status  of 
Estuaries  and Bays  in Ireland. EPA, Wexford.
Hamell, M. (2001). Policy aspects  of the agriculture  -environment  relationship.  In 
Tearmann,  Irish Journal  of Agri-environmenta!  Research,  1: (1). NUI, Dublin.
O’Donovan,  M. (2002). National  classification  or regional  classification.  Fine Gael  
Symposium  on Nitrate  Vulnerable  Zones,  Bridge  Hotel,  Tullamore.
98
The future  of the Irish Dairy  Industry-  the IGA submission  to the 
Department  of Agriculture
Jim Dwyer
Past  President,  Irish Grassland  Association
The Irish Grassland  Association  was invited by Mr. John Malone,  Secretary  of the 
Department  of Agriculture  and Food at its Dairy Conference  in 2001 to make a 
submission  to him and his Department  outlining  the views  of the IGA on the future  of the 
Irish dairy industry.
The Council  of the IGA looked  on this invitation  as a great  opportunity  to point out some  
of the problems  and possible  solutions  for our dairy industry  going  forward.
Although  this is outside  the role of the Irish Grassland  Association  (IGA), council  
members  felt that on this one occasion  the IGA should  comment  on the state of the 
industry  and provide  some alternative  views going fonward.  As the association  is non 
political  and draws its members  from all elements  of the dairy industry  (farmers,  
advisors,  researchers  and agri-business  personnel),  the council  felt that the IGA could  
offer some  constructive  comment.  Within  the association  it is believed  that dairying  has 
the potential  to be a leading  industry  in the Irish economy,  but changes  must  take place  
if we are going  to realize  this potential.
After New Zealand,  Ireland  has the potential  to have the best thriving  dairy industry  in 
the world - certainly  in the Northern  Hemisphere  we should  be the leaders.
We have a climate  ideally  suited  to growing  grass;
Animals  can stay out on grass  for 9 to 10 months  of the year;
High emphasis  on grazing  is an environmentally  friendly  way of dairy farming,  
which is highly  profitable;
These  advantages  must be worked  on to provide  a thriving  dairy industry  to benefit  
farmers  and ultimately  the Irish economy;
Progressive  dairy farmers  are frustrated  at present  due to the lack of opportunities 
to expand. The ability to expand  is the key driving force for any progressive  
business;
Quotas  inhibit progress,  as other farm enterprises  are not returning  sufficient  
income  for dairy farmers  to change;
Nationally  we need to focus on dairy farming,  as it is the only enterprise  that can 
give a good income  to the farming  community.
There have been significant  changes  in the economy  in the last 10 years. In 1990 
agriculture  accounted  for 10% GDP and 15% of total employment  compared  to 5% GDP 
and 9% of employment  by 1999.
Industrial  wages  have increased  by over 40% in the last 10 years. This increase  has 
resulted  in a large divergence  between  industrial  and agricultural  incomes. Inflation  
averaged  at 5.6%  for the year 2000  according  to the C.S.O. Due to inflation  farmers  can 
expect  a substantial  increase  in production  costs. Costs such as labour,  energy  and 
services  are all projected  to increase  substantially  over the next number  of years. The 
F.A.P.R.I.  Ireland  Partnership  has projected  that such costs  will increase  by over 25% in 
the next 10 years. Also the purchasing  power  of incomes  earned  will be significantly  
diminished  due to inflation.
Young  people  are lured out of farming  by the prospect  of high paid jobs for less working  
hours. Further  farm labour  is difficult  and expensive  to secure.
99
The number  of children  on farms  is projected  to decline  further. The Kennedy  William's  
Report  projects  that by 2011 there  will be little over 12,000  children  of school  leaving  age 
living on farms between  16 and 23 years of age. This is 58% less than the 1996 
estimate.  If the potential  number  of future  farmers  is decreasing  at such a rate, then the 
actual  numbers  will inevitably  decline,  unless  there is more  scope  for young  people  from 
non-farming  families  to enter agriculture.
There has been considerable  change  in the agricultural  policy of the E.U. under the 
Agenda  2000  Agreement  and it seems  that all farmers  can expect  even further  changes  
into the future. By 2010, the price of milk will drop and dairy farmers  will get 
compensation  under Agenda  2000. Revenue  will be up 6% relative  to 2000 levels.  
However,  high rates of inflation  mean that farmers  will be subjected  to price cost 
squeeze. Strong  growth  and inflation  rates, higher  than those experienced  in recent  
years  will result  in continued  increases  in production  costs. Fixed  costs  are projected  to 
increase  by 15 to 20% thus impacting  negatively  on farm net margin. Farmers  ,vho  do 
not re$POnd  bv increasing  efficiency  or enlarging  operations  will be exposed  to a
price  cost squeeze  Dairy  farmers  will have to run faster  to stand  still.
Smaller  farms  with a quota  of 20,000  gallons  or less which  have a poor historical  growth  
record and cost structure  will be unable  to expand  milk quota at the current  fixed 
restructuring  price of €1.57  per gallon. Some 11,000  farmers  may find that the future  
of their farm is not viable and may exit dairy farming. If quotas  were eliminated  this 
same group of farmers  would  find it very difficult  to survive. Research  has shown  that 
up to one third of producers  currently  supplying  less than 35,000  gallons  would find 
investment  unfeasible,  given the level of cash surplus  remaining.  Further  it has been 
shown that where investment  was feasible,  between  20 and 30% of the current  
population  (depending  on the price scenario)  would have a disposable  income  lower  
than the minimum  wage.
Under  Agenda  2000 farmers  supplying  20,000  gallons  or less become  non-viable  by 
2003/2004.  The same  farmers  also become  non-viable  in a non-quota  situation.  These  
facts cannot  be ignored.
If there is a large exodus  from farming  prior to milk quota  elimination  then quota  will be 
available  on the restructuring  market. If those  farmers  who remain  in dairy farming  can 
increase  their production  by acquiring  quota  then their future  following  quota  elimination  
may be brighter  as they will be in a better starting  position  and therefore  will not need 
the same  magnitude  of expansion.
The following  are areas  where  changes  can take place.
1. Elimination  of Milk Quotas
We see elimination  of milk quotas  as a priority. Possibly  in the past it had its merits  but 
that time has long gone. As already  stated  the potential  that Ireland  has to produce  milk 
cheaply  from grass must be exploited  to its full extent. It is argued  that this can only be 
done in the absence  of quotas. This will allow committed  dairy farmers  an opportunity  
to grow, and will present  the opportunity  for young vibrant  people  to join the dairy 
industry,  something  that is not happening  at present.
At present  there is a drift to an inefficient  industry  because  dairy  farms  cannot  grow and 
develop.  Inflation  is rampant  in this tiger  economy  and it will impact  negatively  on dairy 
farming.  Costs  of production  will increase  while  output  prices  are relatively  frozen  under  
the Agenda  2000  Agreement.  Farms  will be exposed  to a price costs squeeze  and the 
purchasing  power  of incomes  will fall due to inflation.
100
In light of this it should be a national  priority that quotas be eliminated.  As the 
accompanying  paper  shows  the largest  capital  requirement  would be for new housing  
and milking  parlors. Capital  for housing  can be reduced  substantially  with the use of low 
cost winter  facilities  such as stand  off pads and keeping  cows on grass  for longer  as we 
develop  our knowledge  in this area. The number  of cases where additional  land is 
necessary  is quiet low. This is a reflection  of the large proportion  of non-dairy  livestock  
kept on dairy farms. Livestock  that in general  provides  little or no income.
2. Greater  movement  of milk within  present system
Greater  movement  of milk within  the present  quota  system  is needed. It is suggested  
that the present  price for restructuring  milk remains  for one year and is then reduced  to 
a very low level. Such a policy  should  be well documented  in advance  and would have 
the effect of reducing  the value of quota and flushing  out those individuals  who are 
holding  on to quotas  in order  to get a high price. This would  free up quotas  at a faster 
level. From  the beginning  of the next quota  year milk should  not be collected  from farms 
that are not certified.  These  farmers  have been given ample  time to certify, and they 
bring down  the standard  of milk in general.  This policy  would  bring out more milk, which  
can then be redistributed,  e.g. to young trained  farmers,  who should be given large  
quantities  of milk say 50,000  gallons  minimum  and not drip fed 1,000  gallons  every  year.
Milk should  be distributed  on a more equitable  basis  to all quota  holders  including  those 
over 55,000  gallons.  These  are the people  who drive the industry  forward;  they should  
not be discriminated  against.
Milk should  not be ring fenced  into less economic  areas, but rather moved  into areas  
where it is more economic  to produce  it. While politically  this policy might not be 
acceptable,  there is no doubt  that on an economic  basis this is the way forward.
The administration  of quota  must be changed.  The control  of quota  by dairy companies 
is not the desired  situation  as it allows  them too much power. Farmers  should  have  the 
right to move quotas  as they wish. Also with dairy companies  having control over 
quotas,  it is slowing  down  the restructuring  of the dairy industry.
3. Change  in Butterfat  Reference  level
The Irish butterfat  reference  level of 3.58 is too low in comparison  to other countries  in 
Europe,  e g. the butterfat  level in Holland  is 4.23%. By 2010 the Irish butterfat  level will 
be at 3.85, which  will result  in a loss of 121 m I of milk in volume  terms. This is effectively  
a penalty  for good farming  and breeding  over the last number  of years. Extra butterfat 
can also be turned  into product  and sold benefiting  the industry  as a whole. It would  
seem ridiculous  that from 2002 there will be one common  currency,  yet quotas  are all 
based  on different  reference  levels. Changes  here are necessary  if only on the basis of 
equality  within Europe.
4. A and B Quota
Ireland  should  fight for an A and B quota  system,  although  it is recognized  that this may 
pose difficulties  under  WTO as stated  in the accompanying  paper. However,  it would  be 
another  angle to get more milk production  in Ireland. The production  of B quota milk 
would  not be a problem  for a lot of producers.  They are already  producing  milk at world  
prices when quota lease and land lease (that is not needed  for quota production)  is 
taken out of the milk price. A and B quota  would  also prepare  the Irish dairy farmer  for 
the day when quotas  will cease.
101
Summary  on quotas
Milk production  is the only farm enterprise  that can return  a good living in Irish farming  
terms. We can grow grass,  the raw material  of milk production  cheaply.  Into the future,  
the dairy markets  have potential.  After New Zealand  we can be the most efficient  dairy 
industry  in the world, but we need to focus and change  in order  to be able to achieve  
this objective.
We can change  in the following  ways:
Look for the elimination  of quotas;  they are suffocating  the dairy industry;
Free up quota within  the present  system;  give milk to those who see a long-term  
future  in the industry;
Look for a change  in butterfat  reference  level; within the EU there is a common  
currency  why not a common  butterfat  reference  level?
Look for an A and B quota  system;  it may not be possible  but it will serve  notice  that 
Ireland  values  the dairy industry,  and intends  to protect  and increase  it in the future.  
If we do not make changes  now the dairy industry  will regress,  young people  will 
continue  to leave  the industry  and inflation  will eat into incomes.  Steps must be taken  
now to reward  people  for their enterprise  or the long-term  future  looks bleak.  
‘(Statistics  from Thia Hennessy,  Teagasc  - Irish Grassland  Association  Dairy  
Conference  September  2001)
Industry
The Irish dairy processing  industry  is a very rigid structure.  It has evolved  over many  
years  to its present  structure  of two large PLCs  and a range  of farmer  owned  co-ops  and 
many  different  disciplines.  It is a high cost industry,  with only a small amount  of national  
milk pool going into added  value products.  The production  profile  for milk insures  a 
continuing  dependence  on commodity  products. Commodity  products  processed  
through  small plants  are inefficient.  There  is little prospect  of this changing  in the near 
future. The Irish dairy industry  will not change  because  It Is told to do so. History  clearly  
illustrates  this fact and it is for this reason  that the IGA feels that It would be futile to 
suggest  how the industry  should  rationalise  or restructure.  This is not to say that change  
is not needed  I
The IGA urges  the Minister  to proceed  as soon as possible  with the proposed  study  of 
costs in the industry.  It is only when armed  with facts that an informed  debate  can take 
place and that the reality of the situation  becomes  clear. Somebody  must drive the 
debate  forward. DAF may not be able to fill this role but it can exercise  its authority  to 
get things  started  and also suggest  a suitable  candidate  for this role.
The dependence  of commodities  and the role of the Irish Dairy Board (IDB) in the 
marketing  of Irish products  needs  to be looked  at. Any study  of the industry  must  include  
an analysis  of the IDB. There  are many  factors  that will impinge  on the future  viability  
of Irish dairy farmers,  and it would be Irresponsible  not to try and influence  the industry  
in whatever  manner  possible.  Any factors  that may impede  restructuring  of the industry  
should  be removed.  For example,  quota  administration  handled  by the co-ops  may be 
an Impediment  to change,  there may be others  and any study  undertaken  must  consider  
all the factors.
102
Environment
At the outset,  the IGA recognises  that need to maintain  and enhance  the 
environment,  and that farmers  can no longer  engage  in practices  that are 
leading  to deterioration  in water  quality.
There is a whole range of issues  we thaf could be discussed,  buf remarks  
will be confined  to the Implementation  of Nitrates  Directive  91/676  EEC.
The 3 areas  of water  quality  under  this Directive  are:
Surface  fresh waters,  lakes/rivers
Ground  waters
Estuaries  and coastal  waters.
1. Basis  for Restrictions
Nitrate  vulnerable  zones are about to be declared  in Ireland. In general  terms, when  
expressed  as a percentage  of the land area of the country,  these  are relatively  small in 
area.
However  recent  suggestions  by the EPA and or the Department  of the Environment  on 
what constitutes  eutrophic  in estuarine  waters  is extremely  serious. In fresh water,  
50mg  of nitrates/I  Is fhe level of N, above  which  there are problems.  In estuarine  waters  
it is understood  that this level is only 11 mg/I. If this is adopted,  it is thought  that up 30% 
of the country  could be declared  to be in a nitrate  vulnerable  zone. The basis for this 
nitrogen  level needs  to be subjected  to rigorous  scientific  debate.
2. Organic  Nitrogen
The Directive  states  that levels  of organic  N should  not exceed  210 kg N/ha (which  is 
based on 85 kg organic  N produced  per cow). However  if fhe nitrate problem  is not 
solved  in four years  the current  thinking  is that the level of organic  N be reduced  from 
210 to 170 kg organic  N/ha. This would cause stocking  rates to be reduced  to two 
cows/ha.  Intensive  farmers  would  suffer  severely  under  this ruling. At 210 kg N/ha  Thia 
Hennessy,  (Teagasc.  19 Sandymount  Ave.) has suggested  that 14% of farmers  would  
be adversely  affected,  while if 170kg became  the norm some 31% of dairy farmers 
would  be adversely  affected.
However,  the Directive  appears  to give considerable  leeway  to individual  countries  to 
modify  this figure, if necessary.  It is suggested  that Ireland  has an excellent  case for 
having  organic  N levels  significantly  higher  than the 170kg/ha.  i.e.;
There  is a long growing  season  in Ireland,
Grass  is a crop with excellent  capacity  for nitrogen  uptake.
There  are no significant  quantities  of land lying fallow  in winter.
In view of the very strict ruling applied  to what is termed  estuarine  pollution,  every  effort  
must be made to raise the 170kg N/ha level, and keep it at 210 kg N /ha. Just how 
definite  the 170kg  N/ha is should  be explored  by DAF.
3. Unfairness
There  is considerable  'unfairness'  in this Directive,  in that both the polluter  and the non­
polluter  pay. All in the catchment  suffer, even those who are doing things right. 
Furthermore  those  'good'  farmers  do not get compensation.  There  is a case  to be made  
for those  people  that are doing  things  right be exempt  from the ruling,  or at least, allowed  
to keep to the 210kg  N/ha.
103
4. Organic  N
All the above  organic  N recommendations  are based on the cow producing  85 kg of 
organic  N per year. There  is a danger  that this could be altered,  which  would  make  the 
situation  even worse. For example  if the 85 kg N/cow  were increased  to 120 kg N/cow,  
the stocking  rate at 210 kg N/ha would be reduced  to 1.75 cows/ha.  At 170 kg organic  
N the stocking  rate would be reduced  to 1.4 cows/ha.  This would be a disaster  for 
commercial  dairy farming.
5. Blunt Instrument
All these measures  imply that reducing  the stocking  rates will automatically  lead to 
reductions  in nitrates  in water. Is this necessarily  true? At best, it is a blunt instrument.  
Issues  like I), spreading  of slurry at incorrect  rates, in the wrong place and at wrong  
time; ii). control  of farmyard  hygiene;  ill), spreading  too much nitrogen  at the wrong  time 
of year, are all equally,  if not more important.  Tackling  these may rectify  the problem  
quicker  and do less damage  to the dairy industry.
Summary
Is there a sound  scientific  basis for the N levels used to determine  estuarine  pollution?  
The 170 kg of organic  N/ha after 4 years  will cause  significant  hardship  for Irish farmers.  
Can this be changed?  Why should  good farmers  be forced  to reduce  stock numbers  
without  compensation?  Every  effort must be made  to maintain  the 85 kg of organic  N 
per cow, regardless  of the type of cow.
Surely,  there must be other, less drastic  ways, of solving  this nitrate  problem  in water?
Research
It is fundamental  that Irish agriculture  continues  to have the benefit  of up todate,  profit  
led, independent  and well-financed  research.  Agriculture  is one of the most important  
export  industries  and employers  in Ireland. Therefore  it is vital that all sectors  within  
agriculture  benefit  from research  and development  - farmers,  researchers  and the 
manufacturing/processing  industries.
The IGA emphasize  the importance  of up to date independent  research  and 
development  in soil, grass  varieties  and grassiand  production.  As grass  is our cheapest  
natural  resource  it is critical  that all is done  to keep its benefits  to the farmer  to the fore. 
In the recent past, other well funded  crop production  systems,  e.g. maize, corn and 
silage systems  are being promoted  and funded  by their supplying  industries  and are 
gaining  in popularity  with somewhat  questionable  long term benefits.  These  crops  need  
well funded  on going research  into methods  of establishment  and agronomy,  whereas  
grass  regenerates  providing  a natural  feed for all our animal  production  systems.  Grass  
and grassland  production  needs the same level of research  and funding as the 
aforementioned  crops, but it is vitally important  that this research  remains  independent  
of industrial  funding.
There is an urgent  need for new science  and research  graduates.  Acting  on this will 
allow  Ireland  to retain  its competitive  advantage  as a provider  of cheap  cleanly  produced  
food for its many export  markets. Our “green ” image of food production  needs  to be 
enhanced.
104
Education
It is important  to acknowledge  recent  changes  in agricultural  education  and to allow  for 
these  changes  to take effect. However,  it is equally  important  that agricultural  education  
should  be developed  and funded  to the same  extent  as other  educational  sectors,  ie CIT, 
Regional  Colleges  and Universities.  In most colleges,  agricultural  training and 
education  has been the poor relation  with inadequate  facilities.  There  is an urgent  need  
to have all facilities  updated  to allow  an atmosphere  of importance  and popularity,  which  
will be to the benefit  of the student  and the industry  in general.
Information  technology
Information  technology  (IT) is in its infancy  in termis  of practical  application  for farmers.  
However  the farming  community  will have to embrace  this technology  and use it to 
minimise  bureaucracy  and the paper  work involved  in day-to-day  farming.  Farmers  will 
adopt, provided  systems  are simple  and in turn lead to an easier  management  system.  
It is also critical  that farmers  can access  relevant  information  from the DAF to enable  
them to process  headage,  forestry,  arable  aid and area based  payments  more readily.
105
Milk pricing  revisited:  equity,  transparency  and producer  incentives
Michael  Wallace^,  James  Breent ’ and Seamus  Crosse'^
^Department  of Agribusiness,  Extension  and Rural Development,  University  College
Dublin,  Belfleld,  Dublin  4
'^Teagasc,  Rural  Economy  Research  Centre,  19 Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin  4
Teagasc,  Dairy  Production  Department,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,
Co. Cork
Introduction
Milk pricing  is at the axis of the relationship  between  milk processor  and milk supplier.  
Pricing  schemes  have developed  over time reflecting  an evolving  value relationship  
between  milk processor  and producer  in response  to a changing  market  environment.  
The demand  for milk at farm level is derived  indirectly  from the market  demand  for 
numerous  processed  dairy products. Milk payment  schemes  provide  the means by 
which  the price paid for milk at the farm gate is related  to the market  returns  that can be 
obtained  from that milk when processed  into final product.  The value  of milk to the dairy  
processing  industry  is a function  of its composition  and the aggregate  profit of the 
product  mix manufactured  from the milk. The producer ’s revenue  from supplying  milk is 
a function  of the value  of milk to the processing  industry  and the payment  scheme  used 
to reward  producers  (Garrick  and Lopez-Villalobos,  1999).
The primary  objective  of a milk pricing  system  is that the price paid (received)  for milk 
reflects  as accurately  as possible  the amount  and value  of products  made  from it as well 
as the transport  and processing  costs incurred.  With the exception  of liquid milk, the 
value of milk is directly  dependent  on its solids content  rather than volume. The 
justification  for payment  based  on constituent  composition  is therefore  inversely  related  
to the importance  of the liquid market. In the Republic  of Ireland  the liquid market  is 
comparatively  small, absorbing  less than 10 percent  of total supplies  and there is an 
overwhelming  case for a payment  system  that encourages  and adequately  rewards  
compositional  quality.
This paper  examines  some issues  in component  milk pricing. Comparisons  are drawn  
with pricing  schemes  in major milk producing  countries.  A procedure  for estimating  
market  values  of milk components  is discussed  along with the implications  of some  
results obtained. A process  of relating price to value with progressive  multiple  
component  pricing  policies  is identified  as the way forward.
Criteria  for Evaiuating  Milk Payment  Schemes
A milk pricing  system  can be judged  according  to its transparency,  the extent  to which it 
is equitable  to producers  and the incentive  structure  it provides  to encourage  desirable  
changes  in milk composition.
Equity  in Milk Pricing  Schemes
The pricing  system  should  be fair to the producer  by ensuring  that the price paid for milk 
reflects  as accurately  as possible  the market  returns  that can be obtained  from that milk 
in terms  of processed  product.  As noted by Keane  (1989, p.4) “the basic principle  for a 
payment  scheme  is that those suppliers  with above  average  solids levels in their milk 
will generate  a higher  return  from the marketplace  and, in strict equity  terms,  should  be
106
entitled to a higher price per gallon/litre. ’’ In these terms a payment  scheme  is 
inequitable  if it results  in some producers  being paid more than the true value of milk 
according  to its composition  \«hile other producers  are under-paid  for milk of better  
composition.  In addition,  while producers  are confined  by the milk quota system  in 
terms of both volume  and butterfat  other milk solids are not penalised  in this way. 
Producers  should receive  fair market  value for non-fat  milk solids allowing  them to 
increase  returns  through  improvements  in milk composition  (especially  milk protein)  
over time.
Transparency
A milk pricing  system  should  be transparent  in the sense  that milk suppliers  can easily  
understand  how their milk price has been determined.  This should  permit  producers  to 
assess  whether  or not they are receiving  fair market  value  for milk according  to its solids  
composition.  The system  should  clearly  indicate  to producers  the relative  values  of 
individual  milk components  within  the overall  milk price. Improving  transparency  in milk 
pricing has implications  for the manner in which producer  milk statements  are 
constructed  (see Keane, 2000). Moreover,  producers  need to be assured  of the 
reliability  of the milk sampling/testing  process  for determining  constituent  yields  and they 
must be satisfied  that fair and accepted  procedures  are used in determining  values  for 
constituents  in the milk price.
Incentives
The milk pricing  system  has a pivotal  role in signalling  market  values  of individual  milk 
components  to the producer.  The incentive  structure  provided  by the pricing  scheme  
should promote  desirable  changes  in milk composition  and provide  opportunities  for 
producers  to enhance  profitability  through  the production  of more valuable  milk. While  
in the past butter-fat  was the most important  constituent  to the processor,  changes  in the 
market  environment  such as increased  consumption  of low fat products  and cheese  
have meant  that the value of protein  has risen relative  to that for fat. Similarly  the 
expansion  in the 'food ingredients ’ sector has increased  demand  for milk protein  
(casein)  and to some extent lactose. It is important  that the pricing system  should  
adequately  reflect  changing  market  requirements  and thereby  signal  these  to producers.
Milk Pricing  Practice  in Ireland
Current  milk pricing  schemes  operated  by Irish dairies  are essentially  'differential-based' 
systems.  Dairies  determine  a base price for a reference  milk composition  (e.g. 3.6% fat 
and 3.3% protein)  and a differential  adjustment  (addition  or deduction)  in price per gallon  
is made  for each 0.1% in fat and protein  that the individual  farmer's  milk differs  from the 
base composition.  The basic milk pricing  equations  is:
Price/gallon  = BP -r [(F% - FR%) x FD] + [{P% - PR%) x PD] (eq. 1)
Where :
BP is the base price per gallon;
F% is the fat content  of the milk;
FR% is the base/reference  fat 
requirement;
FD is the fat differential  or incentive  paid 
for fat
107P% is the protein  content  of the milk;
PR% is the base/reference  protein  
requirement;
PD is the protein  differential  or incentive  
paid for protein
107
While  there is consistency  in the general  pricing  system  employed  by Irish dairies  there  
is considerable  variation  between  dairies  in the component  differentials  (i.e. PD and FD) 
in the pricing  equation.  Of twenty  dairies  listed in a recent  milk price comparison  (Rea,  
2001 ) the average  value for butterfat  was 1.12 pence per 0.1% per gallon, however  
among  the dairies  this ranged  from 0.80 pence  to 1.46 pence  (Table  1). In the case of 
protein  values,  there was even greater  variation,  with the highest  being double  the 
lowest. The average  value for protein  across  the sample  of twenty  dairies  was 1.74 
pence  per 0.1% per gallon. The average  ratio of protein  to fat value was about  60:40,  
however  the highest  ratio was almost  70:30  while  the lowest  placed  equal  values  on fat 
and protein (see Table 1). Moreover,  for many of the dairies  fat and protein  values  
combined  only added  to a proportion  of the total milk price and a further  constant  was 
added  to give the total price. The magnitude  of this constant  varied  considerably  (Table  
1) between  dairies  with five having  a constant  amounting  to more than 15 per cent of 
the milk price paid while 10 of the dairies  had a constant  of less than 5 per cent.
Table 1. Key aspects  of pricing  schemes  for dairies  in the Irish Farmers'  Journal,  milk 
price league  (September  2001)
Minimum Average Maximum
Fat (pence  per 0.1%) 0.80 1.12 1.46
Protein  (pence  per 0.1%) 1.00 1.74 2.04
Ratio protein  value:  fat value 50:50 61:39 69:31
Constant  (% of price) -4.0 8.8 33.3
International  Comparisons
To gain perspective  on current  pricing  policies  operated  by Irish dairies  it is useful to 
draw comparisons  with milk pricing  systems  in other  countries.  Milk pricing  in Denmark,  
the Netherlands  and New Zealand  are considered  in the following  sections.
Denmark
Under  the Danish  system  milk price is comprised  of a number  of components:  a value  
for fat, a value  for protein,  a fixed deduction  for milk treatment,  a fixed deduction  for milk 
collection,  seasonal  price differentiation,  premia  and deductions  (Keane,  2000), This 
pricing  system  follows  a model milk payments  scheme  produced  by the Danish  Dairy  
Board. In determining  fat and protein  values  standard  product  manufacturing  costs are 
deducted  from intervention  product  revenues  for butter  and BMP. Milk treatment  costs  
and collection  costs are then deducted  as a volume  related  charge. In total this volume  
related  charge  under the Danish  system  has amounted  to around  6 pence  per gallon  
(Keane,  2000). The basic  price  ex-farm  derived  using  this formula  is usually  much  lower  
than the actual price paid to farmers  as substantial  supplementary  payments  on the 
basis of the financial  performance  of the co-op are a normal  feature  of Danish milk 
pricing.
The Netherlands
Payment  for milk in the Netherlands  is based  on an A+B-C  system. Under  this system  
the Dutch include  high valuations  for fat and protein  with a fixed deduction  for milk 
handling  and other costs. There  are a number  of additional  premiums  including  quality  
premium,  tank milk premium,  quantity  premium,  winter  milk premium/summer  milk levy, 
supplementary  payments  at end of year and other payments/retentions  (Keane,  2000).
108
The negative  ‘C component  of the Dutch milk pricing  equation  comprises  a penalty  to 
discourage  added  water  plus a fixed charge  to cover  administration  and transport costs.  
Keane  (2000) explained  that this volume  penalty  In the Dutch system  varies between  
processors  ranging  from about 10 percent  to 20 percent  of the net milk price. Fat and 
protein valuations  are policy decisions  of the individual  processing  companies.  
Typically,  the value of protein is derived  from the price of gouda cheese net of 
processing  costs (Keane, 2000). Similar to the Danish system, supplementary 
payments  based  on company  performance  are an Important  part of the final price paid 
to producers.
New  Zealand
The New Zealand  system  for payment  of milk is essentially  kgs of fat multiplied  by cents  
per kg plus kgs of protein  multiplied  by cents per kg. The protein  to fat value ratio is 
approximately  70:30. The New Zealand  Dairy Board  (now incorporated  within Fonterra  
Co-operative  Group) calculates  a single ('pooled')  valuation  for milk constituents 
(butterfat  and protein)  based on expected  returns  from selling many different  dairy  
products  to different  international  markets  net of standard  processing  costs. This Is 
referred  to as the Basic Price and is reviewed  quarterly.  ‘Standard  cost models'  are 
used to establish  the processing  costs  associated  with the manufacture  of virtually  every  
product  produced.  The model calculations  are based on processing  milk through 
efficient  New Zealand  plants (Bates, 1998). With reference  to the Basic Price, dairy  
companies  set a preliminary  price, called  Advance  Rates  and this is adjusted  quarterly 
where  necessary.  In addition,  producers  may receive  supplementary  payments  based  
on co-op  performance  (Keane,  2000).
Issues  Emerging  from International  Comparisons
As shown in Table 1, there is considerable  variation  in fat and protein differentials  
applied  by Irish dairy  processors.  Some  of this variation  can be explained  by differences  
in product  mix among  companies  but even allowing  for this the range  appears  extreme.  
Moreover,  it remains  unclear  how Irish processors  determine  their values  for fat and 
protein. This issue appears  more transparent  in the milk pricing  systems  for the other  
countries  examined.  In these  countries,  there  was a high level of consistency  in the milk 
pricing  policies  employed  with no evidence  of the variation  in fat and protein  values 
found among Irish processors.  This may reflect a greater degree of Industry  
coordination  with a central  agency  providing  milk pricing  guidelines  based on market  
information.  In Denmark,  for example,  the Danish  Dairy  Board  provides  a guideline  milk 
payments  system  that is almost  universally  adopted  by the industry.
A proportion  of Irish dairies  include  a significant  positive  constant  in their milk pricing  
schemes.  This contrasts  sharply  with the payment  schemes  operated  in the other  
countries  where  a negative  term in the pricing  equation  recognises  the cost of handling  
and removing  water  in product  manufacture.  For example,  the Danish  volume  charge  
is approximately  7 percent  of the basic  price  while  in the Netherlands  the volume  penalty  
equates  to around  15 percent  of the base price. Given  the small proportion  of Irish milk 
sold as fluid, the payment  of a positive  constant  for volume is hard to justify.  
Furthermore,  the inclusion  of a positive  constant  in Irish payment  schemes  is an 
undesirable  feature  as It reduces  the value  placed  on milk solids  and thereby diminishes 
the incentive  for improvement  in fat and protein  content.
109
Principles  of Multiple  Component  Pricing
Milk is a flexible  raw material  as its components  can be combined  in different  proportions  
to produce  many different  dairy products.  Multiple  component  pricing  (MCP)  of milk is 
defined  as the pricing  of milk directly  on the basis  of more  than one component:  such as 
fat and protein  or fat, protein,  lactose  and carrier  (volume).  The primary  objective  of 
MCP is that the price paid or received  for milk reflects  as accurately  as possible  the 
amount  and value of products  that can be made  from it (Emmons,  et al., 1990a). This 
is of particular  relevance  given the variation  in milk composition  both seasonally  and 
between  producers  and the fact that yields of products  such as butter; skimmed  milk 
powder  (SMP) and cheese  are directly  dependant  on the solids composition  of milk 
supplied  to the processor.  In the strictest  sense, the economic  value of the solids  
components  of milk should  be based  on the value (price)  of the products  in which  they 
are used, less processing  and marketing  costs and costs  of other  ingredients  (Hillers,  et 
al.. 1980).
The task of estimating  component  values  based  on their values  within  the marketable  
dairy products  is a difficult  one. Component  values  vary according  to the product  mix 
into which  the milk is processed.  Different  milk products  contain  different  proportions  of 
milk components  and have varying  market  prices  and processing  costs. For example,  
milk protein  is likely to have a higher  economic  value when manufactured  into a more  
profitable  product  like cheese  than into a less profitable  one such as SMP. A MCP  
system  involves  the processor  paying  directly  for milk components  as reflected  in end 
products  of visible  market  value (i.e. butter, cheese,  etc). The value, or cost, of each 
component  must be closely  related  to its value, or cost, to the processor.  While milk 
solids constituents  have positive  values, the value of water (volume)  is generally  
negative  as it must be transported,  handled  and removed  in processing.  The cost of 
processing  milk, up to the packaging  line, increases  with increased  volume. A MCP 
system  should  ensure  that the dairy  firm pays only what the milk is worth  in terms  of the 
amount  and value  of products  produced.  Conversely,  it should  ensure  that  the producer  
receives  full and fair reward  for milk supplied  according  to its composition  and the 
market  return it produces  as processed  product. Consequently,  the milk price under  
MCP should  reflect  the values  (or costs) of all the key constituents  in the milk supplied,
i.e.:
• Value  of butterfat
• + Value  of protein
• + Value  of other  solids  (lactose  and minerals)
• - Cost of handling/removing  fluid carrier  (water)
This comprehensive  MCP model  could  be referred  to as a ‘plus/plus/plus/minus'  scheme  
accurately  assigning  the positive  values  of milk solids  as well as the cost associated  with 
the fluid carrier,  water.
MCP in an Irish Context
While Irish dairies have for many years priced milk on the basis of fat and protein  
components,  the industry  has stopped  short of implementing  a comprehensive  MCP  
system.  The main deviations  in current  Irish milk pricing  from the MCP model  described  
previously  are:
i) The inclusion  of a positive  constant  for volume  in many  of the pricing  policies.  This
fails to recognise  that volume  actually  is a cost to the processor.
ii) The omission  of solids  other  than fat and protein  from the pricing  schemes.  Even
110
though  fat and protein  constitute  the most valuable  milk components  to ignore  other  
solids  in payment  schemes  can result  in the milk price failing  to reflect  fully the true 
processed  value of that milk. For example,  lactose  is an important  component  in 
WMP  and SMP and that value should  be reflected  in the milk price.
iii) Operation  of differentials  as opposed  to more transparent  direct valuation  of 
individual  components  (i.e. cents per kg times number  of kgs supplied).  Use of a 
base price per gallon,  albeit with quality  adjustments,  tends  to place the focus on 
price per unit volume. This may confuse  producer  incentives  by reducing  the 
perceived  importance  of milk solids. In practice  it would be more transparent  to 
establish  unit values  for each component  and to price milk directly  on the basis of 
the number  of units of each component  supplied.
In the remainder  of this paper some implications  of a comprehensive  MCP  
(plus/plus/plus/minus)  system  are considered  for the Irish dairy industry.  Comparisons  
are drawn with the existing  differential  payment  (DP) schemes  currently  operated  by 
Irish dairies.
Methodology
Operation  of a MCP system  requires  the development  of a reliable  approach  for the 
valuation  of milk components  that can obtain  the confidence  of milk producers.  A wide 
range of approaches  have been identified  in the milk pricing literature  ranging  from 
partial  budgeting  or costing  models  (Caskie,  1992; Brog, 1969; 1970; Hillers  eta!., 1980;  
Garrick  and Lopez-Villalobos,  1999),  through  to more sophisticated  methods  employing  
differential  calculus  (Ladd and Dunn, 1979) and linear programming  (Bangstra  et at, 
1988; Breen,  2001). Much of the difficulty  in deriving  component  values  arises  due to 
the multi-product  nature  of many  dairy processors.  Often  a product  mix is manufactured  
comprising  various  dairy products  that contain  fat, protein  and lactose  in many  different  
combinations.  In this study a linear programming  approach  was chosen,  as the 
technique  lends itself more readily  to decision-making  in a multi-product  context.
A representative  linear  programming  model  of a dairy-processing  firm was constructed  
according  to the general  structure  presented  in Figure 1. The model maximised  an 
objective  of the processor's  net revenue  across  a multi-period  planning  horizon  that 
comprised  12 time periods,  each period  representing  one month  of the year. The use 
of a multi-period  framework  enabled  the model  to incorporate  the effects  of the seasonal  
pattern  of milk supplies  within  the Irish dairy sector. The model  included  a portfolio  of 
products  reflecting  the predominant  product  mix of the Irish dairy industry. These  
products  included  fluid milk, butter, casein,  whole milk powder  (WMP),  skimmed  milk 
powder  (SMP),  Cheddar  cheese,  dried lactose  and whey powder.
Figure  1. Schematic  Diagram  of the Modelling  Framework
111
The decision  variables  of the model  \were the levels of each dairy product  produced  in 
each month of the quota year. The firm’s production  decisions  were assumed  to be 
influenced  by its expectations  for product  prices,  market  demand,  raw milk supplies  as 
well as production  costs for different  product  lines. Specifically,  the quantities  of 
individual  products  that could be produced  In a given month  were limited  by a series  of 
technical  constraints  comprising:
• Monthly  market  demand  for each product  line according  to the firm's market  share  
and supply  commitments;
• Processing  plant capacity  for each product  line, e.g. drier plant  capacity  in the case 
of milk powders.
• Monthly  milk supplies  from farmers  In the processor ’s milk pool reflecting  aggregate  
milk quota  and seasonal  supply  pattern  of the producers.
• Solids  composition  of the milk supplied  to the processor,  which  directly  influences  
the volume  of products  that can be produced.
Manufacturing  costs in the model  were categorised  as either  ‘fixed ’ or ‘variable. ’ Fixed  
costs  were assumed  to remain  constant  in total for a given  volume  of milk regardless  of 
the quantity  of product  manufactured.  These  costs included  milk collection,  reception  of 
milk at the processing  plant, administration  and general  overhead  costs. Variable  costs  
were directly related to the quantity  of product  manufactured.  These costs were  
obtained  on a product-by-product  basis and included  direct labour,  fuel/power,  added  
ingredients,  packaging,  product  storage  and effluent  disposal.
Solution  of the model produced  two main categories  of results. Firstly, the optimum  
product  mix that maximised  the market  returns  from dairy product  manufacture  subject 
to the constraints  listed  above. Secondly,  the shadow  prices  or marginal  values  for three  
principal  milk solids:  fat, protein  and lactose.  These  marginal  values,  calculated  in terms  
of Irish pounds  per kg of each milk component,  represent  the imputed  value to the 
processor  in terms  of the net revenue  obtained  from the last kg of each milk component  
supplied.  The component  marginal  values  estimated  by the model  form the basis of a 
MCP  equation,  which  expresses  the value  of milk as a function  of its solids  composition.  
Under  the system,  producer  payment  for a given volume  of milk would be determined  
by the equation:
PR = (VFx YF) + (VPx YP) + (VL x YL) +/- (AP x Vol) - (CVx Vol) {eq.2)
Where:
PR = Producer  revenue  (Milk cheque)  
VF = Marginal  value of fat (£/kg)
YF = Fat yield in milk supplied  (kg)
VP = Marginal  value of protein  (£/kg)  
YP = Protein  yield In milk supplied  (kg)YL = Lactose  yield In milk supplied  (kg) 
VL = Marginal  value of lactose  (£/kg)
AP = Additional  payments,  i.e. quality  
and seasonal  bonuses/deductions
(E/gal)
CV = Fixed costs per unit volume  (£/gal)
Using the marginal  values of the individual  milk components  multiplied  by the 
corresponding  component  yield in the milk supplied,  it is possible  to ascertain  the 
marginal  value  of a gallon  of milk (MVGM)  of given composition  to the processor.  The 
MVGM  plus or minus  supplementary  payments  (e.g. quality  bonus/deduction,  seasonal  
incentives)  and minus  a volume  related  deduction  for collection,  assembly  and overhead  
costs would represent  the final milk price per gallon  that would be paid to a producer  
under  the MCP system.
112
Model  Results
Marginal  values  of milk components  were estimated  under  six product  mix scenarios.  
These  comprised  a number  of 'specialist'  processing  channel  options  and an 'average  
product  mix ’ scenario  reflecting  the approximate  actual proportions  of each product  
produced  by the Irish dairy industry  as a whole. The 'specialist'  scenarios  comprised  
discrete  processing  channels  for fluid milk, cheese,  casein,  SMP/butter  and WMP and 
were used to estimate  component  values  according  to each of these specific  product  
lines. In each of the five specialist  scenarios  the focus was on the production  of the 
primary  product  with secondary  products  produced  as by-products  from the remaining  
milk components.  For example,  in the specialist  fluid milk scenario  the focus  was on the 
production  of fluid milk, however  some butter  was also produced  from surplus  butterfat  
after standardisation  of the milk. Model  estimates  of values  per kg for fat, protein  and 
lactose,  under  each scenario,  are presented  in Table 2. Since  the results  were based  
on product  price and cost data for quota year 1999/00  all figures  are given in Irish 
pounds. Through  the MCP equation  (Eq. 2) the component  values were used to 
calculate  the marginal  value to the processor  of a gallon of milk according  to its 
composition.  This Marginal  Value per Gallon  of Milk (MVGM)  is shown  in Table 2 for a 
milk of composition  3.6 percent  fat, 3.3 percent  protein  and 4.6 percent  lactose.
Table  2. Milk component  values  and marginal  value  per gallon  for milk of 3.6% fat, 3.3%  
protein  and 4.6% lactose  by processing  Channel.
Fat
(e/kg)Protein
(e/kg)Lactose
(e/kg)MVGM  (p/gal)
3.6% F; 3.3% P; 4.6% L
Average  mix 2.48 3.25 . 0.41 100.83
Fluid channel 2.53 4.74 0.68 130.50
Cheese 2.63 4.27 0.41 119.11
Casein 2.47 4.27 0.41 116.41
SMP/Butter 2.48 1.56 1.56 99.48
WMP 1.84 1.84 1.84 99.05
The highest  return for milk was produced  under the fluid milk scenario  with lowest  
returns  under  the milk powders  scenarios.  Under  the 'average  product  mix ’ scenario  the 
MVGM  for a composition  of 3.6 percent  fat, 3.3 percent  protein  and 4.6 percent  lactose  
was almost  101 pence  per gallon. This compared  to an actual average  base price for 
all dairies  in the Irish Farmers  Journal  Milk Price League  of 99.9 pence  per gallon  in the 
same  period. In converting  the MVGM  to a net producer  price a volume  charge  in pence  
per gallon is deducted  to cover cost of milk collection,  assembly,  administration  and 
general  overheads.  It was estimated  that this charge  would be approximately  6 pence  
per gallon of which 3.4 pence related  to the cost of milk collection/assembly  (Breen,  
2001). However,  it is noted that current  collection  charges  of Irish processors  average  
less than 1 pence  gallon  reflecting  the fact that the true cost of handling  milk volume  has 
not been levied  on suppliers.
There was a high degree  of consistency  in the value for fat under the scenarios  
reflecting  the fact that in most cases its value was determined  by the production  of 
butter. The value  of protein  was more  variable  according  to whether  it was used in milk 
powders  or for more profitable  products  such as cheese  and casein. The lactose  
component  had a small value under most processing  channels  reflecting  its modest  
value as a residual  product. However,  in the case of milk powders  its value  was much  
more significant  reflecting  its role as a major  component  of SMP and WMP.
113
The protein  to fat value ratios estimated  by the model ranged  from 57:43 under  the 
'average  product  mix' scenario  through  to 63:37  for casein  and cheese  scenarios,  39:61  
for the SMP/Butter  scenario  and 50:50  in the case of the WMP  scenario.  This concurred  
\with actual  protein:fat  value ratios  of processors,  which  ranged  from 43:57  to 69:31 with 
an average  for all dairies  of 60:40  over  the same  period. Clearly,  component  values  vary 
according  to the product  mix produced  from the milk and this would  suggest  that it is not 
possible  to obtain  one set of component  values  that accurately  represents  the true value  
of milk for all product  channels.  Consequently,  the best strategy  might involve  the use 
of a 'blended'  formula  where  a weighted  average  of component  values  is used according  
to the proportion  of milk allocated  to each product  channel.
Incentive  for Improved  Composition
An important  aspect  of a milk-pricing  scheme  is that it should provide  incentive  for 
desirable  improvements  in milk composition.  Milk with higher  solids concentration  is 
more  valuable  to the processor  and it is important  that this increased  value is accurately  
reflected  in the milk price. Results  are presented  in Table  3 for the increase  in milk price 
(value) due to a 0.2% increase  in milk solids per gallon. For comparative  purposes  
actual  price incentives  provided  by dairies  are shown  in the bottom  half of Table  3 based  
on Milk Price League  data for the same  time period. The degree  of responsiveness  of 
current  pricing  schemes  is inversely  related  to the magnitude  of a constant  term in the 
payment  structure.  Consequently,  the average  figures  are presented  for dairies  grouped  
according  to the proportion  of milk price accounted  for by a constant  term in their 
payment  schemes.
Under  the MCP model  the increase  in milk value  due to the improved  composition  was 
5.7 pence per gallon under the 'average  product  mix' scenario. Under  the cheese  
scenario  the improved  composition  added  6.8 pence  per gallon  to the milk value  while  
under  the SMP/butter  scenario  the improved  composition  yielded  an extra  5.2 pence  per 
gallon. In the case of the actual pricing  systems  operated  by dairies  in the same  time 
period  the average  price reward  for the improved  composition  was lowest  (4.4 pence  per 
gallon)  for dairies  with a positive  constant  of more  than 15 percent  of their milk price. On 
the other hand, the price adjustment  for dairies  with a positive  constant  of less than 5 
percent  was in line with the MCP results  for an average  product  mix but below  the MCP 
results  by 1 pence  per gallon  in the case of the cheese  scenario.
Table  3. Producer  price incentive  for improved  solids  composition
Reward  for Improved  Composition  
Increase  of 0.2% in Fat, 0.2% in Protein  and 
0.2% in Lactose  (pence/gallon)
Multiple  Component  Pricing  Scenarios
Average  Mix +5.7
Fluid +7.4
Cheese +6.8
Casein +6.7
SMP/Butter -^5.2 WMP +5.2
Current  Differential  Pricing  Systems:
With constant  > 15% -1- 4.4
With constant  5 - 15% +5.3
With constant  < 5% +5.7
114
Volume  versus  Composition
In the case of dairies  with a large positive  constant  in their pricing  equations,  increased  
volume is rewarded  over improvements  in solids concentration.  This issue was 
examined  using  the MCP model. Two deliveries  of milk were evaluated  both containing 
exactly the same quantities  (kgs) of each milk component,  however,  one of the 
deliveries  involved  a volume  of 1,100 gallons  while the other had a volume  of 1,000  
gallons  (see Table 4).
Table  4. Volume  and composition  of two milk deliveries
DELIVERY  A
1,100 gal @ 3.6% F 3.3% P, 
4.6% LDELIVERY  B
1,000  gal @ 3.96%  F 3.63%  P, 
5.06%  L
Milk (kg) 5,127.50 4,661.37
Fat (kg) 184.59 184.59
Protein  (kg) 169.21 169.21
Lactose  (kg) 235.87 235.87
In this example  the value  of both milk pools  in terms  of processed  product  should  be the 
same  as they contain  the same amount  of milk solids  and therefore  will yield the same  
quantities  of product.  Moreover,  the delivery  with lower  solids  concentration  will actually 
have higher  costs in terms  of transportation  and fluid removal.  As indicated  in Table 5, 
the MCP system  correctly  identified  the processed  value of both milk deliveries  as 
exactly  the same. In contrast,  the differential  payment  systems  operated  by processors 
actually  paid more for the volume  increase  than they paid for the increase  in solids  
concentration.  This inefficiency  in the differential-based  systems  varied with the 
prominence  of a constant  term within the pricing  policy. For dairies  in the Milk Price  
League  with a constant  component  of more than 15 percent,  the amount  paid for the 
higher  volume  of milk was on average  about  £23 more than for the delivery  of milk with 
higher solids concentration.  This difference  occurred  despite the fact that both 
deliveries  would yield the same amount  of processed  product  and the added  volume 
would  entail more handling  costs.
Table  5. Efficiency  of milk pricing  systems
DELIVERY  A
1,100 gal @ 3.6% F, 
3.3% P, 4.6% L 
(£)DELIVERY  B
1,000 gallons  @ 3.96%
F, 3.63% P, 5.06%  L
(£)Difference
(£)
Current  Differential  Pricing  Systems:
With constant  > 15% 1,096.99 1,073.56 23.43
With constant  5 - 15% 1,108.07 1,097.32 10.75
With constant  < 5% 1,096.41 1,093.70 2.71
True Value  of Milk (MCP):
Baseline 1,109.09 1,109.09 0.00
Cheese 1,310.22 1,310.22 0.00
Casein 1,280.56 1,280.56 0.00
SMP 1,094.31 1,094.31 0.00
WMP 1,089.57 1,089.57 0.00
115
Control  over unit costs  of processed  product
The single largest  cost to the dairy processing  sector is the milk that is used in the 
production  of its products.  Hence,  from a processor  point of view, an important  benefit  
of MCP is more accurate  control  of unit costs  of milk per kg of final product.  A paper  by 
Emmons  et al. (1990b)  has shown  that milk differing  by as little as 0.1 per cent in fat, 
protein  or lactose  could have important  effects  on the costs of milk per unit of product.  
These differences  in milk costs can in turn have a major effect on profitability  of the 
processing  plant. Variation  in cost of milk per kg of final product  arises  where  the pricing  
formula  does not accurately  reflect differences  in product  yield as milk composition 
varies. Thus some milk may be over-valued  in terms of the product  yield that can be 
obtained  from them, while  other milk compositions  may be under-valued.  In Table  6 fhe 
value of two milks differing  by 0.1% in milk solids are examined  according  to the 
processing  channel  of the milk. Milk 'A comprised  1,000  gallons  with composition  of 3.6 
percent  fat, 3.3 percent  protein and 4.6 percent  lactose. Milk 'B' comprisec.  1,000  
gallons  with composition  of 3.5 percent  fat, 3.2 percent  protein  and 4.5 percent  lactose.  
If manufactured  into cheese,  Milk 'A' produced  net revenue  of £1,185  for the 1,000  
gallons.  Milk B' produced  a lower  product  yield due to its lower  solids  concentration  and 
generated  net revenue  of £1,151. Hence,  the difference  in the true value of the two 
milks for cheese  production  was £34.
Under  the DP formulas  employed  by processors  the difference  in value (price)  between  
the two milks was generally  less than the true difference  in the value of the milks  
estimated  by the MCP model. For example,  processors  with a constant  of more  than 15 
per cent of their milk price would pay only £22.60  less for the milk with poorer  solids  
composition  even though  the actual  reduction  in the net revenue  produced  by that milk 
was £34 in the case of the cheese  processing  channel  and £26 in the case of the 
SMP/Butter  channel  (Table  6). Effectively,  the pricing  formula  used by these  dairies  did 
not fully reflect differences  in product  yield for different  milk compositions.  This 
inefficiency  in the pricing  system  resulted  in the cost of milk per unit of final product  
varying  with compositional  differences  in milk supplied. In the case of dairies  with a 
lower constant  value in their milk price the ability of the pricing formula  to estimate  
changes  in milk value  was better  but differences  remained  for products  such as cheese  
and casein. Under  a comprehensive  MCP system  the price paid to producers  should  
accurately  reflect  the yield of products  obtained;  and the cost of milk per unit of product  
should  remain  constant  as composition  varies  (Emmons,  et al., 1990b). This is a major  
benefit  to processors  in ensuring  greater  control  over their largest  input cost of raw milk.
Table 6. True values  of two milk compositions  compared  with value under  differential  
pricing  schemes  employed  by dairies
MILK  A MILK B Difference
Value  of 1,000 Value  of 1,000
gallons  @ 3.6% F, gallons  @ 3.5%F,
3.3% P, 4.6% L 3.2%P,  4.5% L
(E) (E) (E)
True Value  of Milk (MCP model):
Cheese 1,185.12 1,151.07 -34.05
Casein 1,158.96 1,125.67 -33.29
SM P/Butter 992.31 966.17 -26.15
Differential  Pricing  Systems:
With constant  > 15% 997.27 974.67 -22.60
With constant  5 - 15% 1,007.34 980 74 -26.60
With constant  < 5% 996.74 968.34 -28 40
116
Conclusions
Three  fundamental  principles  have been outlined  by the International  Dairy Federation  
as guidelines  in relation  to milk payments  systems.  A payment  scheme:
• should  be fair and equitable  to suppliers;
• should  promote  the production  of high quality  milk;
• should  be consistent  with developments  in milk sampling  and testing  (IDF, 1979).
Comparison  with milk payment  schemes  in Denmark,  the Netherlands  and New Zealand  
identified  that Irish milk pricing  policies  are much more variable  in terms  of valuation  of 
milk constituents.  In addition,  the role of a positive  constant  for volume  in many Irish 
pricing  schemes  contrasts  sharply  with practice  in the other countries  where  a volume 
charge  is included  in the pricing  equation  to reflect  the costs associated  with handling  
the water  component  in milk.
A representative  processor  model  was used to estimate  component  values  and the true 
value of milks according  to composition  and net returns  from processed  product. The 
component  values  were found to vary by product  mix especially  in the case of milk 
protein. However,  the average  protein:fat  value ratio was approximately  60:40,  closely 
in line with the average  protein:fat  value ratio of Irish dairies  over the same  period.
Using the estimated  component  values,  a producer  milk price was derived  using a 
'plus/plus/plus/minus'  pricing equation  according  to the amounts  of each milk 
component  consigned.  For milk of base composition  it was found that the milk price  
estimated  by this equation  (under  the ‘average  product  mix' scenario)  compared  very 
favourably  with actual average  base price paid by Irish dairies  over the same period.  
The comprehensive  MCP model was found to be superior  to the differential-based 
systems  operated  by Irish dairies  in a number  of respects:
• MCP can provide  benefits  in terms of equity/fairness  by more accurately  pricing  
milk according  to its composition  and the yield and value of products  that can be 
made from milk supplied.  Essentially,  the system  can ensure  that producers  are 
more accurately  rewarded  for their milk according  to its composition  and the return  
that milk produces  in the market  place. A comprehensive  MCP system  would 
prevent  some  producers  being  over-paid  for milk with poor solids  composition  while 
others  are under-paid  for milk of good solids  composition.
• By visually  assigning  market-based  values  to solids components  as well as the 
costs associated  with handling  volume,  the transparency  of the pricing  system  is 
improved.  Producer  milk price is determined  directly  from the component  values 
and the quantities  of components  consigned.  The supplier  should be able to 
compare  component  values assigned  by different  dairies and thereby  make  
assessments  regarding  processor  performance  in the use of that milk. This can 
benefit  the dairy industry  as a whole  by ensuring  that milk is directed  to those  uses 
where  it has greatest  value.
MCP should  result in price incentives  for improved  composition  becoming  more finely 
tuned to developments  in market  returns  for dairy products.  In most cases  the price  
differentials  for an improvement/decrease  in milk solids  composition  were higher  under 
MCP  than under  the existing  pricing  systems.  Moreover,  the system  can help to ensure  
incentive  compatibility  between  processor  and supplier. Since  the value of milk to the 
processor  is a function  of solids composition  it is logical  that suppliers  should  be paid 
directly  on the basis  of solids  also. Payment  for milk in this manner  should  help to align 
the objectives  of the milk supplier  and the processor  by focusing  both parties  on the 
value  of milk in terms  of solids  composition  rather  than volume.
117
From a processor  point of view, the MCP model was found to have an advantage  in 
reducing  variation  in the cost of milk per unit of final product. The MCP system  is 
product  yield focussed  so the price paid by the processor  should  reflect  accurately  the 
processed  value of that milk according  to solids  composition.
However,  it would be wrong  to suggest  that current  pricing  policies  of Irish dairies  are 
universally  inefficient  relative  to the MCP model. Performance  of the differential-based  
systems  of about half of the Irish dairies was very good in rewarding  composition  
according  to product  yield. However,  for about one quarter  of the dairies  there were  
important  deficiencies  in terms of rewarding  improvements  in milk solids composition.  
The main reason  for this was the inclusion  of a positive  constant  in the milk pricing  
formula. In some cases this constant  was over 30 percent  of the milk price. The 
inclusion  of a positive  constant  reduces  the responsiveness  of the pricing  system  to 
changes  in composition,  as price differentials  for milk components  are therefore  lower.  
For dairies  with a constant  of below  5 percent  of the milk price, efficiency  in rewarding  
milk composition  was generally  much better  but the concept  of a negative  constant  to 
reflect  the cost of handling  volume  (water)  remains  an issue  that the Irish dairy industry  
must now consider.  A movement  in this direction  would  bring milk payment  schemes  of 
Irish processors  into line with their key competitors  and would provide  the basis for a 
pricing  formula  that accurately  reflects  the true value of milk to the processor.  
Nevertheless,  modification  of current differential-based  systems  may not be the 
complete  solution  to the challenges  facing the industry  into the future. The pricing  
system  may have to change  further  if it is to accurately  reward  producers,  convey  the 
right market  information  to producers  and be equitable  amongst  producers.  To best fulfil 
these criteria  it seems  difficult  to avoid  the conclusion  that a MCP system  based  on the 
individual  component  value of the constituents  consigned  must be adopted.
References
Bangstra,  B.A., Berger,  P.J,, Freeman,  A.E., Deiter, R.E. and La Grange,  W.S. (1988).  
Economic  value of milk components  for fluid milk, cheese,  butter, and nonfat  dry milk 
and response  to selection.  Journal of Dairy  Science,  71: 1 ;^89-1 798.
Bates, S.A.E. (1998). Issues arising  from the milk pricing mechanisms  of the New 
Zealand  dairy sector. Farm  Management,  10 (2, Summer):  55-62.
Breen, J.P. (2001). A new direction  for the payment  of milk: technological  and  
seasonality  considerations  in multiple  component  pricing  of milk for a diversifying  dairy  
industry. M.Agr.Sc  Thesis, Department  of Agribusiness,  Extension  and Rural  
Development,  University  College  Dublin.
Brog, R. (1969). Quantitative  analysis  of seven  selected  milk-pricing  systems.  Journal  
of Dairy  Science,  52: 1485-1489.
Brog, R. (1970). Economic  incentives  for cheese  processors  using a protein-fat  milk 
pricing  system. Journal of Dairy  Science,  54: 1006-1013.
Caskie, P. (1992). Effects of recent changes  in the Northern  Ireland MMB milk 
compositional  payments  scheme.  Proceedings  of the Agricultural Economics  Society  of 
Ireland,  1992/93.  ,pp.42-59.
IDF (1979). Memorandum  on milk composition  payment  schemes,  C. Doc. 7. Brussels:  
International  Dairy Federation.
Emmons,  D.B., Tulloch,  D, and Ernstrom,  C.A. (1990a).  Product  -yield pricing  system:
1. Technological  considerations  in multiple  component  pricing  of milk. Journal of Dairy  
Science,  73: 1712-1723.
118
Emmons,  D.B.. Tulloch,  D., Ernstrom,  C.A., Morisset,  M. and Barbano,  D. {1990b).  
Product  - yield pricing  system:  2. Plant considerations  in multiple  component  pricing  of 
milk. Journal of Dairy  Science,  73. 1724-1733.
Garrick,  D.J. and Lopez-Villalobos,  N. (1999). Potential  for economic  benefits  to the 
producer  from altering  the composition  of milk. Invited  paper  at a Meeting  of the British  
Society  of Animal  Science,  Belfast,  16-17  September,  1999.
Hillers, J.K., Nielsen,  V.H., Freeman,  A.E., Dommerholt,  J, and Deiter, R.E. (1980).  
Value  of fat and protein  in producer  milk price. Journal of Dairy  Science,  63; 322-327.  
Keane, M. (1989, December).  Component  pricing  of milk: principles  and practice.  
Agribusiness  Discussion  Paper No. 8, Department  of Food Economics,  University  
College  Cork.
Keane,  M. (2000,  August). Milk payment  issues:  payment  schemes  and transparency  
in statements.  Discussion  Paper, Department  of Food Economics,  University  College  
Cork.
Ladd, G.W. and Dunn, J.R. (1979). Estimating  value of milk components  to a dairy  
manufacturer.  Journal of Dairy Science,  62: 1705-1712.
Rea, J. (2001). September  Milk Price League. Irish Farmers ’ Journal,  53, No. 47 
(November  24), p.20.
119
How I intend  to grow  my beef enterprise  - a farmers  perspective
Michael  Doran
Johnstown,  Duncormick,  Co. Wexford
Introduction
Beef farming  has seen many changes  over the past 10 years. The introduction  of 
suckler quotas has seen suckler cow numbers  double. However,  according  to 
Department  of Agriculture  statistics,  the overall  quality  of beef being produced  in Ireland  
is disimproving.  What can be done to reverse  this trend, or how can quality beef 
producers  access  niche markets  and better  prices  for their stock? The future  of the beef 
industry  in Ireland  has to lie in co-operation  and partnership  from the farm gate, through  
the factory, onto the supermarket  shelf and finally into the shopping  basket  of the 
Consumer.
For a vibrant  and sustainable  beef industry  the co-operation  between  the retailer  and the 
consumer  must allow the beef producer  to obtain a respectable  Income and so 
encourage  a continuous  injection  of fresh young blood - a good recipe for a healthy  
industry.
This paper  outlines  the farm development  plan of the author.
Farm Details
Hectares  owned 84.0
Hectares  leased 11.5
Total 95.5
ha ha
Grass 66.5 Tillage 29
Grazing 51.5 Winter  Wheat 4
Silage  (1 cut) 15.0 Spring  Wheat 7
Spring  Barley 12
Set-a-side 2
Maize 4
Education
On completion  of the Leaving  Certificate  a year was spent in Rockwell  Agricultural  
College,  the foundation  for a career  in agriculture.  A FAS welding  course,  to improve  
basic welding  skills, followed  this in 1996. Since completing  this course,  a lot of time 
has been spent improving  efficiency  on the farm. The Teagasc  Advanced  Certificate  in 
Drystock  Management  was completed  in 2000. This focused  on the production  of 
quality  beef and on the performance  and profitability  of the enterprises.  A profit monitor  
was completed  for the first time while participating.  As part of this exercise,  a beef study  
tour to Belgium  and France  was included  with a second  trip to Spain  the following  year. 
On completion  of the certificate  a discussion  group  was formed,  which is proving  to be 
very successful.  The discussion  group  has been named  the “U3 Wanderers ” - with the 
goal of trying  to produce  a U3 carcass.
120
As a young  person  why choose  a career in agriculture?
You are your own boss - you decide  when and how to do a job 
It provides  you with freedom  - no commuting,  no traffic  
New challenges  appear  - you decide  how best to tackle  them  
Fresh blood - new entrants  have different  ideas and ways of doing a job 
Rewarding
Suckler  Herd
The beef enterprise  is based  on 80 suckler  cows, 20 of which are autumn  calving.  This 
has been increased  from 45 cows  five years  ago. The breed  of cow has also changed 
from the traditional  black whitehead  to mainly  1/2 and fl bred Limousin  cows. A small  
number  of Blonde  cows have also been tried, however,  the majority  are too narrow  and 
have led to calving  difficulties.
The aim is to use a Simmental  bull (purchased  at 3 years  old) to breed  all replacements.  
At present  the Simmental  is running  with 16, 1/2 and 1/2 bred Limousin  cows. It is hoped  
that this breed  will bring extra milk, growth,  size and most Importantly  wider  pelvic  bones  
to allow ease of calving.
The spring  calving  cows are mostly  In calf to a Charolais  bull purchased  in 2001. The 
autumn  calvers  (which  calve outdoors)  and the in-calf  heifers  are in calf to the Limousin  
bull for ease of calving. Hopefully  the Charolais  bull will bring increased  weight  to 
carcases  at slaughter. Table 1 outlines  the breeding  values of the Charolais  and 
Limousin  stock bulls.
Table 1. Stock  bull breeding  values
CharolaisBLUP  Figures
Limousin
Muscle 118 117
Skeletal 101 107
Functionality 111 81
Reliability  (%) 31 45
Beef Merit (Tully) 123
Beef finishing
Heifers  are finished  at 20 to 21 months  of age for a local butcher,  or for Pettits  
supermarkets.  Bullocks  are finished  at 28 to 29 months  of age so as to maximise  the 
carcase  weight  of the fl bred or greater,  continental  carcases.  Animals  are left to grow 
as long as possible  before  finishing.  As the farm is operating  at a physical  stocking  rate 
of 2.8 L.U.^a,  extensification  is not a runner. Allowing  animals  to remain  on the farm 
longer  also avoids  the need to purchase  extra  store cattle  to replace  the beef cattle  and 
so avoids  the risks involved  with price fluctuations  and the high cost of store cattle.  
Prior to November  2000 when age was not an issue, all animals  were pushed  as close  
to a 400 kg carcase  as possible,  for which  a premium  of 2p/lb was paid. However,  now 
it is the age of an animal  that determines  the date of sale - surely  not a true means  of 
determining  the finish or quality  of a carcase? In the past 12 months  the average 
carcase  weight  was 344 and the percentage  that graded  LI3 or 4L and R3 and 4L was 
88 .
121
Developments
Since  starting  to farm in 1994, a major  development  programme  has been undertaken.  
Slatted  accommodation  for 85 beef cattle and a slatted  cubicle  house  for cows were 
built. This also included  a feed passage  for weanlings.  However,  the purchase  of a 
computer  and a Kingswood  Herd Package  in 1997 was probably  the best investment  on 
the farm. This allowed  fhe herd register  to be automatically  updated  and ensured  that 
all cattle  were entered  for the 10 and 22-month  premium  at 0.6 of a LU, which allowed  
for extra premiums  to be claimed  in the calendar  year. This in turn permitted  for extra  
weanlings  to be purchased  annually  and so pushed  output  up further.
With the increase  in stock numbers,  a post driver was made in 1999 and paddock  
fencing  for all animals  was installed  to allow  for rotational  grazing.  This has ensured  the 
continuous  supply  of good quality  grass  all year round,  which increases  performance  at 
grass. Control  of stock is also easier,  which is very important  nowadays  as labour  on 
farms  is at a minimum.  Paddocks  also allow action  to be taken  earlier  if grass  supply  is 
running  ahead  or below  demand.
To help maintain  the improvement  in cattle performance  throughout  the winter, and to 
allow for an increased  use of homegrown  feed, a diet feeder  was purchased  in March  
2002. Prior to 2002, homegrown  barley  was the cereal fed on the farm. This was 
ground  through  a small hammer  mill on the farm. However,  the labour  involved  in filling  
the mill, grinding  and then bagging  out the meal takes time, and leaves  for very dusty  
working  conditions.  In 2001, 20 tonnes  of alkalage  was tried as an alternative  feed with 
good results. In 2002, with the poorer  first cut silage  quality  and maize,  which  will have 
a lower  starch  content  than normal,  it was felt that alkalage  would  only increase  the fibre 
content  of the diet, which is already  high. Instead,  70 tonnes  of grain was crimped;  45 
tonnes  of which  was winter  wheat  and 25 tonnes  was spring  barley.
Grass  silage,  maize  and crimped  grain will form the diet for weanlings,  store cattle and 
finishing  beef cattle during  the winter  of 2002 .
At present,  a straw-bedded  shed for 40 cattle is being constructed,  to allow the beef 
cattle on slats to be finished  on sfraw. It will also allow  the shed to be used for cows at 
calving.
Grassland
Over the last 10 years, 30 ha have been reseeded.  An additional  5 ha was reseeded  
after  the 2002 harvest.  After  seeing  and hearing  of good results  during  discussion  group  
visits  to other  farms,  a Sinclair  Magill grass seed mix was used. The aim over the next 
five years will be to re-seed  a further  20 ha. The method  of reseeding  used is to grow  
three crops of corn and then reseed  post harvest. This gives very good yields of corn 
and allows  extra wheat  to be grown. Another  very important  aspect  to this approach  is 
that it allows  weeds  to be controlled,  the biggest  problem  being docks.
Profit  Monitor
Completion  of the Teagasc  Drystock  Profit Monitor  helps to focus on costs and the 
direction  the farm is heading.  Having  completed  the profit monitor  for four years  further 
financial  targets  can be set. Table  2 shows  a summary  of both the 1999  and 2001 profit  
monitors  for the beef enterprise  on the farm. It also compares  the 2001 analysis  with an 
analysis  of 10 beef farms in the South East collected  by Teagasc  for the year 2001.
122
Table  2 Beef profit monitor  per hectare  analysis
M. Doran
1999M. Doran
2001Teagasc  10 Farm  
Average  2001
Output  kg/ha 687 738 658
Output  excl. premia 938 977 793
Output  incl. premia 1318 1542 1463
Variable  costs 461 548 481
Gross  Margin  incl. premia 857 994 982
Fixed costs 555 497 503
Total costs 1016 1045 983
Net profit €302 €497 €479
Compared  to the 1999 analysis  and the 10-farm  average,  the output  of beef produced  
per ha was higher  in 2001. This is reflected  in the higher  output  (incl. premia)  in terms 
of €/ha. Variable  costs per ha have risen since 1999 but the higher  output,  due in part 
to increased  costs, off sets this to give a higher  gross margin  per ha in 2001. The 
variable  costs have also risen due to an increase  in prices of most farm inputs  since  
1999.
Fixed costs have fallen since 1999 and compare  favorably  to the 10-farm  average.  
Overall  the beef enterprise  profit per ha has risen since 1999. A large part of this is due 
to increased  premia  per ha. This is a reflection  of the industry,  with an increasing  
proportion  of profit coming  from direct  payments.
The aim now is to try and increase  the amount  of subsidy  retained  as profit  to 100%. To 
achieve  this, it is hoped  to increase  output  by a further  25 kg/ha, and reduce  variable 
costs by €35/ha  (targeting  vetinerary  and fertiliser  costs). Fixed costs also have room  
to be reduced,  especially  depreciation  as capital  investment  in expensive  buildings  is on 
the decrease.
Future  developments
Tillage
It is planned  to reduce  the area under tillage. Instead,  sheep numbers  are to be 
increased  to 150 ewes. The sheep  form an important  part of the overall  production  from 
the farm. Sheep  can graze after the cattle without  affecting  the performance  of either.  
Sheep  can also be out-wintered  for part of the winter  on stubbles  and so no additional 
housing  is required.  The increased  sheep  numbers  should  help increase  profitability.
Suckler  cows
Suckler  cow numbers  are also to increase  to 100. It is hoped  to calve  one third of these 
in the autumn  (to ease management)  and allow a year round  supply  of beef to be sold. 
This is very important  if we are to maintain  any share  of the European  beef market. It 
will eliminate  purchasing  extra  weanlings  and the disease  risks associated  with them. At 
present,  the cost of the better  quality  weanlings  also makes  it impossible  to purchase  
such an animal. It is also hoped  to improve  the quality  of the suckler  cows by breeding  
all of the replacements  on the farm. Cows  of an 'R' grade  should  also help increase  the 
chances  of producing  a U' grade  carcase.
123
A.I.
A.I. could also play an important  role in the improvement  of the quality of cattle  
produced.  However,  currently  the success  rate and the lack of a synchronization  and 
A.I. program  by A.I. stations  limits its use. If synchronization  and A.I. programmes  were  
to be provided  at a realistic  fee for the top quality  A.I. bulls in the country,  a huge  
improvement  in A.I. usage  would be seen. Subsequently  the quality  of beef produced  
could be improved.
Mid term review
Any good business  has need of a 5 to 10 year plan - ‘if you fail to plan you plan to fail'. 
Under Agenda  2000 the E.U. commission  for agriculture  entered into a 6-year  
agreement.  This was the foundation  for planning  in agriculture.  At the moment  it is very 
difficult  to proceed  with development  plans with such uncertainty.  However,  if the 
present  reform proposals  were to form a discussion  document  for the industry  to 
address  where  EU.agricultural  policy is to go post 2006, I would agree to look at the 
proposals.  If however,  the commission  is to break an agreement  already  in place mid 
term, then how can the commission  be trusted to introduce  another long-term  
agreement?  We have seen no study  of the consequences  of such a proposal.  My belief  
is that the quality  of beef being produced  will disimprove  under  the proposals,  as the 
number  of suckler  cows  will likely reduce,  as the cost of carrying  such animals  could not 
be justified.
Conclusions
Beef farming has a lot of potential,  especially  the development  of partnership  
arrangements  with factories  for farmers  producing  quality  beef suitable  for the European  
market. This market  is returning  some of the top prices  for beef on the world market.  
The only way for Ireland  to compete  on the world market  for beef is to target these  
markets. The limits in our scale and the costs of production,  combined  with 
environmental  and animal  welfare  regulations,  mean we will never  be able compete  on 
the world market  alone.
We need to maximize  the percentage  of our animals  suitable  for the EU market. I hope  
to do so with a fully enclosed  herd, with all animals ’ slaughtered  from the farm on which  
they were born. Improvements  in breeding  take time, however,  the rewards  when  
reached  are worth  the effort it takes,  and a lot of pride can be taken  from the fact that I 
had an input into them. Too much focus is being placed  on claiming  subsidies  and not 
enough  on the production  of quality  beef today in Ireland. If we as farmers  focus on 
what we do Inside the farm gate we can see an immediate  improvement  in the 
percentage  of our animals  that can access  these  top priced EU markets  and hopefully  
this will result In an improvement  in our profitability.
124
Outwintering  Pads as an accommodation  System  for beef cattle
Padraig  French  and Marie  Clare Hickey  
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath
Introduction
During  the last two years, outwintering  pads (OWP's)  have been evaluated  as a beef 
cattle  accommodation  system  at Grange  Research  Centre. The results  to date indicate  
that relative  to traditional  slatted floor accommodation,  OWP's  can have a positive  
impact on some animal productivity  indices. However  the system produces  large  
volumes  of effluent  with a high pollution  potential,  which must be properly  managed  to 
achieve  environmental  sustainability.
Construction  of an OWP
The OWP is constructed  by placing  a layer  of woodchips  on top of an artificially  drained  
surface,  which is lined underneath  to prevent  downward  movement  of effluent  into the 
groundwater.  Compacted  clay has been used successfully  as a liner at Grange  for two 
years. This was done by removing  approximately  0.6 m of subsoil  and replacing  it in 0.2 
m layers,  and compacting  each layer using a 20-ton  track digger. However,  the soil type 
at Grange  is a clay loam with a high (60-70%)  clay and silt content.  This facilitated  the 
construction  of the impermeable  barrier. However,  in other circumstances  an artificial  
liner may be necessary.  By placing  the liner beneath  30 cm of subsoil,  between  two 
layers  of sand or geotextiles,  it will be protected  from possible  damage.  On top of the 
liner the subsoil  was ridged  with ridges  being 3.5 m apart and 0.2 m high. Along the 
trough  between  each ridge a slotted  80 mm ducting  pipe was placed  beneath  200 kg 
/m^ of round stone (approx.  5 cm in diameter).  The stone was covered  with 50 kg of 
woodchips  /m2, which was a mixture  of timber  and bark, known  in the sawmills  as butt 
reduced  chip or post plant chips.
Animal  performance
The first experiment  to evaluate  the OWP ’s as a full time accommodation  system  for 
finishing  continental  x Friesian  steers  was carried  out during  the winter  of 2000/2001.  
One hundred  and twenty  six cattle  were  assigned  to one of seven  treatment  groups:  one 
group  was kept indoors  on a slatted  floor shed at 3 m^ space  allowance  per animal.  The 
other six groups were accommodated  outdoors  on OWP's and allowed  a space  
allowance  of 6, 12 or 18 m^/head.  Shelter  was provided  for 3 of the outdoor  groups  
using a 2 m high nation  windbreaker.  The other three groups  had no shelter  on what 
was an exposed  site, during  a winter  that was both wetter  and colder  than normal. All 
animals  were offered  silage  ad-libitum  and were supplemented  with 5 kg concentrates 
per head daily. The experiment  extended  from November  4 to April 4, after which all 
animals  were slaughtered  and carcass  data obtained.
Animal  performance  results  are shown  in Table 1. There was no significant  effect of 
stocking  density  or provision  of shelter  on growth  rate, carcass  traits or feed efficiency  
among  the animals  on the OWP. Cattle accommodated  on the OWP ’s had higher  
liveweight  and carcass  gains,  and better  feed conversion  efficiency  and lower  fat scores  
than those in a slatted  floor shed. During  the winter  of 2001/2002  selected  treatments
125
from the above experiment  were repeated  in a second experiment.  The relative  
advantage  in animal  growth  rate and feed efficiency  on the OWP  was confirmed.
Animal  welfare
Measures  of climatic  conditions  and animal behaviour,  immune  function,  cleanliness,  
hair length  and hoof condition  were conducted  to determine  if outwintering  compromised  
the well being of animals.  When  indoor  and outdoor  environments  were compared  over 
the experimental  period  the ambient  air temperature  was lower  outside  (3.5 versus  5.0 
°C), while relative  humidity  was higher  indoors  (90.6 versus  86.0 %). Wind speed  was 
reduced  by the provision  of shelter  and daily rainfall averaged  2.2 mm during the 
experimental  period,  with a recorded  minimum  and maximum  daily  fall of 0 and 28.4 mm 
respectively.  The climatic  energy  demand  (CED) refers  to the amount  of heat energy  
required  to sustain  normal  body  temperature.  There  was no measurable  effect  of shelter  
on the CED of animals  outwintered.  The CED for animals  outdoors  was higher  than for 
animals  accommodated  indoors  on slats (70.3, 71.1 or 59.2 W/m^ for animals  on 
sheltered  OWP ’s, exposed  OWP's  or indoors  on slats respectively).  On no occasion  
during  the winter  did the CED exceed  the calculated  heat of production  (internal  heat 
energy  released  from the digestion  of feed) for any group  of animals.  This would  imply  
that the animal  out-wintered  did not use feed solely  to maintain  body temperature.  
Among  cattle on OWP's  there was no effect of shelter  on mean hair length, however  
housed  animals  had a shorter  mean hair length than those accommodated  outdoors  
(1.11 versus  1.36 cm). There  was no effect  of outdoor  shelter  at any space  allowance  
on animal cleanliness.  Each incremental  decrease  in space allowance  on OWP's  
increased  the recorded  mean  dirt score  over the experimental  period  (3.9, 3.3, and 2.7 
for 6, 12 18 m2/head  outdoors  and 2.8 indoors  respectively).  There was no effect of 
space  allowance,  shelter  or housing  on time spent lying and eating,  blood cell profiles  
or on the measured  indices  of immune  function. There was no significant  effect of 
shelter,  space allowance  or housing  on the development  of interdigital  dermatitis  or 
cracks  on animal  hooves. Indoor  animals  were more susceptible  to white line disease  
of the lateral  front  claw and had a greater  severity  of under-run  on front and hind hooves.  
At the lowest  stocking  density  on the OWP ’s, a layer of faecal  material  gathered  behind  
the feed face and was associated  with the infrequent  removal  of surface  wood chips.  
Animals  confined  on 18 m^/head  therefore  had greater  incidence  of medial  and lateral  
claw erosion  on the hind hoof, as their feet were submerged  in this material  around  
feeding  time. If clean underfoot  areas  were maintained  by more regular  removal  of the 
faecal layer this condition  should  be minimised.  Therefore  there was no physiological  
or behavioural  evidence  to suggest  that the animals  used required  an artificial  shelter  
belt outdoors  or that animals  were distressed  by out-wintering,  though  transient  acute  
stresses  were not evaluated. Animal behaviour  studies showed no effect of 
accommodation  environment  on aggression.  The animals  accommodated  indoors  had 
a lower number  of lying bouts, which has previously  been associated  with animal  
discomfort  or unease  with underfoot  conditions.  This was supported  by a greater  
number  of lying hesitations  amongst  animals  accommodated  on the slats rather  than on 
the OWP, again indicative  of an animals  nervousness  and fear of slipping  or hurting  
themselves  while attempting  to lie down. The under-foot  conditions  provided  by OWP's  
therefore  allowed  the animals  more security  during  the standing/lying  actions.
126
Autumn  calving  sucklers
During the winter of 2001/2002,  the Grange  autumn calving herd, composed  of 
Charolais  X Limousin  cows,  with Belgian  Blue crossed  calves,  were assigned  to one of 
two housing  systems.  Half of the cows were accommodated  indoors  in a slatted  floor 
shed with the calves  having  access  to a straw-bedded  creep  area. The other  half of the 
cows were accommodated  outdoors  on the OWP at a stocking  rate of 22 m^/cow  and 
calf, with the calves  having  access  to a sheltered  creep  area. The cows  were  fed silage 
ad-libitum  and 2 kg concentrate  and the calves  were offered  creep concentrates  ad- 
libitum.
The reproductive  performance,  feed intake  and growth  rates of the cows  and calves  are 
shown  in Table  2. The cows  and calves  on the OWP's  had marginally  higher  feed intake  
and similar  liveweight  gain to their counterparts  in the slatted  floor sheds. However,  
after  turnout  to grass  the calves  that were outwintered  had higher  growth  rates  than their 
housed  counterparts.  The cows  on the OWP  had a shorter  calving  to conception  interval  
and a higher  proportion  were returned  in-calf  than for the cows accommodated  indoors.  
This difference  was mainly  due to low submission  rates indoors  because  of significantly 
reduced  reproductive  behavioral  activity.
Managing  the OWP
The OWP surfaces  were inspected  daily to quantify  surface  cleanliness,  and were  
scored  for the proportion  of clean and dirty areas. If there was less than 2.2 m^ of dry 
clean lying area available  per animal  then the OWP was cleaned  off. During  cleaning,  
the top 10 cm approximately  of wood chips were removed  with a fork loader  and the 
OWP was replenished  with clean chips. During  the experimental  period  of 2000/2001  
the space  allowance  treatments  of 6, 12 and 18 m^/head  required  cleaning  on 11, 52 
and 110 day intervals,  respectively.  All the experiments  to date have used the OWP  as 
a complete  accommodation  system  where  the animals  were fed and all the nutrients  
collected  on the OWP. However,  in practice  many  farmers  have existing  facilities  where 
animals  can be fed off the pad such as a slatted  floor shed or self-feeding  at a silage  pit. 
This will reduce  the nutrient  load on the OWP and the area required  per animal.  
Typically  these systems  are stocked  at 10-12 m^ /animal  without  any requirement  for 
cleaning  during  the winter.
Conclusion
The main objective  of this experiment  was to identify  any negative  effect  of outwintering 
animals  on OWP's  on animal  performance  and welfare. The animals  accommodated 
indoors  performed  as anticipated,  however  the outwintered  animals'  grew  faster  and had 
leaner  carcasses  and consumed  less energy  per kg carcass  growth  under  the prevailing  
test. The provision  of wind shelter  or increased  space allowance  on OWP's  had no 
significant  advantage  for animal  growth  or energy  efficiency.  There  was no physiological  
or behavioural  evidence  to suggest  that this type of animal required  wind shelter 
outdoors  or that out-wintering  distressed  animals. Transient  acute stresses  were not 
evaluated.  The under foot conditions  provided  on OWP ’s allow the animals  more  
security  during  the standing/lying  mechanism.  Increasing  the stocking  density  on the 
OWP's  increased  the frequency  of cleaning  the surface  area and the dirtiness  of the 
animals.  Relative  to indoor  slatted  accommodation,  animals  accommodated  on OWP ’s 
had a lower severity  of hoof under-run  and white line disease. Further  studies  are
127
required  to determine  the reason  for the increased  carcass  growth  and leanness  of the 
cattle  on the OWP ’s. This is a preliminary  report  and research  is still on-going.  A definite  
specification  for the construction  of an OWP  will need to be drafted  in association  with 
the EPAand  the Department  of Agriculture.
uoo$
■o0)
&c
'5 w
o ^ 
£2 o
00c 
w
O) 2I-
■is
-o
*0 - 
>^2 S O 
0 > 
.y ro 
0 2
0 a ^ 0
~C. ^
OJ D 
W O o £
.« 5 
S o
^ c-
0 '5
■5 ^ 
0
P 0
0 "O
0' .£ o ^c y0 Q 
E «I I
0 ^
. 01- Q.
0 -CS3
.2 E> t * - «
CO * 6 ^ ^O
CO„cococococococo
CO
oCO CO CO CO CO CO COz z z z z z z
CO CO CO CO CO CO COz z z z z z z
■ r C \ J C O O U -n
<'>cn<Mc30Csjo ‘^
T- CD ^ CO 
CO CD ® ai CO
O) CD COo
CO CJ CO
S CD D' O® 5N TO CD O
CCJ TOCO
CO o oCD CO ^ CO
CO
CD COTO C\j CO
^ 23 CO..t TO
TO CM CO
CD CD D' 'O' TO CO CDCD 
CM
CO CO TO CM CO
CO - ° iS:
^ ~ c^
o 05O IT) ^ ^ COO h- C\J (£)
CD ^ CO
T- CO CVJ
CD CJ) O) COP C\j ® CO T- CO CM cn
CD ^ 
CD COCD CO9 irj^ COCO CO 
cvi '•O
CO
>.0-o
0
CJ0
Q.
CO>>0•o
c'0O)0O ^ 
0 CD 
O ^ 
O) CD
0
CD
.5^ (/) 0 0000
OL.0O
Oco
'tro
Q_OO
O2
DO
030
0>
Oo■QCCD
C03Ox:
oo
■Oc
0
CLCD 
C
’c 0 0 $ 
O := 
c C 
O 3 
0 0 
<!> ^ > 2 0 CD“ o
£ S
■O c
§ 3 
0 »-
8 « 
»- 0 
O O
ij 0
S §
CD £ 
> Cl0 4-O C
C SE O’ 3 0 02 -Q0 3
0 C O 03
0 oi —
t "CJ 0
0 0
.im
C C 
< ~
0 i=
^ 0m ^ ^ S ^ OK g CO o o TO^ ^ o ^ CO CM
CM S CD §j ^
<D O CO ^ CMr- O1- O
CO CO
CD ^ ^ 0 
‘O
0 ' 
C C 
'o_ ^g- CD
2 £ O O) 
(1)
53 $C 0
■0 0o o0
0
00■o
O)
cg
8 0 
C V 8-^  
2 §
E o^ S’ 0 2 O 0-c -c .b
05's’ S' 
Q) ^ .2^
§ I I I I I
5 = 5 = $ 
CO « o000CO
128
Important  factors  in suckler  beef production  and influence  of 
calving  season  on income
Michael  Drennan
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre.  Dunsany.  Co. Meath.
Introduction
Suckler  beef production  is of major importance  in Ireland  with the cow herd of 1.13 
million  accounting  for 48% of the total cow herd. Incomes  from suckling  are low with 
cattle  premiums  making  a major  contribution.  Assuming  a continuation  of EU funding  in 
a modified  form oriented  towards  more extensive  production  the more important  factors  
influencing  economic  returns  in future  years  are (a) disease/health,  (b) beef quality  and 
(c) production  costs.
Disease/Health
Bovine  Viral Diarrhoea  (BVD) and Johne's  disease  are increasingly  becoming  major  
problems  in suckler  and dairy herds, and are the result of cattle importations.  In the 
absence  of national  eradication  programmes,  producers  should  aim to have their herds  
free of these diseases.  Respiratory  disease  (caused  mainly  by IBR, PI3 and RSV) is 
also a major  problem.  All of these  diseases  are likely to cause  more problems  in Ireland  
than elsewhere  because  of the very high level of cattle  trading. In addition  to testing  and 
possibly  vaccination  programmes,  clearly  defined  animal  management  programme  are 
necessary  to ensure  effective  control.
BVD
Possible  outcomes  of infection  include  abortion,  stillbirth,  foetal malformation,  weak or 
apparently  healthy  offspring.  The main source  of infection  is Persistently  Infected  (PI) 
animals  that excrete  large amounts  of infection  throughout  their lives. PI animals  arise 
from infection  before  100 days of pregnancy  when  the foetus  cannot  recognise  the virus 
as foreign  and therefore  does not eliminate  it. These PI animals  have the virus but 
develop  no antibodies  to the virus, and eventually  develop  mucosal  disease  (lesions  of 
the gastro-intestinal  tract and lymphoid  tissues)  and die. The severity  of the disease  in 
animals  infected  after birth varies but mortality  can be high. The disease  can be 
controlled  by avoiding  exposure  to infection  (caused  mainly  by Pi animals  which  may be 
recognised  due to intermittent  scouring,  poor health  and poor performance)  during  the 
first 3 months  of pregnancy.  Tests are available  and could be used to identify  PI 
animals.  When  eradicating  the disease,  suspect  PI animals  should  be isolated  from the 
main herd while awaiting  test results. When diagnosed,  PI animals  should be 
immediately  removed  from the herd. If a herd is free from the disease  serious  
consideration  should  be given to providing  replacements  from within the herd or from 
herds known  to be free.
Johne ’s Disease
Most cattle  are infected  with this bacterial  disease  early in life (usually  in the first month)  
through  milk or feed contaminated  with faeces.  Animals  generally  do not show signs of 
the disease  until 2 to 6 years of age when the number  of bacteria  excreted  rises 
dramatically.  At this stage symptoms  include  watery  diarrhoea,  rapid loss in body 
condition  and eventual  death. Sub-clinical  infection  results  in higher  rates of mastitis,
129
longer  calving  intervals  and infertility. If the herd is free of Johne ’s, then preferably  
provide  all replacements  from within the herd and any purchased  animals  should  be 
kept clear of the cow herd and replacements.  If the herd has the disease  then if 
possible,  replacements  should  be purchased  from a herd (or herds)  considered  free of 
Johne's.  These  should  be managed  separately  from the main herd for at least the first 
six months  of life. In the meantime  slurry control in addition  to animal isolation  is 
necessary.  Tests  for diagnoses  of the disease  have limitations.  Further  details  can be 
obtained  in a document  produced  recently  by the Department  of Agriculture  and Food.
Respiratory  Disease
Bovine  respiratory  disease  is an important  cause  of morbidity  and mortality,  particularly  
in suckled  calves  following  weaning.  Fewer  cases  of respiratory  disease  are recorded  
in home-reared  than purchased  animals. This is due to less exposure  to the various  
organisms  causing  the disease,  which arises due to mixing of animals  from different  
sources  and the additional  stress associated  with marketing.  The organisms  mainly  
responsible  include  Respiratory  Syncytial  Virus (RSV),  Infectious  Bovine  Rhinotracheitis  
(IBR) and Para-influenza  3 (PI 3). Vaccines  are available  and where  a problem  exists  
a control  programme  should  be planned  with your Veterinary  Surgeon.
Beef Quality
Beef carcass  quality  is important  because  of its effect on price. In this context  good  
quality carcasses  are those of good conformation  that are lean. In addition  to the 
various  cattle premiums  the main source  of income  from suckling  is the calf crop. It is 
therefore  important  that the animals  (or carcasses)  produced  from the suckler  herd are 
eligible  for the highest  priced markets  available.  The highest  priced markets  are in 
mainland  EU, for example  France where in 2001 steer carcasses  grading U3 for 
conformation  were priced at 96c/kg (320 v 224) more than 03 grade (Table 1). The 
corresponding  price difference  for bulls in Italy was 64c/kg  (279 v 215). In fact the price 
difference  between  03 and U3 was even greater  for heifers  in these two countries  
resulting  in a greater  price difference  per animal  than with steers and bulls despite  a 
lower carcass  weight. Therefore  with almost  90% of our beef exported  an increasing  
proportion  of which  is going  to the continental  EU market  it is important  that the animals  
produced  from the suckler  herd are suitable  for the highest  prices  in these  markets.
Table 1. Effect  of carcass  conformation  score  on beef prices  (c/kg)
Steers Grade Ireland N. Ireland UK France Italy Spain Netherlands
(Bulls) U3 239 272 276 320 (279) (249) (208)
R3 231 262 268 289 (255) (235) (186)
03 224 246 253 224 (215) (223) (190)
Fleifers U3 - - - 361 347 271 -
R3 233 263 266 300 321 266 153
03 226 247 243 214 196 242 148
Source:  Bord Bia for the year 2001
Breed is the main factor influencing  conformation  and leanness  and as continental  
breeds  are superior  for these  traits the breeding  programme  must be based on these  
breeds.
130
There  is considerable  variation  in muscularity  between  individual  bulls within  all breeds.  
At Grange,  young continental  cross-suckled  bulls have been used to study the 
relationship  between  live animal  muscularity  scores  (in addition  to ultrasound  scanning  
of the eye muscle)  and subsequent  carcass  traits. Good correlations  were obtained  
between  muscular  scores  at weaning  and before  slaughter  with carcass  conformation,  
meat percent  and killing-out  rate (Table 2). Therefore,  because  the heritability  for 
muscularity  is high, breeding  bulls that are superior  for this trait can be selected  at an 
early age.
Table 2. *Correlations  between  muscular  scores  at weaning  and at slaughter  with 
carcass  conformation,  meat percent  and killing-out  rate
Carcass
ConformationMeat Percent Killing-out  Rate
Time of scoring  
CorrelationWeaning Slaughter  
0.72 0.82Weaning
0.57Slaughter
0.65Weaning
0.66Slaughter
0.72
*The closer  to 1 the better  the correlation
Cost of Production
As incomes  are low, beef farmers  have always  been aware  of the need to keep costs  to 
a minimum. However,  there are always opportunities  for further cost reductions  
particularly  where EU payments  are associated  with more extensive  production.  
Examples  of possible  cost reductions  include:
• retaining  animals  to slaughter  reduces  trading  costs and incidence  of disease:
• improving  overall performance  resulting  in early disposal  reduces  borrowing  for 
cattle and possibly  housing  requirements;
• more extensive  production  (to qualify  for premia)  results  in a shorter  winter and 
therefore  lower  feed costs and less reseeding.
Some  features  of beef production
Before  discussing  systems,  a brief outline  of the present  position  regarding  the breeds  
used in suckling,  the calving pattern and seasonality  of cattle slaughterings  is 
considered  useful.
Breeds  used  in suckling
A desirable  feature in suckling  is the increased  use of continental  breeds. Data 
compiled  by Irish Cattle Breeding  Federation  (ICBF)  show  that continental  sire breeds  
accounted  for 85% (Charolais  accounted  for 44%) of the 2001 calf crop from the suckler 
herd (Table  3). Twelve  percent  of sires were early maturing  breeds  leaving  a further  3% 
which  were mainly  other  continental  breeds.  The dam breeds  of the 2001 calf crop were  
about  65% continental  breeds  and crosses  and 35% early maturing  breed crosses.
131
Table  3. Sire breed  and cow breed in the suckler  herd
Breed  of sire Breed  of dam
Charolais 44 20
Simmental 9 17
Limousin 24 18
Hereford 6 22
Aberdeen  Angus 6 13
Belgian  Blue 8 4
Other 3 6
Total 100 100
Source:  ICBF 2001 
Seasonality  of calvings
Calving  in the suckler  and dairy herd Is predominantly  in spring  with 70% of calving  in 
the 4 months  February  to April and 84% in the first 6 months  of the year (Table 4). 
During  the remaining  6 months  of the year the highest  proportion  of calvings  in the 
suckler  herd is in July (4.1%)  with none of the remaining  5 months  exceeding  3% of the 
total.
Table  4. Seasonal  distribution  of calf births (%)
Herd Jan Feb Mar Apr May  June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec
Suckler 5.3 9.8 22.2 22.9 15.5 7.8 4.1 2.8 2.4 2.2 2.3 2.7
Dairy 10.0 25.5 25.0 15.2 8.4 3.8 1.8 1.3 2.2 2.5 2.4 2.0
Total 7.6 17.5 23.6 19.1 12.0 5.9 3.0 2.0 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.3
Source:  ICBF 2001 
Seasonality  of Slaughterings
For orderly  marketing,  a relatively  even supply  of beef throughout the year Is desirable.  
However,  in contrast  with most other EU countries,  beef production  in Ireland,  because  
it is based  on grazed  grass  has a more pronounced  seasonality  in production,  with most 
slaughterings  in Autumn.  This poor distribution  of slaughterings  throughout  the year is 
particularly  evident  for steers with less variation  in heifer and cow slaughterings.  
Averaged  over a 7 year period  (1995  to 2001) the monthly  steer slaughterings  at meat  
export  premises  (Figure  1) was 75,740  with peak slaughterings  in October  (105,000)  
and November  (102,000)  and lowest output In June (43,000)  July (49,000)  and 
December  (47,000). In contrast,  monthly  heifer slaughterings  over the same 7-year  
period  averaged  42,370  per month  with a peak of 51,000  in November  and a minimum  
of 36,000  in April. The average  monthly  figure for cows was 30,000  with a peak of 
35,000  in November  and a minimum  of 23,000  in April.
132
Figure  1, Mean monthly  slaughterings  (‘000) of steers,  heifers  and cows over a seven  
year period  (1995  to 2001)
Suckling  Systems
Calving  season  is often considered  to have an important  bearing  on incomes  and time 
of disposal  of the progeny  for slaughter.  Spring  (average  calving  date March 15) and 
autumn  (average  calving  date November  1) calving  are compared  based on Grange 
data from the spring  calving  herd using Limousin  x Friesian  and Simmental  x (Limousin  
X Friesian)  cows. Sires of the larger  continental  breeds  (Charolais)  are used on mature  
cows and easy calving Limousin  sires on heifers. The Grange  system has been  
operated  on permanent  pasture  and would  thus be similar  to most lowland  suckler  beef 
units in the country.
Progeny  are taken to slaughter,  and a high level of animal  performance  (Grange  spring  
calving  figures)  is assumed  for both the spring  and autumn  calving  systems.  Economic  
evaluations  are carried  out using both semi-intensive  and REPS (Rural Environment  
Protection  Scheme  - eligible  for the low level of extensification)  systems. Studies  at 
Grange  have shown  that with good management  and similar  concentrate  inputs  similar  
performance  levels can be expected  from the REPS and the semi-intensive  systems.  
Details  of the comparisons  are as follows:
REPS Semi-Intensive
Spring Autumn Spring Autumn
Calving March  15 November  1 March  15 November  1
Sale: Heifer  (20 mths) November June November June
Steers  (23 Mths) February October February October
''ha/cow  unit 1.08 1.08 0.81 0.81
Nitrogen/ha  (kg) 90 90 225 225
Silage  (tonne/cow  unit) 13.4 14.5 13.4 14.5
Cone, (kg/cow  unit) 710 770 660 720
■'Cow  and progeny  to slaughter  and replacements
Both silage  and concentrate  requirements  per cow unit are somewhat  higher  for autumn  
than for spring  calving. As the autumn  calving  cow is lactating  throughout  the winter,  
silage  quality  would be more critical. Spring  calving  cows are fed silage  only in winter
133
(except  for first calvers  which  receive  1.5 kg of concenfrates  after calving)  while  autumn  
calvers  received  2 kg of concentrates  daily during  the breeding  season  (total 190 kg). 
Standard  daily concentrate  feeding  levels  for fhe spring  calving  progeny  are:
weanlings  1 kg (1.33 kg for REPS  as average  silage  quality  is lower);  
finishing  heifers  (2 months)  3 kg and finishing  steers  4 kg.
Daily concentrate  feeding  levels  for the autumn  born progeny  are; 
suckled  calf in winter  1 kg;
yearlings  1 kg (or 1.33) and finishing  sfeers  (2 monfhs)  4 kg.
Target  weights  for fhe sysfems  are shown  in Tables  5 and 6. In all systems  carcass  
weights  of steers and heifers  are 395 and 310 kg respectively.  Carcass  prices are 
€2.52/kg  for steers  and heifers  sold in spring/summer  and €2.35/kg  for fhose  disposed  
of in autumn/early  winter. Cull cow prices are €l.85/kg.  In the REPS syste.-us  the 
stocking  rate was reduced  to 1.08 ha per cow unit to have them eligible  for the lower  
level of extensification.  Interest  is charged  on the cow (valued  at €635) and half the 
variable  costs. Total fixed (overheads  plus depreciation)  costs  are charged  at €244  per 
cow. The additional  premia from REPS and extensification  in the REPS systems  
amount  to €206  per cow. There  is no charge  for labour  included  in the calculations.
Table  5. Animal  weights  (kg) for spring  calving
Steers Heifers
Weaning 316 288
Yearling 404 373
20 Months 570. 565
23 Months 700 -
Carcass 395 310
Table  6. Animal  weighfs  (kg) for aufumn  calving
Steers Heifers
Spring;  5 months  old 210 200
Autumn:  yearling 410 390
Spring:  17 months 500 480
Slaughter 700 565
Carcass 395 310
Receipts  per ha were quite similar  for fhe spring  and aufumn  calving  systems  but due to 
higher  winter  feed requirements,  costs  were higher  for the autumn  calving  system  (Table  
7). As a result  income  per ha was €27 (736 v 709) greater  for the spring  calving  REPS  
system and €21 (642 v 621) greater  for the semi-intensive  system than for the 
corresponding  autumn  calving  system.  Although  stocking  rate and beef outpuf  was one- 
third higher  for the semi-intensive  system,  income  was greater  for the REPS system  
indicating  the importance  of the extra premiums  (REPS  and extensification)  to income.  
It is noticeable  that in the absence  of all premia,  incomes  per ha ranged  from €26 to 
€99. Thus, at low cattle  prices  when  fixed costs  are charged  at a standard  rate per cow 
resulting  in an extra  €75 per ha for the intensive  system  compared  to REPS  there is no
134
effect  of stocking  density  on income  per ha. Totai costs per kg carcass  gain are higher 
for autumn  than for spring  caiving  (Tabie  8). Costs  per kg carcass  gain are marginaiiy 
greater  for the semi-intensive  than for the REPS  systems  as iand which is not charged 
repiaces  fertiiiser  and some  other costs. Piacing  a rentai charge  on iand wouid  have a 
major effect on incomes  particuiariy  in the REPS system  where  stocking  rate is iow. 
Totai premiums  per kg carcass  produced  are 1.67 and 1.17 for the REPS and semi-  
intensive  systems  respectiveiy.
Tabie  7. incomes  (€) per ha. from suckiing  systems
REPS  System Semi-intensive  System
Time of caiving Spring Autumn Spring Autumn
ha/cow  unit 1.08 1.08 0.81 0.81
1. Animai  saies 901 894 1201 1192
2. Premia 637 637 595 595
3. ^Totai  receipts 1538 1531 1796 1787
4. Variable  costs 501 520 748 760
5. Interest  and overhead  costs 301 302 405 406
6. Total costs (4-r5) 802 822 1153 1166
Gross  margin  (3-4) 1037 1011 1048 1027
Income  (3-6) 736 709 642 621
Income  (excluding  premia) 99 72 48 26
®REPS  system  eligible  for the lower  level of extensification  and receive  €l 17/ha  in 
REPS  payments
Table  8. Total costs and total premiums  per kg carcass  weight  gain
REPS  System Semi-intensive  System
Spring Autumn Spring Autumn
Costs (€) 2.10 2.15 2.27 2.29
Premiums  (€) 1.67 1.67 1.17 1.17
Aithough  not taken into account  in the economic  anaiysis,  housing  requirements  are 
greater  for the autumn  than for spring caiving  due to the high requirements  for the 
cow/caif  unit (about  6 m^) compared  to about  3 m^ for the cow aione  (space  vacated  by 
finishing  steers  assumed  to be adequate  for the young  spring born caif) using siatted  
accommodation.  Reproductive  performance  is aiso iikeiy to be better in the spring  
caiving  than in the autumn  caiving  system.  An examination  of the resuits  shows  that the 
factors  that have the greatest  effect on income  are cattie prices, animai  performance  
(fertiiity,  mortaiity  and daiiy weight  gains)  and cattie premium.
Summary
• it is important  to avoid diseases  such as BVD and Johne ’s in the herd.
• To be eiigibie  for highest  prices,  aim to produce  carcasses  of good conformation  
that are iean.
• Minimise  production  costs whiie improving  performance.
135
The suckler  herd is increasingly  based  on continental  breeds  and crosses  but there  
is scope  for improvements  in muscularity.
Calving  is predominantly  in spring  with 70% of calvings  in the 4 months  February  
to May,
Cattle slaughterings  (steers  in particular)  are unevenly  distributed  throughout  the 
year with over 100,000  (average  of 7 years 1995 to 2001) steers  slaughtered  in 
both October  and November,  which is double  that in June, July and December.  
Spring  calving  is more desirable  than autumn  calving  due to 
Higher  income;
Lower  cow, winter  feed costs;
Lower  housing  requirements;
Likely  better  reproductive  performance;
Better  distribution  of slaughterings  where  producing  2 year old steer beet. 
Delaying  sale of steers in spring calving would improve  slaughtering 
distribution  while a delay  with autumn  calving  would  increase  housing  costs.
References
Irish Cattle Breeding  Federation.  Irish Cattle Breeding  Statistics  2002, 24 pages.
136
Financial  returns  from cattle  systems
Tom Egan
Teagasc,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork
Introduction
The Teagasc  National  Farm Survey  for 2,000 puts average  Family Farm Income  on 
cattle  farms  at €7600  for cattle rearing  (mainly  suckiing)  systems  and €7750  for ‘Cattle  
Other' units. For farms over 50 hectares  the equivalent  figures are €21200  and 
€21500. The percentage  of profit arising  from direct payments  is 120 % for ‘cattle  
rearing'  and 124 % for 'cattle  other'  across  all farm sizes and drops  only slightly  to 114 
% and 109 % for farms of over 50 ha in the respective  production  systems. These  
figures  confirm  what is widely  accepted,  that cattle  farming  incomes  are (a) low, and (b) 
hugely  dependent  on direct  payments.
There  is however  a very wide range  of financial  performance  across  cattle farms even 
within  similar  systems  and size groupings.  Using  gross  margin  (output  including  premia  
less variable  costs) as a measure  of efficiency  illustrates  the point. Gross  margin  per 
hectare  on all cattle  farms  averaged  €564  per ha, but the bottom  25% produced  a gross  
margin  of only €250 per ha as against  a figure of almost  €900 per ha for the most  
efficient  quartile. Figures  from Teagasc  Demonstration  Farms  and Profit Monitor  data 
also indicate  a very significant  variation  in margins  within rather  than between  cattle  
systems.  Some  interesting  questions  arising  from these  various  sources  of information  
are:
• What  are the principal  contributing  factors  to higher  or lower  gross  margins  per unit 
area, and specifically  what role do Direct  Payments  play? In the current  premium  
system  what is the “ideal ” level of stocking  to maximise  profit in the various  
systems?
• What  are the principle  production  costs per hectare  or per kg of animal  liveweight  
on farms?
• Flow does the overall  margin  available  for production  of suckler  beef break down  
between  the weanling,  producer  and the grower/finisher?
• Flow would  the proposed  Mid-Term  Review  affect  cattle  farming  economics?
Factors  Contributing  to Higher  Gross  Margin  on Top Farms
Considering  the overall  importance  of direct payments  to cattle farming  incomes,  it is 
very surprising  to note that only 10 % to 15 % of the difference  in gross  margin  between  
top and bottom  farms in the NFS can be attributed  to premium  receipts. The biggest  
contributors  by far are technical  issues like animal performance  and quality, overall  
production  efficiency,  trading skills and cost control. Stocking  rate, controlled  by 
premium  regulations,  is less significant  than in pre-premium  days.
137
Table 1 Cattle  margins  - top vs bottom  farms
Single  suckling  (soil group  2)Bottom  25% Top 25% Advantage
Gross  margin  €/ha 292 797 505
Premia  €/ha 276 408 132
75% Of Advantage  to Top Producers  Derives  From  Technical  Performance
Mixed  production  (best soils) Bottom  25% Top 25% Advantage
Gross  Margin  €/ha 248 879 631
Premia  €/ha 254 317 63
90% Of Advantage  to Top Producers  Derives  From  Technical  Performance
Source:  Teagasc  National  Farm Survey  2,000
Ideal stocking  level?
Table 2 outlines  the total premium  receipts  in suckling  to beef and weanling  to beef 
systems  operating  to the upper (tighter)  limit of stocking  density  for basic premia,  low 
rate extensification  or high rate extensification.
The most noteworthy  points  in this table are;
1. The higher  levels  of premium  “take ” in trading  versus  breeding  systems  regardless  
of exfensification  level.
2. The effect on total "take ” of finishing  steers at 28 rather than 24 months  where  
extensification  is claimed.
3. High rate extensification  is very justifiable  in trading  systems  but possibly  less so 
on breeding  farms  where  land quality  is good.
Breeding  farms selling  weanlings  or stores  with premia  attached  can optimise  income  
without  claiming  maximum  premia  through  the increased  market  value of "unpunched ” 
or “single-punched ” cattle. This of course  means  that the purchaser  is actually  buying  
the premium  right along with the beef producing  potential  of the animal. Following  the 
same rationale  the higher  levels of premia  in trading  as opposed  to breeding  systems  
do not automatically  lead to higher  farm profits. It is an accepted  logic within Irish cattle  
farming  that premia  have to be purchased  and paid for with the qualifying  animal. It is 
impossible  to estimate  the cost of this entitlement  purchase  but a figure  of 50 % to 70 
% of the payment  is often mooted. A recent review of competitiveness  questions  
whether  this trading  of entitlements  has actually  imposed  a new cost on the industry  
(The Competitiveness  of Irish Agriculture,  Prof. G. Boyle,  2000).
Table  2. Premium  receipts  (€) on 40 ha at differing  extensification  rates
System No Extn €40 €80
Suckling  to Beef
Steers  @ 24 mts, Hfrs @ 20 Mts21,774 23,954 19,304
Suckling  to Beef
Steers  @ 28 mts, Hfrs @ 20 Mts21,774 20,445 18,052
Weanling  to Beef
Steers  @ 24 mts, Hfrs @ 20 Mts
No. of Heifers  in Brackets28,409
(55)30,659
(30)33,011
(6)
Weanling  to Beef
Steers  @ 28 mts, No Heifers 27,599 27,599 25,399
138
Production  costs  in cattle  farming
Cattle  production  costs  within  the NFS are considered  in terms  of variable  (direct)  costs  
and fixed costs. The principle  outcomes  are;
1. Costs  are high (as expected),  and account  for more fhan trading  output. For year 
2,000  on cattle rearing  farms of over 50 hectares,  direct  costs amounted  to €226  
per hectare  and fixed costs to €255.
2. Both direct  and fixed costs  account  for approximately  one-third  of total output  value  
including  direct  payments.
3. Feed is the principle  direct  cost and when  feed, fertiliser and contractor  charges  are 
combined  they account  for over 80% of direct  costs.
4. In fixed costs  the largest  single  item is machinery  coming  in at 28% with land rental  
also featuring  strongly  at 22% of total fixed costs.
Teagasc  demonstration  farms in 2000 had direct costs of €0.75  per kilo of liveweight  
produced,  and fixed costs  of just over €0.90. This equates  to approximately  €3.20  per 
kg of carscase.  The Boyle review  of competitiveness  in beef production  highlights  a 
deterioration  in our situation  vis a vis some  of our EU competitors  in recent  years. Our 
cash cost index is now above  the average  of a basket  of states  (UK, Germany,  France,  
Ireland)  at 113 %, whereas  in 1993 we stood  at just 82 %, Only the UK has a higher  cost 
structure  than Ireland,  whether  considered  as a percentage  of total output  or per unit 
production  (100 kg liveweight).
Comparison  between  Systems
NFS data show comparatively  little overall difference  in profitability  between  'cattle  
rearing ’ and 'cattle  other' systems.  A look at theoretical  output,  cost and profit figures  
for well managed  suckler  to weaning  and weanling  to beef units would  suggest  that in 
the quality suckler beef sector the breeder is currently  faring better than the 
feeder/finisher.  Applying  standard  costings  and outputs  to efficient  production  systems  
in each case allows  for the calculation  of an overall  profit  for producing  beef from a herd 
of 30 suckler  cows. Distributing  this profit evenly  on a per hectare  basis between  the 
breeding  and the finishing  farms  allows  for estimination  of an 'equitable'  weanling  value.  
Assuming  a beef price of €2.50  per kg this figure  works  out at approximately  €l .85 for 
males  and €l .45 for females  (Table  3). Actual  prices  in recent  years  have been well in 
excess  of these levels, particularly  for male weanlings.  This is again related  to the 
trading  of premium  entitlements  and the high value  placed  on them, rather  than the meat  
producing  potential  of the animal. This suggests  that the weanling  producer  has been  
winning  out in most years in the battle  for the limited  profit available.
Table  3a. Suckler  farm - 30 cows producing  weanlings  in autumn
Calves  reared  per 100 cows bulled 90
Weaning  (sale) weight  males  (kg) 300
Weaning  (sale) weight  females  (kg) 270
Replacement  rate (%) 15
Stocking  rate (ac/cow) 1.4
Ha employed 17
Premia Suckler  cow
Extensification Low rate
139
Table  3b. Feeder  farm bringing  progeny  to finish
Males Females
Start Weight  (kg)
Days on farm 
Sale date
Carcass  weight  (kg) 
Stocking  rate ha/head  
Ha employed  
Premia
Extensification300
570
March  Year 2 
380
0.6 (For Premia)  
8.5
2 SBP, slaughter 
Low Rate270
365
October  Year 1 
290 
0.30 
4
Slaughter,  heifer  top-up
Table  3c. Financial  - start to finish (30 cows - progeny  to beef) €
Farm Suckler
Cows WeanlingsFinisher  
Heifers  Yr 2Steers  Yr 2Total
Sales  @ €2.50 9425 13300 22725
Premia  2002 6705 2,095 2095 10895
Slaughter  Premia 355 1360 1115 2830
Extensification 1205 540 540 2285
Total premia 8265 7745 16010
Replacement -1525 -1525
Total output 37210
Variable  costs 6225 2,600 5250 14075
Fixed costs (€31 5/ha) 5335 3935 9270
Total costs 11560 11785 23345
Overall  profit 13,865 (€470/ha)
Table  3d. “Equitable"  price for weanlings
Beef Price  Weanling  sales required  Females
(equal  profit/ac)  (270 kg)Males  
(300 kg)
€2.50  /kg €12800 €390 €554
Effect  of mid-term  review
As understood  at the moment,  the proposed  mid-term  review  of Agenda  2000  would  de­
couple  direct  supports  from animal  production  and apply approximately  the same level 
of payment  for each farm on an area basis. It Is suggested  that there  will be some  level 
of farming  activity  required  in order  to draw down this premium  but it may be minimal.  
There are no direct market  support  changes  involved  in the review, so any price 
evolution  over time will be the result of supply  and demand  rather  than policy  change.  
Obviously  policy  in the area of world trade would have an impact  but that is outside  of 
the current  review. For the practising  cattle farmer  some of the effects  that could be 
expected  to follow  are:
• Total premium  take should  remain  constant,  although  the modulation  proposal  may 
result  in some  redistribution  over time.
• Farming  activity beyond  a minimal  level will be dependant  on trading returns,  
selling  price, buying  price and production  costs.
140
• In breeding  to finish systems,  equal premium  payments  and similar  market  pricing  
should  produce  similar  overall  financial  output. Whether  this will be the case will 
depend  on farmer  decision  making  regarding  cattle  numbers  and age at sale, which  
will be more discretionary  in a new regime.
• In trading  systems,  whether  buying  or selling  calves,  weanlings  or stores  there will 
be a new valuation  system,  which  should  logically  depend  solely  on the economic  
beef producing  potential  of the animal.
Same  systems  - new scenario
In Table 3 above,  at the ‘equitable ’ weanling  price, neither  the breeder  nor the finisher 
could produce  a profit in the absence  of direct  payments.  The actual  outcome  is that 97 
% of premia  would be retained  as profit on the weanling  unit and 76% on the finishing  
farm. So what happens  after de-coupling?  One line of logic  suggests  that both systems  
would  cease  to operate  since  neither  is profitable  outside  of premia,  which  would  be paid 
almost  independently  of production  in the new system.  This, though,  is not the full story.  
The profit margins  above  allow for fixed costs, most of which  would not disappear  with 
the livestock.  In the absence  of production,  therefore,  part of premium  receipts  would  
be absorbed  by existing  fixed costs. An alternative  logic proposes  that an enterprise  that 
leaves  a margin  over variable  costs and interest  payments  and contributes  to meeting  
fixed cost commitments  will improve  the profitability  of the overall  business.
Table  4 looks  at the same  two farming  operations  from this new perspective.  Attempting  
to allocate  the available  gross margin  over breeding  and finishing  farms on an area 
basis, the overall  result is a drop in the value of the output  from the breeder  farm and 
obviously  an improvement  in the situation  of the finisher.  This comes  about  because  the 
finisher  no longer  has to buy premium  entitlement  and, if he behaves  logically  will only 
purchase  cattle at a price that leaves  at least a margin  over direct costs and interest  
The magnitude  of the change  on these figures  is not huge, but as stated  earlier, real 
prices for young stock are considerably  higher  than the 'equitable'  figure calculated  
here. More realism  may or may not evolve  in a new situation.
A more interesting  facet is the change  in relative  values  of male and female  weanlings.  
The value of heifers  holds up well for two reasons,  (a) they were not reaping  high 
premium  payments  anyway  and (b) the production  costs associated  with them in this 
system  are low with most of the liveweight  gain achieved  on grass. Male weanling  
values  are seriously  reduced  for the opposite  reasons,  high dependence  on premia  and 
high finishing  costs in this spring  born two-year  old beef system.
Cattle production  systems  in Ireland  are closely  aligned  with the premium  regime  in 
force. Steers  are not finished  under  22 months  so that they qualify  for second  stage  
SBP. Equally,  turning  two year old cattle back to grass can impact negatively  on 
extensification  payments.  Removing  this straitjacket  will allow for more flexibility  and 
possibly  reduced  costs on farms. Trials in Grange  show  that high quality  suckler  beef 
can be produced  from grass in autumn  at 18 to 20 months.
The example  does illustrate  that high winter  feed costs  will be an even bigger  burden  in 
the proposed  new scenario.  Attempts  to reduce  the burden  such as finishing  more cattle  
in the autumn  or storing  animals  for finishing  on spring  grass will be facilitated  by the 
new payments  system.  One very immediate  result  could be the return  of seasonality  as 
a feature  of the Irish beef industry.  Certainly  long finishing  periods  indoors  on expensive  
diets will be difficult  to justify  without  the benefit  of headage  based premium  payments  
unless  there is an old-style  seasonal  price rise. This may be one of the first obvious  side 
effects  of the policy  review.
141
Table  4. Financial  - start to finish (30 cows - progeny  to beef) € 
Revised  for decoupled  payments
Suckler Finisher Total
Cows Heifers  Yr 2 Steers  Yr 2
Sales  @ €2.50 9425 13300 22725
Replacement
Total output-1525 -1525
21200
Costs
Total variable  costs 6225 2600 5250 14075
Overall  contribution (FC and Profit) 7125 {€240/ha)
Table  4a. ‘Equitable ’ price for weanlings 
Revised  for decoupled  payments
Beef Price  Weanling  Sales Required
(equal  contrib/ha)Females
(270 kg)Males
(300 kg)
€2.50  /kg €11,830 €451 €430
Conclusions
Profitability  in cattle systems  is low and highly premium  dependent.  There is a huge  
range from top to bottom  in terms of profit per unit area and this is related  greatly  to 
technical  performance  rather  than to superiority  at premium  optimisation.  Costs  are high 
and relative  to international  figures  have disimproved  in the last decade.  Feed cost, and 
in particular  winter-feed,  is the single  largest  cost element  in cattle  farming.  The current  
premium  system  does not always  predispose  to lowest  cost production  with its age and 
area restrictions  and regulations.
From the viewpoint  of an individual  farmer the proposed  review  of Agenda  2000 would  
have obvious  implications  for the trading  values of male animals  in particular,  with 
premium  eligibility  no longer  of importance.  If premium  payments  are to be largely  de­
coupled  from animals  high costs  will only be justifiable  on a trading  basis,  this could  well 
result  in a return  to highly  seasonal  beef supply  and price differentials.  Even assuming  
that average  prices  remain  generally  similar  to current  levels in the new situation,  there  
will be huge changes  at farm level in terms of flexibility  and scope for management  
decision  making.  Less stock  and more output  from grass  to reduce  direct  costs  or more  
animals  and higher  production  to pull down  fixed costs per unit output? Either  way, the 
emphasis  will be even more on costs.
142
NOTES
143
NOTES
144
Irish Grassland  
Association  Journal
2002  VOLUME  36
IRISH  GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION
CORPORATE  MEMBERS  2002
ACC  
AIB Bank  
Alltech
Bank of Ireland  
Dairymaster  Limited  
Dawn  Meats  
Drinagh  Co-Op  
Farm Managers  Association  
Glanbia
Goldcrop  Limited  
Green  Agribusiness
Hibernian  General  Insurance  Ltd 
I.A.W.S.  Group  pic 
I.F.A.C.
Irish Farmer ’s Journal  
Irish Fertilizer  Industries  
Richard  Keenan  & Company  
LELY  Ireland  Limited  
Monsanto  Ireland  Ltd 
Mullinahone  Co-Op  
New Zealand  Cattle  Limited  
Premier  Molasses  Company  Limited  
Timac  Limited
lEAGASC  EDUCATION  and ADVISORY  SERVICES
Ballyhaise  Agricultural  College  
Cork East  
Cork West
Kildalton  Agricultural  College  
Kerry  
Laois  
Limerick
Regional  Office,  South,  Kildalton  
Regional  Office,  North,  Grange  
Tipperary  South  
Westmeath
Irish Grassland  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 36 2002
Edited  by 
David  McGilloway
ISSN 0332-0588
Printed  by Walsh,  Printer,  Roscrea
CONTENTS
PAGE
S. Flanagan
W. KellyExtended  grazing  as an alternative  to Housing 1
A.F. Carson
L.E.R.  Dawson
D. IrwinDeveloping  easy-care  lambing  systems 8
A. Winter Lame  Sheep  - are they an inevitability  of
Sheep  farming16
H. M. Gunn Scrapie,  a TSE that must be eliminated  - 
an EU perspective18
T. Sweeney Scrapie,  current  knowledge  on the genetics  
and infective  agent20
T.J. Gilliland
P.D. Barrett
R.E. AgnewVariety  diversity  in key characters  determining  
grazing  value in ryegrass  {Lolium  perennel  L) 
swards26
N. Gowan
Ml 0 Donovan
1. Casey  G StakelumImproving  cow performance  at grass,  
what do grass  cultivars  offer?33
J. McNamara The impact  of grazing  management  on 
improving  milk solids  production45
D.J. Garrick Dairy cow improvements  using selection  and 
crossbreeding49
P. Dillon
F. Buckley
R. Evans  J Kennedy
D. Berry
R.F. VeerkampBreeding  objectives  for a seasonal  calving  
pasture  based  system  of milk production57
B. Hillard Crossbreeding  results  at farm level in the 
Dungarvan  area67
J.G. Crowley A blueprint  for growing  maize 71
E. Phelan What  are the advantages  of using maize  silage
For a spring  calving  system78
T Keady Complementary  forages  for dairy production 83
Ml Ryan Understanding  the N Cycle  and the
Pathways  of N loss85
S. Regan  
J. Dwyer
Ml Wallace  
J. Breen,  S Crosse
Ml Doran
P. French  
M.C. Hickey
Ml Drennan
T. EganEnvironmental  legislation,  current  and 93
Pending  and its implications
The future  of the Irish Dairy Industry  - the 99
IGA submission  to the Department  of
Agriculture
Milk pricing  revisited:  equity,  transparency 106
and producer incentives
How I intend  to grow my beef enterprise  - 120
A farmer's  perspective
Outwintering  pads as an accommodation  system 125
for beef cattle
Important  factors  in suckler  beef production  129
and influence  of calving  season  on income
Financial  returns  from cattle systems  137
COUNCIL  2002-2003
President  
Vice-President  
Past-President  
General  SecretaryJohn O 'Brien  
Tony Pettit  
Noel Culleton  
Grainne  Dwyer
Peter Baker,  Brendan  Barnes,  Johnny  Butterly,  John Claffey,  Jim Dwyer,  John  
Dunworth,  Richie  Fallon,  Donal Fitzgerald,  Sean Flanagan,  Jan Frederiks,  
Padraig  French,  James  Humphreys,  Anne Kehoe,  Pearse  Kelly, William  Kingston,  
Mike Magan,  Pat McFeely,  David McGilloway,  Michael  O’Donovan,  Robin  Talbot,  
Padraig  Walshe,  Peter  Young
Irish Grassland  Association,  Moneymore,  Borris  in Ossory,  Co. Laois 
Phone/Fax  0505 41025 Email: arassland(a)eircom  net
Extended  grazing  as an alternative  to housing
S. Flanagan  and W. Kelly
Teagasc,  Knockbeg  Sheep  Unit, Carlow
Introduction
Labour  demands  and production  costs are two components  of flock management  that 
are commanding  increasing  significance  for sheep  producers.  Both components  have  
one unifying  determinant  that can reduce  man-hours  and costs, namely,  grazed  grass.  
Grass  and how it is used is central  to the competitiveness  of the sheep  sector  and, in 
particular,  to reducing  the workload  associated  with winter housing. Results  which  
reduce  labour  demand  and input costs are summarised  in this paper.
Two contrasting  systems
Two systems  of mid season  lamb production  are being compared  on two self-contained 
farmlets  at Knockbeg:
1. Grazing,  silage  and housing:  9.6 ha grass/clover  pasture  stocked  at 14 ewes per ha 
including  a silage  budget  of 0.6 t per ewe for a 100-day winter.
2. Extended  grazing:  15.0 ha perennial  ryegrass  pasture  stocked  at 10 ewes per ha; 
only surplus  grass is conserved  for silage.
In 1999 and 2000 the ewes in both systems  were housed  for lambing  but in 2001 the 
ewes in the extended  grazing  system  lambed  in the field.
The objectives  of this project  are:
(i) to improve  the enterprise  competitiveness  of sheep  production
(ii) to develop  grassland  management  practices  for all-year  round grazing
(iii) to compare  ewe lambing  performance  and output  in flocks wintered  and lambed  
down either  indoor  on silage  or outdoor  on grazing  grass
(iv) to compare  the labour  inputs  (man-hours)  required  for winter  housing  and extended  
grazing  systems
Choice  of lambing  date
This was a key factor  in the management  plan. In order  to minimise  feed costs  in spring,  
meal supplements  post-lambing  were ruled out. It was therefore  necessary  to maximise  
grass supplies  in both systems  for satisfying  ewe peak feed demand  post-lambing.  A 
70 kg ewe suckling  twin lambs  and producing  3 kg milk per day requires  a daily Intake  
of almost  3.5 kg grass DM. At 14 ewes per ha the feed demand  is almost  50 kg grass  
DM/ha/day.  Spring  pastures  in the Carlow  region  do not attain this level of production  
until mid April. However,  for lambing  in mid-March  adequate  supplies  of grass can be 
accumulated  by resting pastures  from the previous  December  and by application  of 
fertilizer  N around  February  1.
In 1999 and 2000  the lambing  date chosen  for both systems  was March  21; in 2001 April 
1 was chosen  for outdoor  lambing  in the extended  grazing  system.  Ewes  were  therefore  
joined  with the rams on October  17 with the exception  of the outdoor  lambing  flock for 
which the date was October  25. All rams were removed  after 6 weeks. The 
management  calendar  was planned  around  these  dates.
Fertilizer  N
Nitrogen  inputs  were low, 75 kg and 80 kg N per ha in systems  1 and 2 respectively.  In 
system  1 the clover  content  of the pasture  was high and fertilizer  N was restricted  to 50 
kg N around  February  1 for early grass,  70 kg N in April for silage  and 34 kg N for silage  
aftermath.  In system  2, N inputs  were based  on the principle  that the optimum  amount  
of N depends  on the stocking  rate. For 10 ewes per ha only strategic  dressings  of N 
were applied;  50 kg N around  February  1 for early grass and 34 kg N in autumn  when  
closing  paddocks  for extended  grazing.
Autumn  saved  pasture
Pasture  for extended  grazing  was accumulated  by closing a number  of paddocks  
sequentially  during  September  and October,  applying  34 kg N per ha and resting  them  
until December.  Up to 50 % of the farmlet  was closed;  hence  the stocking  rate on the 
grazing  area during  the breeding  season  was high, e g. up to 20 ewes  per ha. The ewes  
were already  in good condition  prior to September  as a result of lax grazing  during  
August.
Grass  budgeting  1998-2000
The ewes in system  1 were housed  in mid December.  In system  2 extended  grazing  
was commenced  in early December.  The ewes were block grazed  in daily shifts using  
electrified  net fencing  and offered  a daily ration of 1.3 kg grass DM/eweWay.  A back 
fence  was used to prevent  access  to ground  already  grazed.  Grazing  was completed  in 
February;  the ewes were then housed and offered silage ad libitum plus meal 
supplements.
Average  results  on the feeding  capacity  of extended  grazing,  days housed  and ewe 
liveweight  for the 2 years 1998-2000  are shown  in Table 1. Grass  supply  was 1625 kg 
DM per ha and, when rationed  as described,  grazing  extended  to February  6. Thus,  the 
housing  period was reduced  to 44 days. The adequacy  of the grass allowance  for 
satisfying  the feed requirements  for 70 kg ewes in mid pregnancy  was confirmed  by a 6 
% increase  in liveweight.  Condition  score was maintained.  Moreover,  lamb birth rate 
was significantly  heavier  {+ 0.4 kg) in the extended  grazing  system.
Table 1. Feeding  capacity  of extended  grazing  (1998-2000)
System Silage  and housing Extended  grazing
No. ewes 131 153
No. ha autumn  saved  pasture - 6.5
Extended  grazing  commenced - December  7
Grass  supply  (kg DM/ha) - 1625
Grass  allowance  (kg DM/ewe/day) - 1.3
Date of housing December  14 February  6
No. days housed 98 44
Ewe liveweight  (kg), C. score);
Mid pregnancy  (December  12) 69,4 67.8  (3.5)
Late pregnancy  (February  9) N/A 72.0 (3.5)
Effects  of extended  grazing  on management  inputs
Conventional  housing  and silage  feeding  systems  require  the cutting  and transport  of 
grass to the farmyard  for silage conservation,  tractor transport  and machinery  for 
feeding,  handling  of straw on a regular  basis for bedding  pens, followed  by the task of 
mucking  out sheds  and providing  transport  to the field for manure  disposal.  The shorter 
housing period resulting  from extended  grazing reduces  demands  for these  
management  inputs. It is, however,  necessary  to purchase  portable  electric  fencing  for 
managing  extended  grazing.
Comparative  estimates  for winter management  inputs including  fencing  are shown  in 
Table 2. Requirements  for silage and straw in the extended  grazing  system  were 
reduced  by two-thirds  leading  to a cost saving  of €827 per 100 ewes at year 2000  
prices. Straw  was worth  approximately  €114 per ha (Teagasc  2000)  which  at a yield of 
2.5 t per ha is equivalent  to 4.6 cent per kg. The cost of straw  varies  widely  depending  
on whether  it is home grown or purchased.  The fencing  cost incurred  by extended  
grazing  must be set against  these savings  and may be discounted  over 5 years as 
shown,  resulting  in net savings  of €707 per 100 ewes.
Labour  as measured  by man-hours  required  for feeding  and herding  was reduced  by 
over two-thirds. The financial  savings  attributable  to this factor depend on the 
opportunity  cost of the stockman ’s own labour. If it is included  at the current  agricultural 
wage of €9 per hour, labour cost is reduced  by €783 per 100 ewes. In practice,  
however,  the opportunity  cost varies from farm to farm and the values  shown here 
should  be adjusted  accordingly.
Table 2. Winter  management  in-puts  and cost savings  arising  from extended  grazing  
(1998-2000)
Silage  and 
housingExtended
grazingSavings*  /100 ewes  
(€)
Housing  period  (days) 98 44
Per 100 ewes:
Silage  (t) 60 20 610
Straw (kg) 7480 2720 217 827
Less cost of electric  fencing:
300 m @ €2/m
discounted  over 5 yrs. 120 707
Labour  (man-hours/day) 1.0 0.3
Labour  (man hours) 100 13
Waqe  @ €9/hour 900 117 783
*Costs:  Silage  €l5.24/t;  straw  4.6 cent/kg;  electric  fencing  €100/50  metre  roll
Grass  supply  in spring
The provision  of adequate  supplies  of grass in spring  is a critical  point of management  
for cutting  feed costs. Extended  grazing  reduces  the resting  period  for grass recovery  
in spring  and hence  may be expected  to impact  on grass  supply.  The adequacy  of grass  
supply  however  is relative  to feed demand  which,  at the stocking  rate practised  in the 
extended  grazing  system,  is low. To date, relative  to feed demand,  extended  grazing  
has not adversely  affected  grass  supply  for ewes  post-lambing.  Indeed,  after application  
of fertilizer  N in February  the fast recovery  of pasture  following  extended  grazing  has 
been a notable  feature  of the daily block grazing  system.
Grazing  management
Six paddock  rotational  grazing  was practised  on both farmlets. Occasionally,  1 or 2 
paddocks  were sub-divided  temporarily,  e.g. for ewes rearing  triplets. Creep  feed was 
introduced  to ail lambs  at 8 weeks  of age and offered  at the rate of 300g/head/day  until 
slaughter.  Length  of grazing  rotation  depended  on sward height,  i.e. ewes and lambs  
were moved  when the sward  was grazed  down to 4 cm in April, 5 cm in May, 6 cm in 
June and 8 cm in July/August  for weaned  lambs. (Sward  height  for sheep  is measured  
to ground  level). Grazing  control  proved  difficult  in the extensive  system  due to the lax 
grazing  arising  from the low stocking  rate.
Output
Pooled  results  on lamb performance  and oufput  for the two years  are shown  in Table  3. 
Lamb birth weights,  growth  rates and carcass  weights  were significantly  higher  in the 
extensive  system  with its lower stocking  rates of ewes and lambs. Due to the use of 
Belclare  x Cheviot  ewes, output  per ewe was high in both systems  of intensive  and 
extensive  production.  Output per ha, however,  was significantly  reduced  in the 
extensive  system  due to the lower  stocking  rate.
Table  3. Lamb performance  and output  (1998  - 2000)
Intensive  grazing Extensive  grazing
No, ewes/ha 14 10
No. lambs  reared/ewe 1.77 1.78
No. lambs  sold/ha 24 18
Growth  rate (g/day):
Birth to 5 weeks 271 286
5 to 14 weeks 238 267
Weaning  wt. (kg) 29.0 31,1
Carcass  wt. (kg) 18,8 19.3
Lamb carcass  output:
kg/ewe 33,3 34.2
kg/ha 451 347
Outdoor  lambing  2001
To further  develop  an easy care approach,  it was decided  in 2001 to continue  extended  
grazing  for February/March  and to allow  the ewes lamb in the field. Concentrates  were 
introduced  at 6 weeks pre-lambing  (February  7) at the rate of 400 g/ewe/day  fo 
supplement  the daily grass ration of 1.3 kg DM. Lambing  in the extended  grazing  
system  was delayed  until April 1 firstly, to stagger  the seasonal  demand  for labour  and 
secondly,  because  this date coincided  with the change  to summer  time. Ewes were  
scanned  in January  and 3 paddocks  were reserved  for single,  twin and triplet bearing  
ewes to lamb separately.  A fourth paddock  was reserved  for grazing  post-lambing.  
These  paddocks  had already  been grazed  in December/January  and were dressed  with 
fertiliser  N in February.
The date for the booster  vaccine  at 2 weeks  pre-lambing  was used for 'spread-out',  i.e. 
the ewes were removed  off block grazing,  transferred  to the 3 assigned  paddocks  and 
set stocked  for lambing.  At this time also, the concentrate  supplements  for ewes  bearing  
mulfiples  was increased  to 700g/head/day.  Ewes were allowed  to lamb unassisted  and 
no lambing  supervision  was conducted  after dark. Creep  feed was introduced  to all 
lambs  at 8 weeks  of age and offered  at the rate of 250 g/head/day.
Ewe productivity  2001
Results  on ewe lambing  performance  are shown  in Table  4. Ewe productivity  was again  
high in both systems,  i.e. about  1.8 lambs  reared  per ewe joined. Lamb  birth weight  was 
significantly  higher {+ 0.6 kg) in the extended  grazing  system. It is possible  that 
concentrate  supplementation  at grass was excessive. Current  work is aimed at 
clarifying  this issue. The advantage  of 0.6 kg extra birth weight  in the extended  grazing  
system  combined  with the lower stocking  rate resulted  in significantly  higher  weaning  
weight.
Table  4 Ewe reproductive  performance  2001
System Silage  and housing Extended  grazing
No. ewes to ram 140 152
Ewes lambing  (%) 92.1 94.7
Litter size 2.19 2.17
Lamb mortality  (%)* 13.1 10.6
No. lambs  reared/ewe  joined 1.76 1.84
‘Figures  relate  to all lambs  born (dead and alive)
Input  costs
Comparative  results on outputs,  inputs and gross margins  are shown in Table 5. 
Average  price per kg carcass  was 452 cent. Income  from lamb sales, wool and premia  
was as shown. The net cost of replacing  cull ewes in autumn  2000 was €14.73.
Direct  costs are listed under  seven  headings  and do not include  labour. Silage  making  
was costed  at €19 per t. Concentrates  for ewes and creep  feed for lambs  consisted  of 
a pelleted  compound  costing  €190 per t (crude  protein  content  190 g/kg DM). Flock  
health  expenses  were comprised  mainly  of pour-ons  for fly strike prevention,  cydectin  
for scab prevention,  zinc sulphate  for footbathing,  fasinex  and oramec  for dosing  against 
fluke and worms. Other  costs included  straw  (5) 64 cent per bale, shearing  @ 152 cent 
per ewe and levies  @ 80 cent per lamb.
Gross  margin  per ewe was almost  15% higher  in the extensive  system. Gross  margin  
per ha was reduced  considerably,  reflecting  the lower  carcass  output. Critical  appraisal  
of Table 5 shows  that creep feed was an expensive  input. This component  is being  
targeted  for significant  reduction,  especially  in view of the likely return of more normal  
lamb prices  than those of 2001 .
Cost per kg carcass
Production  cost is a major determinant  of enterprise  competitiveness.  The estimates 
shown  in Table 6 provide  a basis  for estimating  cost of production.  Direct  costs are as 
already  listed in Table 5 and the fixed costs shown in Table 6 are those incurred  by 
buildings  and machinery  maintenance,  depreciation  charges,  fuel, etc; labour and 
interest  charges  are not included.  Total costs per ewe amounted  to €85.51  and €63.01  
in the silage/housing  and extended  grazing  systems,  respectively.  Using the carcass  
weights  shown in Table 4 the relative  costs of producing  1 kg of lamb carcass  were  
calculated  as shown.  The effects  of extensification  in reducing  costs (per ewe, lamb, kg) 
are clearly  evident.
Table  5. Outputs,  inputs  and gross margins  2001 (€)
System Silage  and housing Extended  grazing
No. ewes 140 152
Output  per ewe
1.77 iambs 152.0
1.84 lambs 151.4
Wool + premium 12.84 164.85 12.84 164.21
Less replacement 14.73 14.73
150.12 149.48
Direct  costs  per ewe
1. Fertilizers  for grazing 5.87 4.79
2. Silage  0.6 t 11.43
3. Concentrates:  Pre-lambing  20 kg 3.94
Pre-lambing  23 kg 4.52
Post-lambing  for ewes suckling  triplets:
23 ewes @ 1 kg/ewe/day  for 6 weeks 1.30 1.30
4. Creep  feed 30 kg/lamb 10.11
26 kg/lamb 9.10
5. Flock health 8.20 8.20
6. Scanning 0.89
7. Other 6.14 46.99 2.97 31.77
Gross  margin  per ewe (€) 103 118
Gross  margin  per ha (€) 1494 1180
Table  6. Production  costs in 2001 (€)
System Silage  and housing Extended grazing
Gross  output/ewe 150.12 149.48
Direct  costs/ewe 46.99 31.77
Fixed costs/ewe 38.52 85.51 31.24 63.01
Net margin/ewe 64.61 86.47
Cost/kg  carcass  (cent) 254 188
Costs  as percent  of price 56% 42%
How many  ewes?
It is of interest  to estimate  the flock size that is required  to generate  an income  
equivalent  to the 2001 average  industrial  wage  of €23,500  (£18,500).  By deducting  the 
costs per ewe (Table  6) from the gross  outputs  (Table  5), the net margins  per ewe in the 
silage/housing  and extended  grazing  systems  were €64.61  and €86.47  respectively.  
Using these values  the flock size required  in each system  for earning  the average  
industrial  wage  is 364 and 272 ewes  respectively,  excluding  labour  and interest  charges.  
These  estimates  are based on a lamb crop of about 180 lambs reared  per 100 ewes  
joined.
Lamb prices  in 2001 were exceptional.  If prices drop significantly  (and the history  of 
sheep  price trends  almost  demands  it) or if levels of ewe productivity  are lower than 
those  discussed  here, a larger  flock would  be needed  to earn the equivalent  wage.
Conclusion
Income  is dependant  on the volume  of output  and, hence, on flock size. Many mid 
season  enterprises  are relatively  small - average  flock size is about 100 ewes - and 
extensification  must be accompanied  by financial  support  measures  to compensate  for 
lower output  per ha.
Extensification  practices  are an attractive  option  where  flock size is of sufficient  scale  for 
producing  enough  output per labour unit to generate  a commercially  viable income.  
There is considerable  scope for increasing  profit margins  by reducing  unit costs of 
production,  e.g. costs per ewe or per labour  unit as shown  by the results.
Developing  easy-care  lambing  systems
A.F. Carson,  L.E.R. Dawson  and D. Irwin 
The Agricultural Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  Co. Down
Introduction
The significant  long-term  decline  in the margins  from sheep  production  is having  a major  
impact  on the shape  of the industry.  In Northern  Ireland,  the gross margins  of recorded  
lowland  sheep  production  systems  have declined  by approximately  50% per ha in real 
terms  over the past 20 years  (DARD,  2001). In a bid to remain  viable,  sheep  producers  
have increased  flock size from 86 in 1982 to 119 in 2002 and/or have become  
increasingly  dependent  on income  from off-farm  sources. Currently  55% of sheep  
producers  in Northern  Ireland  are part-time  (DARD,  2000), These  trends  are likely to 
continue  and the ratio of stock  to stockpersons  set to increase  further.
Current  systems  of sheep production  require  relatively  high levels of labour input.  
Survey  data  from Ireland,  both North  and South,  indicates  that 4 to 8 man hours  per ewe 
are put into lowland  sheep production  systems  (DARD,  1996; Connolly,  2001). The 
major labour input in sheep production  occurs over the lambing  period. Recent  
estimates  indicate  that approximately  19% of the total labour  input in lowland  sheep  
production  systems  occurs  over this period  (Connolly,  2001). Thus the intensive  labour  
requirements  of sheep  production  systems  over this period  represent  a major  limitation  
to the size of flock, which a producer  can operate,  particularly  as hired labour  costs  
continue  to increase.
In view of this background  a research  programme  was established  in autumn  1999 to 
investigate  the potential  to develop  lower  labour  input easy-care  lambing  systems.  The 
main issues  the programme  is seeking  to addressr  are:-
1. The effect  on labour  input and iamb output  of adopting  an easy-care  (grass-based)  
lambing  system  in comparison  to indoor  lambing  systems.
2. The effect of herbage  allowance  and concentrate  feed level in late pregnancy  on 
ewe condition  and lamb performance.
3. The effect  of ewe and ram breed  on lamb output  in indoor  and grass-based  lambing  
systems.
Outline  of research  programme
The main study  was carried  out at ARINI,  and on five commercial  lowland  farms  across  
Northern  Ireland. On each farm the experimental  flock (n=90 on average  per farm),  
consisting  of Blue-Faced  Leicester  X Scottish  Blackface  (BLXB),  Texel X Scottish  
Blackface  (TXB),  Suffolk  X Cheviot  (SXC)  and Texel  X Cheviot  (TXC)  ewes  were mated  
with high lean growth  index  Suffolk  (n=9), high lean index  Texel (n=9) or double-muscled  
(DM) Texel (n=9) sires. Ewes in the indoor  lambing  system  were mated  to lamb down  
from mid to late March. Some  but not all of the producers,  mated  ewes in the easy-care  
system  2 weeks  later i.e. to lamb down late March  to early  April (2 out of the 6 farms in 
year 1).
Developing  a complete  out-wintering  grazing  system  is only possible  at low stocking  
rates. Thus in the current  study ewes in the easy-care  system  were removed  from the 
main grazing  area in mid-pregnancy  and fed supplementary  grass silage on cereal  
stubble  ground or indoors,  or fed forage rape/turnips.  Three to six weeks before  
lambing,  ewes  were  turned  out onto the grazing  area and budgeted  2 kg of herbage  dry
8
matter  (DM) per day above  a pasture  cover  of 800 kg DM/ha. During  the pre-lambing 
period, ewes were set-stocked  with lambed  ewes being drafted  out 12 - 48 h after 
lambing. (Work  in New Zealand  indicates  that it is critical  that over the first 2 - 6 h after 
birth, the ewe and lamb are left alone on the birth site. This is the period  when the 
maternal  bonding  between  the ewe and lamb develops.  The ewe and lamb learn to 
recognise  each other  and the maternal  drive of the ewe is reinforced  by the lamb).
In the indoor  lambing  system,  ewes were housed  in late pregnancy  and offered  grass  
silage  ad libitum  plus concentrates  (level depending  on silage  quality,  ewe condition  and 
foetal number)  and ewes and lambs  were turned  out to grass 1 to 7 days post-lambing.  
Ewes and lambs  from the indoor  and easy-care  lambing  systems  were grazed  together 
as a single  group  on each of the farms  after the lambing  period.
Effect  of lambing  system  on lamb output
Lamb birth weight  was higher  in the ewes on the easy-care  lambing  system  compared  
with those  lambing  indoors  on silage-based  diets (Table  1). In the first year of the study,  
lambing  difficulty  was greater  in the easy-care  lambing  group due to a proportion  of 
oversized  lambs. This was due to higher  than anticipated  grass  growth  rates, resulting  
in grass allowances  being higher  than planned.  In the second  year of the study, grass  
covers  were monitored  more closely  and producers  ensured  that ewes had access  to 
only moderate  grass  covers  in late pregnancy  (1200  to 2000 kg DM at turnout  to lambing  
pastures)  with concentrates  fed if grass  supplies  were inadequate.
Lamb mortality  rates were similar  In the easy-care  and indoor  lambing  system  (11 and 
13% respectively)  (Table 1). Lamb growth  rates in the first six weeks  of lambing  were  
higher  in the lambs  born outdoors.  This indicates  that milk yield in the ewes  was higher  
in the easy-care  system,  likely as a result  of the ewes in the easy-care  system  lambing  
down in higher body condition  score. Thereafter  iamb growth rates between  the 
systems  were similar,  thus the days to slaughter  were marginally  lower  for ewes in the 
easy-care  system  (158 and 161 days to slaughter  for the easy-care  and indoor  lambing  
systems  respectively).  The overall  ewe output,  expressed  as the total weight  of lambs  
weaned  per ewe was similar  in both systems.
Table 1. The effect  of lambing  system  on lamb mortality
Lambing  system
Indoor Easy-care Sig.
No. lambs  born/ewe 1.79 1.77 NS
Lamb birth weight 5.0 5.2 *
No. lambs  born dead/ewe 0.10 0,11 NS
No. lambs  died (birth-weaning) 0.10 0.12 NS
No. lambs  weaned/ewe
Lamb  growth  rate1.59 1,50 NS
Birth - 6 weeks 292 310
Birth - weaning 266 273 NS
Weaned  lamb output  (kg/ewe) 56.8 56.2 NS
NS = difference  is not significant; * = significant;  **= highly  significant.
: very highly  significant
Effect  of lambing  system  on labour  requirements
In the current  study, ewes in the easy-care  system  were observed  at regular  intervals  
and the producers  intervened  as considered  necessary  when the life of the ewes or 
lambs  was threatened.  The necessity  to collect  research  data (e.g. lamb birth weight,  
ewe milk score) resulted  in more contact  with the sheep than would normally  be 
considered  necessary.  Nonetheless,  the study  yielded  useful  comparative  data on the 
labour  requirements  of indoor  versus  easy-care  lambing  systems.
The time spent  lambing  was similar  in the indoor  and easy-care  systems  (Table  2). In 
the indoor  system,  the time spent  catching  ewes  which  required  assistance  to lamb plus 
the time spent moving  ewes into lambing  pens was greater  than the time required  to 
catch those ewes which required  intervention  in the easy-care  lambing  system. The 
time spent  on lamb care was similar  in both systems.
Feedback  from the producers  involved  in the trial indicates  that they are becoming  
increasingly  confident  of the performance  of the easy-care  system,  and feel that in the 
future  there is potential  to further  delay intervention.
Table  2. The effect  of lambing  system  on labour  inputs (year 2 of study)
NS = difference  is not significant;  * = significant;  
significantActivity  (min/ewe)Lambing  system
Sig. Indoor Easy-care
Lambing 2.2 2.0 NS
Catch/move  ewes at lambing 6.5 4.6jHt
Neonatal  Lamb-care 1.6 1.7 NS
Moving  ewes to grass 3.5 0.0*★*
= highly  significant;  *** = very highly
Ewe breed  performance  in easy-care  systems
FI crossbred  ewes produced  from a previous  hill sheep  study (Dawson  and Carson,  
2002)  were used in the current  study. These  ewes  were  chosen  due to the fact that each 
of the crosses  contained  50% hardy hill breed genes  and have the potential  benefits  of 
maternal  hybrid vigour. This study enabled  the performance  of a highly prolific  
crossbred  ewe type, the Bluefaced  Leicester  X Blackface  ewe, to be compared  with 
moderately  prolific  ewe breed  types,  Texel and Suffolk  crosses,  under  indoor  and easy-  
care lambing  systems.
Lambing  difficulty  score was lower in Suffolk  X Cheviot  ewes compared  with the other  
ewe breed types (Table  3). Consequently,  the average  time spent lambing  each ewe 
was lowest  in the Suffolk  X Cheviot  and highest  in the prolific  Bluefaced  Leicester  X 
Blackface  in the easy-care  system.  Although  lamb mortality  tended  to be higher  in the 
Bluefaced  Leicester  X Blackface  ewes in the easy-care  compared  with the indoor  
system,  lamb output  remained  highest  with this ewe breed. Nonetheless,  the superiority  
of Bluefaced  Leicester  X Blackface  was less in the easy-care  system,  with Suffolk  X 
Cheviot  ewes performing  relatively  better  in the easy-care  system.
Ram breed  performance
Suffolk  and Texel are the predominant  terminal  sire breeds  in Northern  Ireland. In the 
current  study, animals  were sourced  from sire reference  schemes  and were selected  to
10
represent  the top 10% of sires on the basis  of estimated  breeding  values  for lean growth  
indices. Double-muscled  (DM)-slred  lambs  were also used in this trial as previous  work 
at ARINI had found Texels  selected  for carcass  conformation  and less for growth  rate 
produced  relatively  small lambs  with a low incidence  of lambing  difficulty.
Table 3. The effect  of ewe breed  type on lamb output
O)
■(/)
SI
02
Ic
0>
II
c
02
(/)
(/)
In the current  study DM-Texel  sired lambs  were lighter  at birth compared  with Texel and 
Suffolk-sired  lambs  and had a slightly  lower Incidence  of lambing  difficulties.  However
11
sire breed  did not significantly  affect  the time spent  to lamb an ewe. The percentage  of 
Suffolk-sired  lambs born dead was higher  compared  with DM-Texel  and Texel-sired  
lambs, resulting  in a higher overall mortality  rate in both the indoor and easy-care  
systems.  Higher  rates of lamb mortality  in Suffolk  compared  wifh Texel sires have also 
been found in previous  work (Carson  et ai, 2001).
High lamb growfh  rates are an important  component  of low labour  input  systems  through  
reducing  days to slaughter.  DM-Texel-sired  lambs  had significantly  lower  growth  rates  
from birth to weaning  compared  with the Texel and Suffolk  sires (Table  4). Consequently  
days to slaughter  were greater  for DM-Texel-sired  lambs  (173 days) compared  with 151 
and 155 days for Suffolk and Texel-sired  lambs respectively,  thus overriding  any 
potential  labour  saving benefits  of low lambing  difficulties  associated  with DM-Texel-  
sired lambs. Growth  rates were higher  in Suffolk-  compared  with Texel-sired  lambs  
produced  in the indoor  lambing  system.
Table  4. Effect  of ram breed on lamb output  in indoor  and easy-care  lambing  systems
Indoor Easy-care
DM
TexelTexel Suffolk SigDM
TexelTexel Suffolk  Sig
Lamb birth weight 4.81 4.98 5.13 NS 4.90 5.18 5.43*★
Lambing  difficulty  score  
Lamb  mortality
No. lambs  born1.2 1.3 1.4 NS 1.3 1.4 1.4 NS
dead/ewe
No. lambs  died0.07 0.07 0.15 NS 0.09 0,10 0.16 NS
(birth-weaning)
Lamb  growth  rates0.12 0.09 0.09 NS 0.15 0.09 0.13 NS
Birth-6 weeks 272 292 313***304 312 314 NS
Birth-weaning
Labour  inputs  (min)247 268 283 263 279 277★
Lambing 1.7 1.9 2.9 NS 1.5 2 9 1.6 NS
Neonatal  lamb-care 1.2 1.3 2,3 NS 1.1 1.5 2.6 NS
NS = difference  is not significant;  * = significant;  ** = highly  significant;  *** = very highly  
significant
Developing  appropriate  grazing  regimes  for ewes in late pregnancy
Whilst  there is a significant  amount  of information  on the effect of conserved  forage  
qualify  on ewe performance  at lambing  there is little or no information  on the effect of 
herbage  allowance  and concentrate  feed rates on which to base outdoor  grass-based  
feeding  strategies.  Consequently  studies  are being carried  out at ARINI  to determine  
the effect  of herbage  allowance  and concentrate  feed level on ewe body  condition,  lamb 
birth weight  and subsequent  performance.
The first study in this programme  investigated  the responses  to increasing  levels of 
concentrates  on low (1.3 kg DM/day)  and high (2.6 kg DM/day)  daily allowances  of 
herbage.  Provisional  data indicates  that ewe condition  score  and lamb birth weights  at 
lambing  increased  linearly  with increasing  levels of concentrates  on both the low and 
high herbage  allowances  (Figure  1). However,  in the first of this series of planned  
studies  little benefits  of additional  concentrate  supplementation  on subsequent  lamb 
performance  were achieved.
12
Figure  1.Effect  of concentrate  feed rate and herbage  allowance  on ewe condition  score  
and lamb birth weight.
3.6 1
200 400 600 800 1000
Concentrate  feed rate (g/day)200 400 600 800 1000
Concentrate  feed rate (g/day)
4 Low herbage  allowance  (1.3 kg DM/ewe/day)
B High herbage  allowance  (2.6 kg DM/ewe/day)
The work to date has shown  the potential  for grass-only  diets to support  the nutritional  
requirements  of ewes in late pregnancy.  A recent  indoor  study at ARINI  has shown  the 
higher intake characteristics  of zero grazed  grass compared  with conserved  forages 
(Table 5). In addition  grass alone was shown to support  relatively  high levels of 
colostrum  production.  Work is planned  to investigate  further  the effect of herbage  
allowance  on subsequent  performance  to develop  grazing  strategies  requiring  no 
concentrate  supplementation.
Table  5. The effects  of forage  type and concentrate  supplementation  on dry matter  
(DM) intake,  lamb birth weight  and colostrum  yield (1)
Diet DM intakeLamb  birth weight  
(kg)Colostrum  
yield (1)
Grass-only 1.7 5.2 1.6
High D silage  only 1.2 4.5 1.3
Restricted  grass (1 kg 1.4 4.4 2.2
DM/ewe/day)  + cone
High D silage  + cone 1.7 4.9 1,7
Medium  D silage  -r cone 1.0 5.2 1.5
Shelter  provision
In the current  study, the easy-care  system  has been investigated  over two years  on six 
farms  representing  a wide range  of farming  conditions.  On each of the farms,  fields  for 
lambing  were chosen  by the producers  on the basis of ground  conditions,  shelter  and 
convenience  to the farmyard.  Ewes have been noted  to use shelter,  particularly  during  
periods  of adverse  weather  conditions.  (In Australia  the provision  of additional  shelter 
for ewes around  lambing  has been shown  to improve  lamb survival  (Alexander  et at. 
1980)). During  the forthcoming  lambing  season  a study is planned  to investigate  the 
effect of providing  additional  shelter  on lamb survival  and growth  rates in grass-based  
lambing  systems.  The design  and location  within paddocks  of shelter  provisions  over a 
range  of farm sites will be examined.
13
other  management  issues  
Castration
In the current  study  all ram lambs  were left entire  eliminating  one of the routine  tasks of 
lamb production  and enabling  the producers  to benefit  from the higher  growth  potential  
of ram lambs. Entire males  typically  grow 10% faster  than castrates  and can be taken  
to heavier  carcass  weights  at the same fat class (+0.7 kg) (Wylie  et a!., 1997). In the 
current  study  there were few differences  in meat quality  between  the male and female  
lambs. Cooking  loss was slightly  higher  in males  and tenderness  slightly  lower,  however  
the differences  were small and the instrumental  meat quality  values  were indicative  of 
good eating  quality  in both sexes.
Worm  dosing
Effective  control  of gastrointestinal  parasites  is crucial  in maintaining  good animal  health  
and performance  and thereby  minimising  labour  requirements.  The indiscriminant  use 
of wormers  is likely  to be inefficient  from a labour  and economic  point of view as well as 
raising  concerns  on the usage  of chemicals  in production  systems.  Thus, the current  
programme  is evaluating  the potential  for on-farm  monitoring  of faecal egg counts  to 
direct  and monitor  worm control  strategies  on a sound  epidemiological  basis.
In the first year of this component  of the programme  the periparturient  rise in ewe faecal  
egg counts  (EEC)  was observed  on each of the farms  indicating  the need to dose ewes  
in late pregnancy  in a bid to minimise  larval contamination  of the pasture.  As ewes in 
the easy-care  system  are at grass  during  this period  the risk of larval contamination  of 
pastures  is likely to be reduced  by ensuring  that ewes are dosed at least four weeks  
before  the commencement  of lambing  combined  with good pasture  management.  
Provisional  data from the first year of this study indicates  that there are breed  
differences  in the level of the periparturient  rise in EEC (Figure  2). Suffolk  X Cheviot  
ewes tended to have higher FEC ’s in late pregnancy  than the other breed types.  
However,  within each of the ewe breed types a large variation  occurred  between  
individuals  in their worm egg count as assessed  by FEC. Progress  on increasing  the 
genetic resistance  to gastrointestinal  parasites  in sheep is being made through  
extensive  research  programmes  being  carried  out in the UK and Ireland  and this is likely  
to lead to considerable  benefits  in breeding  sheep  for easy-care  systems.
Figure  2. Effect  of crossbred  ewe genotype  on periparturient  rise in faecal  egg counts.
I - Bluefaced  Leicester  X Blackface  
^ Suffolk  X Cheviot 
OverallTexel X Bluefaced  
Texel X Cheviot
Weeks  pre-lambing
14
Conclusions
Grass-based  lambing  systems  have been shown  to have the potential  to reduce  the 
fixed costs associated  with lowland  sheep  production.  Averaged  across  a range  of ewe 
breed types lamb output  was similar  in grass and indoor  lambing  systems.  There  are 
some indications  that the superiority  of highly  prolific  ewe types in terms  of lamb output  
is less in grass-based  systems. Sire breed has been found to affect lamb mortality  
rates. Breed  improvement  programmes  are now taking  into consideration  traits such as 
resistance  to worms. Suitable  emphasis  needs  to be placed  on traits of vital importance  
in easy-care  systems  such as ease  of lambing  and lamb vigour. Further  work is required  
to investigate  the effect of grass allowances  in late pregnancy  to develop  grazing  
strategies,  which ensure  ewes lamb down in the correct  body condition  with lambs  of 
optimum  size.
Acknowledgments
The authors  are indebted  to the following  producers  for undertaking  this research  
programme:-  Mr and Mrs Isaac Crilly, Messrs  John and Francis  McHenry,  Messrs  Billy 
and John Martin,  Mr Alan Montgomery  and Mr Robert  Moore. Thanks  are also due to 
Dr Maurice  McCoy  and staff at the Diagnostic  Unit, Veterinary  Sciences  Division,  DARD  
and also to Mr Andrew  Crawford,  Economics  and Statistical  Division,  DARD. This 
research  programme  has been funded  by AgriSearch  and the Department  of Agriculture  
and Rural Development  for Northern  Ireland.
References
Alexander,  G., Lynch,  J.J., Mottershead,  B E. and Donnelly,  J.B. (1980). Reduction  in 
lamb mortality  by means of grass wind breaks: Results of a five-year  study.  
Proceedings  of the Australian  Society  of Animal  Production  13: 329 ~ 332 
Carson,  A.F, Dawson,  L.E.R.  and Irwin. D. (2001). A comparison  of Scottish  Blackface  
and Cheviot  ewes and five sire breeds  in terms of lamb output  in hill sheep  systems.  
Journal  of Agricultural  Science,  Cambridge  137: 221 - 223
Connelly,  L. (2000). Labour  on sheep  farms. Proceedings  of the 27^^ Meeting  of the 
Irish Grassland  and  Animal  Production  Association  pp. 82
Dawson,  L.E.R. and Carson.  A.F. (2002). Effects  of crossbred  ewe genotype  and ram 
genotype  on ewe prolificacy,  lamb viability  and lamb output in the lowland  sector.  
Journal  of Agricultural  Science,  Cambridge  (in press)
Department  of Agriculture  and Rural Development  (DARD) (1996). An economic  
analysis  of ewe flock performance  In Northern  Ireland  1994. Studies  in Agricultural  and 
Food Economics.  Department  of Agriculture,  Belfast.
Department  of Agriculture  and Rural Development  (DARD)  (2000). EU Farm Structure  
Survey 2000. Northern  Ireland: Report on the Agriculture  Labour Force. Farm  
Diversification,  Use of Contractors.  Econcomics  and Statistics  Division,  DARD.  
Department  of Agriculture  and Rural Development  (DARD)  (2001). Farm Incomes  in 
Northern  Ireland  (1999/00),  Economics  and Statistics  Division,  DARD,  March  2001.  
Wylie, A.R.G., Chestnutt,  D.M.B. and Kilpatrick,  D.J. (1997). Growth  and carcass  
characteristics  of heavy  slaughter  weight  iambs: effects  of sire breed  and sex of lamb  
and relationships  to serum  metabolites  and IGF-1 . Animal  Science  64: 309-318.
15
Lame  Sheep  - are they an inevitability  of sheep  farming?
Agnes  Winter 
University  of Liverpool
Introduction
As someone  who has kept sheep  for most of her life, the author  knows  that the utopian  
aim of eliminating  all lameness  from sheep  flocks Is impossible.  Even if the diseases  
caused  by the common  bacteria  Fusobacterlum  necrophorum  (scald)  and Dichelobacter  
nodosus  (foot rot) are controlled  (In the former)  and eradicated  (in the latter),  there are 
other  non-Infectious  problems  affecting  feet which  continue  to cause  sporadic  problems  
in individual  sheep  and sometimes  in significant  numbers  within  a flock. The author  is 
particularly  interested  in these  conditions,  which  seerfi  to involve  hoof quality.
However,  it is certainly  the case  that scald and foot rot are the major  causes  of lameness  
at flock level. It is important  to realise  that the bacteria  involved  live under different  
conditions  and this factor  determines  whether  it is possible  to eliminate  them.
Scald
F. necrophorum,  which causes  the interdigital  condition  scald. Is an organism  that is 
found  everywhere  in the environment,  particularly  in dirty conditions  and in faeces. It is 
therefore  impossible  to eliminate. It does not, on its own, cause an invasive  foot 
condition.  It is not known  whether  individual  sheep  or breeds  are more resistant  than 
others  (based  on a very small  sample,  the author ’s experience  is that black  sheep  seem  
more resistant  than white). No vaccine  is available,  so shepherds  must try and reduce  
the factors that predispose  to the condition  developing,  and to treat accordingly.  
Predisposing  factors  include:  -
Dirty/muddy  areas around  feed troughs,  water  troughs  and In gateways  that keeps  the 
skin of the interdigital  space  wet and In contact  with the bacteria 
Excessively  long grass or other herbage  that damages  the interdigital  space  
Poorly  bedded  and damp  conditions  under-foot  when sheep  are housed
• Maintaining  short swards  is good for foot health  as well as nutrition.  Situating  feed 
and water  troughs  on hard or well-drained  ground  will help to prevent  areas  of mud 
forming.  The regular  moving  of non-fixed  troughs  will also help. Attention  should  
also be paid to gateways  to ensure  that they do not become  'mud baths ’. Placing  
builders  lime in gateways  can also help to keep these areas dry, and a slightly  
alkaline  environment  may reduce  bacterial  contamination.
• Despite  these precautions,  a number  of cases will still occur which require  
treatment.  Small  numbers  respond  well to topical  Oxytetracycline  spray. If flock or 
group treatment  Is required,  the best option is probably  still walking  through  a 
formalin  footbath  at no more than 2 - 3% strength.  Standing  on a dry surface  for 
half an hour after footbathing  will ensure  that the chemical  is not immediately  
washed  off.
Foot rot
This is caused  by the combined  effects  of F. necrophorum  and D. nodosus.  After the 
initial Interdigital  damage  caused  by F. necrophorum,  D. nodosus  is able to invade  the 
hoof causing  the characteristic  smelly  necrosis  and horn separation,  which starts at the
16
heels. The degree  of invasiveness  depends  on virulence  of the strain of the bacterium.  
It is important  to realise  that this is an infectious  condition  - merely  treating  obviously 
lame animals  will never  clear the disease  from a flock. The organism  can only live on 
the ground  for 16 days, so if it is eliminated  from the feet of all sheep  and they are not 
put on ground  that has recently  had sheep on it, it is possible  the eradicate  it from a 
flock. This is worth considering  for closed flocks. However,  this is hard work and 
requires  determination  to achieve. In commercial  open flocks it is more realistic  to 
control  the disease  to an acceptable  level. Measures  which  will to need be considered  
to achieve  control  include:-
Regular  foot paring  (not too severe)
Separation  of uninfected  from infected  sheep  by examination  of all feet 
Foot bathing  (preferably  in 10% zinc sulphate)
Possible  use of vaccination
Use of antibiotic  injections  for severely  affected  animals  
Culling  of chronic  cases
Eradication  demands  much more scrupulous  imposition  of whichever  combination  
of these  control  measures  is to be applied.
Conclusion
Lame sheep suffer pain and therefore  need to be treated  as soon as is practically  
possible. Prevention  of lameness,  where  suitable  methods  exist, should  be the aim. 
More note needs to be taken of genetic  factors impacting  on the development  of 
lameness,  as it is known  that there is varying  susceptibility  to foot rot. Hoof horn quality  
may also be influenced  by genetics.  Nutrition  may also be a factor  in horn quality.  There 
is still plenty  work to be done on the control  of lameness  in sheep.
17
Scrapie,  a TSE that must  be eliminated  - an EU perspective
H. Michael  Gunn
Department of Agriculture  and Food
Abstract
A number  of Transmissible  Spongiform  Encephalopathies  (TSE's) affect man and 
animals. Scrapie,  a disease  of sheep  and goats, has been recognised  for the longest  
period  - approximately  300 years. While microscopic  changes  in the brain and spinal  
chord are common  to all these  conditions,  clinical  signs generally  include  alterations  in 
“attitude",  loss of control of movement  and eventually  death. In sheep and goats  
suffering  from Scrapie,  the loss of condition  and movement  control may also be 
accompanied  by an itch associated  with wool loss.
For precautionary  reasons,  member  states of the EU have been obliged  to eliminate  
Scrapie.  Controls  were initially  implemented  in the early 1990's. The disease  was made  
notifiable;  only sheep from 'Scrapie  free' flocks were allowed  to be exported  tor 
breeding;  the feeding  of Meat and Bone Meal (MBM)  to sheep  was banned,  and tissues  
which might possibly  be infected  with TSE's  have to be removed  at slaughter.  Ireland  
has been the first country  in the world  to actively  look for Scrapie  using a 'rapid  test' on 
post-mortem  tissues. The group with the highest  risk of having  the disease  - culled  
ewes -- has been targeted  in the major  slaughterhouses  since 1998. Data obtain  from 
such surveillance  and information  collected  from clinical cases indicates  that 
approximately  10 new flocks a year are detected  in Ireland  as having  Scrapie.  Using  
less sophisticated  surveillance  systems,  reports  indicate  that approximately  150 new 
cases  are found  per year In the UK, 13 per year in Italy, 12 per year in the Netherlands,  
nine per year in Greece  and four per year in Spain.
An EU Directive  on TSE's  has been put in place  since  July 1st 2001. This necessitates  
extra controls  being put in place within the EU. Member  States  are obliged  to actively  
look for TSE's  In their sheep  flocks. When  identified,  infected  animals  and their relations  
(and their parts after slaughter)  must be identified  and destroyed.  Controls  on sales of 
animals  from infected  flocks will be enacted  for 3 years after infection  has been 
identified.
While Scrapie,  as a disease  of small ruminants,  is accepted  to pose no human  health  
risk, its capacity  to mask BSE (as shown  in laboratory  controlled  studies)  has raised  
public health concerns.  While BSE has not been shown  to be present  in commercial  
sheep, studies  are on-going  to investigate  if sheep affected  with what appears  like 
Scrapie  are in fact infected  with BSE. This scenario  may have arisen  as Sheep  were 
probably  exposed  to similar  contaminated  MBM as were cattle; BSE' could then cycle  
in the sheep  population,  but show  the signs of Scrapie.
Traditionally  the control  of Scrapie  in sheep and goats relied on eliminating  infected  
animals  and vacating  premises,  which  were used by infected  sheep. While  it has been  
recognised  for years  that excluding  Scrapie  infected  animals  from the breeding  pool was 
useful  in controlling  the disease,  the underlying  genetic  explanation  for this is now better  
understood.  Eliminating  genetically  susceptible  animals  may be a useful tool in 
eliminating  Scrapie.  However,  at present,  there is insufficient  evidence  to assure  public  
health concerns  as genetic  ‘resistance ’ may only prevent  clinical signs and mask  
infection.
Options  being considered  to allay public  health  concerns  include  rapid testing  (for TSE 
infections)  of all sheep  going  for slaughter,  extending  the list of Specified  Risk Materials
18
to be removed  from sheep  at slaughter  and only allowing  sheep  of specific  genotypes  
to enter  the food chain. Despite  the practical  and economic  consequences  of instigating  
these measures,  there is, at present,  insufficient  knowledge  to guarantee  the safety  of 
food products  from sheep  and goats if BSE were found in these  species.
A number  of investigations  are being carried  out by DAF into the nature  of ‘resistance ’ 
to prion diseases  and the possible  role of breeding  for resistance  to Scrapie,  which  will 
contribute  to the understanding  of what is meant,  by ‘resistance ’. Breeding  programmes 
have been set up in five commercial  flocks, in which there was active Scrapie,  with 
considerable  co-operation  of their owners. When the entire breeding  stock on these  
farms  has been changed  to the "resistant ” type, detailed  laboratory  examinations  will be 
carried  out on members  of the flocks,  to ensure  that the Scrapie  prion - PrPSc  - has 
been eliminated  from the flocks.
At present  an interim policy to eliminate  Scrapie  positive  flocks and vacate  infected  
premises  is being pursued  by DAF. This policy  will be reviewed  on a regular  basis and 
will respond  to advances  in knowledge  on TSE ’s.
19
Scrapie;  current  knowledge  on the genetics  and infective  agent
Torres  Sweeney
Faculty  of Veterinary  Medicine,  University  College  Dublin.
Summary
Scrapie  is an untreatable  and fatal disease  of the central  nervous  system  of sheep  and 
goats. It is one of a group of unconventional  diseases  known as transmissible  
spongiform  encephalopathies.  Other diseases  in this group include  Creutzfeld-Jakob  
Disease  (CJD) in humans  and Bovine Spongiform  Encephalopathy  (BSE) in cattle.  
Currently,  the diagnosis  of scrapie  is dependent  upon post mortem  confirmation  by 
histological  examination  of the brain. Another  diagnostic  characteristic  of scrapie  is the 
accumulation  of an abnormal  variant  of the prion protein  in the lymphoreticular  '-ystem  
and in the central  nervous  system.  The nature  of the infectious  agent  is not known  and 
is the cause of much scientific  debate. The development  of scrapie  in sheep is 
dependent  on a genetically  susceptible  animal  being exposed  to the infectious  agent.  
Genetic  variation  at codons  136, 154 and 171 on the sheep  PrP gene has been found  
to influence  susceptibility  to scrapie.  There  is considerable  concern  that BSE may have 
entered  the sheep  population  following  the inadvertent  feeding  of meat and bone meal 
to sheep. There  is however,  no scientific  evidence  to date to support  this concern.
PrpSc  as a biochemical  marker  of infectivity
One of the characteristics  of the lymphoreticular  system  and central  nervous  system  of 
sheep  is the presence  of prion protein. The function  of the prion protein  is unknown  and 
does not appear  to play any role in normal physiological  functioning  of the animal.  
However,  the earliest  sign that a sheep  is developing  scrapie  is the transformation  of this 
protein  into an abnormal  conformation  that is very resistant  to breakdown.  Hence  this 
protein  accumulates  in the cell preventing  the cell from functioning  normally.  As the 
disease  progresses,  more and more cells accumulate  the abnormal  form of the prion 
protein. The accumulation  of this protein  in cells of the cent.'al  nervous  system  causes  
cell death, which gives a spongiform  type histopathological  appearance  under the 
microscope.  Once the cells start to die, the behaviour  of the animal  changes  and the 
characteristic  clinical  signs of scrapie  develop.  In the pre-clinical  stages  of scrapie  the 
abnormal  isoform  {PrP^'^)  of prion protein  has been detected  in gut-associated  lymphoid  
tissues,  the spleen,  lymph  nodes,  tonsil and nictitating  membrane  of the eye (Hadlow  et 
at., 1982; Van Keulen  et ai., 1996; 1999; 2000; Schreuder  etai.. 1996, 1998; O'Rourke  
et ai.. 1998; Andreolliti  et ai.. 2000). The ileal Peyer's  patch was identified  as the likely  
primary  entry site of the scrapie  agent  with subsequent  replication  and dissemination  of 
the infectious  agent occuring  in the secondary  lymphoid  system  via the lymphatic  or 
vascular  pathway  (Andreoletti  et ai., 2000). PrP can be detected  in these tissues  for 
many  months/years  before  becoming  detectable  in the CNS. While  a pre-clinical  test is 
currently  not available,  screening  peripheral  lymphoid  tissue  for PrPSc  offers  a possibility  
of pre-clinical  diagnosis  in sheep  scrapie  (Schreuder  etai., 1996; O'Rourke  etai., 1998;  
Thuring  et ai., 2001; 2002).
Genetic  susceptibility  to scrapie
The gene which  determines  whether  an animal  is resistant  or susceptible  to developing  
the clinical  signs of scrapie,  is the prion protein  gene. Polymorphisms  at codons  112, 
136, 137, 138, 141, 151, 154 and 211 of exon 3 of the gene have been characterised.
20
There are three positions  or codons  on the prion protein gene showing  variation  
associated  with resistance  or susceptibility  to developing  the clinical  signs of scrapie;  
these are at codons  136. 154 and 171. The alanine  (A) to valine (V) polymorphism  at 
codon 136 and the glutamine  (Q) to arginine  (R) polymorphism  at codon 171 contribute  
to susceptibility  to developing  clinical  signs  of scrapie  (Laplanche  etal., 1993; Belt etal.,  
1995; Clouscard  etal., 1995; Hunter  etal., 1996, 1997b;  Junghans  etal., 1998; Elsen  
etal., 1999; Tranulis  etal., 1999;  Thorgeirsdottir  etal., 1999). The association  between  
scrapie  susceptibility  and polymorphisms  at codon 154 are currently  unclear,  but there  
is a possibility  that histidine  (H) at codon  154 may offer protection  from scrapie  in some  
breeds  of sheep (Elsen et al., 1999; Thorgeirsdottir  et a!., 1999). Polymorphisms  at 
codons  112, 137, 138, 141, 151 and 211 are rare and have not been associated  with any 
disease  phenotype  in natural  and experimental  scrapie  (Laplanche  etal., 1993; Bossers  
etal., 1996; Tranulis  et al., 1999; Thorgeirsdottir  et al., 1999).
In the entire  sheep  population  studied  to-date  around  the world, five different  alleles  of 
the prion protein  gene have been identified.  These  are ARR, ARH, ARQ, AHQ, VRQ.  
Each animal  inherits  two alleles  (one from each parent),  which  gives rise to the animals'  
genotype. The most resistant  allele has been found to be ARR. Based on a 
combination  of these alleles, fifteen PrP genotypes  have been identified. These  
genotypes  can be graded  from the most resistant  genotype  (AA130 RR154 RR171 or 
written another  way prpARR/ARRj  jq the most susceptible  genotype  (W130 RR154 
QQ,71 or PrPVRQ/VRQ)
The genotype  frequencies  of the 10 main breeds  of sheep  in Ireland  have recently  been  
published  (O'Doherty  etal., 1991). There  was significant  variation  between  the different  
breeds. In a study of 154 scrapie-infected  sheep  in Ireland  genotyped  between  1998 
and 2000, seven PrP genotypes  were identified:  VV130 RR154 QQ171 (PrP'^FiQA/RQ)  
VA,36 RRi54 QQi71 (PrPVRQ/ARQ),  AA,30 RRi54 QQi7i (PrPARQ/ARQ),  VAi30 RR,54
■'171(PrPVRQ/ARR),  aAi30 RR154 QH'171QHi7i (PrpVRQ/ARH)  vAi 
(PrpARQ/ARHj  AAi30 RR154 HH,7, (PrpARH/ARH)  (Q'Doherty  et al., 2002). The results  
presented  in this study show that there is a significant  risk of developing  the clinical  
signs of scrapie  associated  with particular  PrP genotypes  in the Irish sheep  popuiation.  
The association  between  the VRQ, ARQ and the ARH allele and scrapie  was evident,  
as was the association  between  ARR and resistance  to developing  clinical  signs of 
scrapie. It was also evident  that the presence  of the AHQ allele in the flocks  examined  
resulted  in a decreased  risk of developing  scrapie.
PrpSc  distribution  in sheep  of different  genotypes
Recent  studies  have  suggested  that  the specific  PrP genotype  of an animal  can have  an 
influence  on the distribution  of PrP^c  throughout  the lymphoid  system  in natural  scrapie,  
PrPSc  has been detected  in the spleen,  lymph  nodes,  tonsil, nictitating  membrane  and 
gut-associated  lymphoid  peripheral  lymphoid  system of animals  of the following  
genotypes;  W136 RR154 QQ171 (PrpVRQA/RQ),  VA130 RR154 (PrpVRQ/ARQ),
AAi36 RRi54 QQi7i (PrpARQ/ARQ)^  VA130 RR154 QH171 (PrpVRQ/ARH)  (Van Keulen  et 
al., 1996, Schreuder  et al., 1998, Q'Rourke  el al., 1998, AndreoHiti  et al., 2000). In 
contrast,  PrP^c does not accumulate  in the lymphoreticular  system  of VA130 RR154 
QRi7, (PrpVRQ/ARR)  sheep  naturally  affected  with scrapie  but is detected  in the CNS
21
(Van Keulen  et al. 1996: Schreuder  etal. 1996, 1998;  AndreoHiti  etal. 2000), Hence,  it 
is imperative  to characterise  the distribution  of PrPSc  in the lymphoid  tissues  of animals  
with different  PrP genotypes.
A current  study underway  in Europe  is highlighting  that the earliest  time of detection  of 
PrPSc in lambs appears  to be influenced  by the breed of sheep and the genotype.  
Taking the genotype:  VVi3@ RR154 QQ171 (PrpVRQA/RQ)  Romanov  sheep express  
PrPSc  as early as 3-5 months  of age, Texels  express  PrPSc  at 4-6 months  of age, while  
Cheviots  had not expressed  PrPSc  at 10 months  of age.
What does “genetic  resistance  to scrapie ” mean?
Genetically  susceptible  sheep with genotypes  such as PrpVRQA/RQ^  prpVRQ/ARQ  
PrpARQ/ARQ  prpVRQ/ARH_  prpVRQ/ARR  p^pARQ/ARH  prpARH/ARH  ,hat develop  clinicai  
signs of the disease  following  exposure  to the infective  agent are said to be 'genetic  
susceptibility , One of the complex  areas in transmissible  spongiform  encephalopathy  
research  is to define ‘genetic  resistance ’ to scrapie. By saying that animals  of the 
genotype  PrPARR/ARR  are genetically  resistant  to scrapie,  we mean that no animal  of 
this genotype  has ever been confirmed  with scrapie  with histopathology  or detection  of 
PrPSc in any tissue  in the body. This includes  animals  that have died of old age and 
infectivity  analysed  by the subsequent  innoculation  of brain tissue  into mice. There is 
the possibility  that these  animals  had some  residual  PrpSc  that could not be detected  by 
current  biochemical  or mouse  bioassay  tests. However,  the question  has to be asked,  
if these  tissues  are not infective  in the mouse  bioassay  test, is there still a risk to other  
sheep  or to humans?
Scrapie  strain  types  and BSE in the sheep  population
Concerns  have been raised about the possibility  of natural  transmission  of the BSE 
agent  to sheep  as experimental  studies  have revealed  that sheep  develop  signs  that are 
indistinguishable  from conventional  scrapie  following  experimental  infection  with BSE 
(Foster  et al., 1993). Hence  this is one of the most active  areas of research  on TSE's  
at present.  Currently,  the experimental  innoculation  of mice with brain from the affected  
animal  is the standard  recommended  method  for distinguishing  different  TSE strains. In 
the mouse  bioassay,  the incubation  time of the disease  and brain lesion profile  pattern  
in the mice are used to differentiate  the different  strains. However,  in these  assays  large  
numbers  of animals  (26 mice per line) from three different  highly inbred mouse  lines 
(C57BI, VM95, Rill) plus their intercrosses  need to be infected  and subsequently  
analysed.  Although  the results  obtained  using this mouse  inoculation  procedure  are 
considered  reliable,  the effort and time needed  for conducting  these experiments  are 
considerable.  Hence  alternative  criteria  and techniques  are currently  being developed  
to characterize  TSE agents. Glycotyping  is a procedure  involving  the isolation,  
proteinase-K  digestion  and immunoblotting  of PrPSc  from infected  animals.  The protein  
normally  segregates  into three bands  of different  molecular  mass  on an SDS-PAGE  gel. 
The different  molecular  masses  are caused  by the number  of glycosylation  chains  on 
the protein molecule:  di-glycosylated,  mono-glycosylated  and non-glycosylated. 
Different  strains appear  to have different  sensitivities  to proteinase-K  and also the 
proportion  of the three different  glycoforms  can vary with different  strains.
22
The question,  whether  BSE can be detected  in sheep  scrapie  cases  by use of the above  
criteria,  for the molecular  characterization  of PrP^'^ was addressed  (Sweeney  et al., 
2000). Samples  from the central nervous  system (thoracic  cord, thalamus,  basal  
ganglia,  mediobasal  hypothalamus,  medulla  and cortex)  were collected  from 16 scrapie  
infected  sheep  which  had shown  a wide variety  of clinical  signs  and which  were carrying  
the following  PrP genotypes:  PrP^RQ/ARH  p|-pARQ/ARQ-  p|-pVRQ/ARQ|  pcpVRQ/ARH  
Cerebellar  and brain stem samples  were also collected  from BSE infected  cattle. PrPSc  
in ovine  scrapie  samples  from Ireland  displayed  clearly  distinct  molecular  characteristics 
from PrPSc  in bovine  BSE samples.  Sheep  scrapie  PrP^c  was generally  characterized  
by less than 55% diglycosylated  PrP compounds  in immunoblot,  while In BSE PrP^c  
about  70% diglycosylated  proteins  were detected.  It must be noted,  however,  that for a 
final characterization  of the Irish scrapie  cases,  a mouse  lesion profile  scoring  of these  
samples  will be analysed.
Three  other studies  on the molecular  characteristics  of PrPS*-  from field scrapie  cases  
have been published  to date. Two research  groups have reported  a considerable 
degree  of variation  in PrP^c  from British  scrapie  cases,  which  were assumed  to reflect  
the diversity  of different  strain  types in the country  (Hill et al., 1998; Hope et al., 1999).  
In contrast  to these results, French  scientists  found little diversity  in French  sheep  
scrapie  cases,  but glycotyping  patterns  which  closely  resembled  BSE patterns  (Baron  et 
al., 1999)
Conclusion
In conclusion,  we now have significant  information  on the genotype  variation  within  and 
between  breeds  as well as information  on the genotypes  that are more susceptible  to 
developing  the signs  of scrapie.  The distribution  of the prion protein  in scrapie  infected  
sheep  has been determined.  While  there is no evidence  that BSE is present  in sheep,  
experimental  infection  studies  are undenway  to characterise  BSE in sheep, and all 
European  countries  are developing  the technology  to identify  such cases.
References
Andreoletti,  O., Berthon,  P., Marc, D., Sarradin,  R, Ggrosclaude,  J., van Keulen,  L., 
Schelcher,  F, Elsen, J.-M. and Lantier,  F. (2000). Early accumulation  of PrPSc  in gut- 
associated  lymphoid  and nervous  tissues  of susceptible  sheep  from a Romanov  flock 
with natural  scrapie. Journal of General  Virology  81:3115-3126.
Baron,T.G.,  Madec,  J.Y. and Calavas,  D. (1999). Similar  signature  of the prion protein  
in natural sheep scrapie and bovine spongiform  encephalopathy-linked  diseases.  
Journal  of Clinical  Microbiology  37: 3701  -3704.
Belt, B.G.M.,  Muileman,  I.H., Schreuder,  B.E.C.,  Bos-de  Ruijter,  J., Gielkens,  A.L.K.  and 
Smits, M.A. (1995). Identification  of five allelic  variants  of the sheep  PrP gene and their 
association  with natural  scrapie. Journal  of General  Virology  76: 509-517.
Bossers,  A., Schreuder,  B.E.C,,  Muileman,  I.H,, Belt, P.B.G. and Smits, M.A. (1996).  
PrP genotype  contributes  to determining  survival  times of sheep  with natural  scrapie.  
Journal  of General  Virology  77: 2669-2673.
Clouscard,  C., Beaudry,  P, Elsen, J.M., Milan, D., Dussaucy,  M,, Bounneau,  C., 
Schelcher,  F, Chatelain,  J., Launey,  J.M. and Laplanche,  J.L. (1995). Different  allelic  
effects of the codons  136 and 171 of the prion protein gene in sheep with natural  
scrapie. Journal  of General  Virology  76:2097-2101.
23
Elsen,  J.-M.,  Amigues,  Y, Schelcher,  R, Ducrocq,  V., Andreoletti,  O., Eychenne,  R, Tien 
Khang,  J.V., Poivey,  J.-R, Lantier,  R. and Laplanche,  J.-L. (1999). Genetic  susceptibility  
and transmission  factors  in scrapie:  detailed  analysis  of an epidemic  in a closed  flock of 
Romanov.  Archives  of Virology  144:431-445.
Roster, J.D., Hope, J. and Rraser, H. (1993). Transmission  of bovine spongiform  
encephalopathy  to sheep  and goats. Veterinary  Record  133:339-341.
Hadlow,  W.J., Kennedy,  R.C. and Race, R.E. (1982). Natural  infection  of Suffolk  sheep  
with scrapie  virus. Journal of Infectious  disease  146:657-664.
Hill, A.R, Sidle, K.C., Joiner, S., Keyes, R, Martin,  T.C., Dawson,  M. and Collinge,  J. 
(1998). Molecular  screening  of sheep  for bovine  spongiform  encephalopathy.  Neurodci.  
Lett 255 (3): 159-162.
Hope, J., Wood,  S.C.E.R.,  Birkett,  C.R., Chong,  A., Bruce,  M.E., Cairns,  D., Goldmann,  
W., Hunter,  N. and Bostock,  C.J. (1999). Molecular  analysis  of ovine prion protein  
identifies  similarities  between  BSE and an experimental  isolate of scrapie,  CHI 641. 
Journal  of General  Virology  80: 1 -4.
Hunter,  N., Roster,  J.D., Goldmann,  W., Stear, M.J., Hope, J. and Bostock,  C. (1996).  
Natural  scrapie  in a closed  flock of Cheviot  sheep  occurs  only in specific  PrP genotypes.  
Archives  of Virology  141: 809-824.
Hunter, N., Goldmann,  W., Poster, J.D., Cairns, D. and Smith, G. (1997). Natural  
Scrapie  and PrP Genotype:  Case-control  Studies  in British Sheep. Veterinary  Record  
141: 137-140.
Junghans,  R, Teufel, B., Buschmann,  A., Steng, G. and Groschup,  M.H. (1998)  
Genotyping  of German  sheep  with respect  to scrapie  susceptibility.  Veterinary  Record  
143: 340-341.
Laplanche,  J.L., Chatelain,  J., Westaway,  D., Thomas,  S., Dussaucy,  M., Brugere-  
Picoux,  J. and Launay,  J.M. (1993). PrP polymorphisms  associated  with natural  scrapie  
discovered  by denaturing  gradient  gel electrophoresis.  Genomics  15: 30-37.
O’Doherty,  E., Aherne,  M., Ennis,  S,, Weavers,  E., Hunter,  N., Roche,  J.R and Sweeney,  
T. (2000). Detection  of polymorphisms  in the prion protein  gene in a population  of Irish 
Suffolk  sheep. Veterinary  Record  146: 335-338.
O’Doherty,  E., Aherne,  M., Ennis,  S., Weavers,  E., Roche,  J.R and Sweeney,  T. (2001).  
Prion protein  gene polymorphisms  in pedigree  sheep  in Ireland. Research  in Veterinary  
Science  70: 51-56.
O'Doherty,  E., Healy,  A., Aherne,  M., Weavers,  E., Doherty,  M., Roche,  J.R, Gunn, M. 
and Sweeney.  T. {in press). Prion protein  (PrP) gene polymorphisms  associated  with 
natural  scrapie  cases  and their flock-mates  in Ireland. Research  in Veterinary  Science.  
O'Rourke,  K.I., Baszler,  TV., Parish, S.M. and Knowles  D.P. (1998). Preclinical  
detection  of PrP^c  in nictitating  membrane  lymphoid  tissue  of sheep. Veterinary  Record  
142: 489-491.
Schreuder,  B.E.C.,  van Keulen,  L.J., Vromans,  M.E., Langeveld,  J.R and Smits, M.A. 
(1996). Rreclinical  test for prion diseases.  Nature 381: pp563.
Schreuder,  B.E.C.,  van Keulen,  L.J., Vromans,  M.E., Langeveld,  J.R. and Smits, M.A. 
(1998). Tonsillar  biopsy  and RrRSc  detection  in the preclinical  diagnosis  of scrapie.  
Veterinary  Record  142: 564-8.
Sweeney,  T, Kuczius,  T, McElroy,  M., Gomez  Rarada,  M. and Groschup,  M. (2000).  
Molecular  analysis  of Irish scrapie  isolates.  Journal  General  Virology  81: 1621-1627.
Thorgeirsdotter,  S., Sigurdarson,  S., Thorisson,  H.M., Georgsson,  G. and Ralsdottir,  A.
24
(1999). PrP gene polymorphism  and natural  scrapie  in Icelandic  sheep. Journal  of 
General  Virology  80: 2527-2534.
Thuring,  C.M.A.,  McElroy,  M., Sweeney,  T. and Weavers,  E. (2000). Protuberances  on 
sheep  third eyelids  as a suitable  biopsy  site for lymphoid  follicles. Veterinary  Record  
147: 631-632.
Thuring,  C.M.A.,  Crowe,  M.A., McAllister,  H., Earley, B., Roche,  J.R and Sweeney,  T. 
(2002). Peripheral  lymphoreticular  biopsy techniques  and associated  clinical side 
effects  in sheep. Research  in Veterinary  Science  (in press).
Tranulis,  M.A., Osland,  A., Bratberg,  B. and Ulvund,  M.J. (1999). Prion protein  gene  
poymorphsims  in sheep  with natural  scrapie  and healthy  controls  in Norway.  Journal  of 
General  Virology  80: 1073-1077.
van Keulen, L.J.M., Schreuder,  B.E.C., Meleon,  R.H,, Mooij-Harkes,  G., Vromans,  
M.E.W.  and Langefeld,  J.P.M. (1996). Immunohistochemical  detection  of prion protein  
in lymphoid  tissues  of sheep  with natural  scrapie. Journal  of Clinical  Microbiology  34 
(5): 1228-1231.
van Keulen, L.J., Schreuder,  B.E,, Vromans,  M.E., Langeveld,  J.P and Smits, M.A. 
(1999). Scrapie-associated  prion protein in the gastrointestinal  tract of sheep with 
natural  scrapie. J. Comp.  Pathol. 121 (1): 55-63.
van Keulen,  L.J., Schreuder,  B.E., Vromans,  M E., Langeveld.  J.P. and Smits, M.A. 
(2000). Pathogenesis  of natural  scrapie  in sheep. Arch. Virol. Suppl. 16:57-71.
25
Variety  diversity  in key characters  determining  grazing  value  in 
ryegrass  (Lolium  perenne  L.) swards
T. J. Gilliland'',  P. D. Barrett^  and R. E. Agnew^
Department  of Agriculture  and Rural Development for Northern  Ireland  
^Applied  Plant  Science  Division,  Plant Testing  Station.  Crossnacreevy,  Belfast.  BT6
9SH
^Agricultural Research  Institute  for Northern  Ireland,  Hilllsborough.
Introduction
Herbage  yield is only a partial indicator  of the overall  value of a perennial  ryegrass  
variety  as animal  productivity  is the ultimate  measure  of its vt/orth. Despite  this, current  
variety  testing  programmes  in the UK and Ireland  are based  primarily  on cutting  systems  
\«ith animals  rarely involved  and only then to introduce  grazing  pressures  or to assess  
grazing  preferences,  but not to measure  animal  output  from varieties  (Weddell  et af. 
1997). This absence  of a direct animal output assessment  is recognised  as a 
shortcoming  of the testing  systems  (Orr et af, 1988).
A total of 111 different  perennial  ryegrasses  are currently  recommended  in the UK and 
Ireland  and upwards  of 40-50  new candidates  are submitted  annually  for evaluation.  It 
is both impractical  and prohibitively  expensive  to measure  animal  output  on such large  
numbers  of varieties.  Consequently,  any grazing  output  studies  that have been done  
only examine  a very small number  of varieties.  So alternative  ways of assessing  the 
animal  output  potential  of ryegrass  varieties  must be sought. Variety  feeding  value can 
be defined  as a combination  of the nutritive  quality  and intake potential  of the grass,  
which  will comprise  chemical,  morphological  and yield factors. Characteristics  such as 
sward surface  height,  herbage  mass, bulk density  and green leaf mass have all been 
implicated  as having  effect  on intake  during  grazing  (Penning  etal., 1994; Barrett  et af, 
2001). Furthermore,  nutritive  value factors such as digestibility  and water-soluble  
carbohydrate  (WSC)  have been shown  to increase  the output  of milk or meat without  
increasing  production  costs (Davies  etal., 1991). In contrast,  protein  levels  in grass  are 
not normally  limiting  for ruminant  nutrition  and are therefore  unlikely  to be important  
parameters  for variety  evaluation.
In the present study, the potential  value and practicality  of incorporating  the 
aforementioned  parameters  into routine  testing  procedures  for compiling  recommended  
lists of perennial  ryegrass  varieties  is considered.
Materials  and Methods
The study was conducted  at the Plant Testing Station Northern  Ireland using 12
perennial  ryegrass  varieties,  comprising  diploids  and tetraploids  of different  maturity  
types (Table 1). The varieties  were managed  under the simulated  rotational  grazing  
system  used for the Northern  Ireland  Recommended  List (Weddell  et af, 1997) and so 
were cut with a plot harvester.
26
Table 1. Perennial  ryegrass  varieties  examined
Early Maturing
Frances Sambin AberTorch  (T) Tetramax  (T)
Intermediate  Maturing
AberDart Merbo  Calibra  (T) Missouri  (T)
Late Maturing
Choice Foxtrot Millennium  (T) Navan  (T)
(T) indicates  a tetraploid  variety
At each of eight rotational  grazing  cuts between  early May and October,  representative  
samples  were taken  for five sward  morphological  characters  (sward  height,  tiller length,  
bulk density,  Leaf:Stem  ratio and leaf weight),  three nutritive  value parameters  (water-  
soluble  carbohydrate  ‘WSC concentration  and WSC yield and in vitro digestibility  by 
pepsin  cellulase  ‘%DMD')  as well as for the standard  test assessments  of total annual  
and seasonal  yields and sward density. In all cases the methods  employed  were as 
described  by Gilliland  et al., (2002).
Current  yield based  assessments
The 12 ryegrass  varieties  differed  significantly  in total annual  yield, in their seasonal  
distribution  of yield across  the growing  season  and also in sward density  (Table 2). 
These data are supplied  annually  to farmers through the Northern  Ireland 
Recommended  List booklet  and show that the tetraploids  are among  the highest  total 
annual  yielding  varieties  available.  Importantly,  the table shows  that the total annual  
yield rankings  do not remain  fixed throughout  the growing  season. With the exception  
of Merbo,  which maintains  a relatively  consistent  performance  throughout  the year, the 
other varieties  display  periods  of peak productivity  at specific  times. For example,  
Sambin  outperforms  all other  varieties  except  for AberTorch  in spring,  despite  it having  
the lowest  total annual  yield of all 12 varieties.
Table 2. Comparison  of production  and sward density  of perennial  ryegrass  varieties 
under  a simulated  grazing  management
Control  Yield  
it DM ha <)HeadingTotal
Yield SpringEarly
SummerLate
Summer AutumnSward  
Density  
0-9 high dafe 12.5 1.9 5.1 3.9 1,5
AberTorch  (T) 9 May 106 130 94 100 102 5.8
Frances 11 May 95 104 93 98 97 6.1
Sambin 16 May 87 122 88 85 91 6.9
Tetramax  (T) 19 May 101 111 101 96 96 5.8
Merbo 21 May 93 95 98 96 92 5.8
AberDart 27 May 92 99 98 105 107 5.9
Calibra  (T) 27 May 107 103 104 105 98 5.8
Missouri  (T) 28 May 103 100 101 107 100 5.5
Navan  (T) 6 June 109 91 104 114 105 5.1
Foxtrot 7  June 107 86 110 111 99 6.1
Choice 10 June 97 77 105 105 93 5.9
Millennium(T) 14 June 102 95 107 110 101 5.6
Average 100 101 100 103 98 5.9
Significance *** trim irim *** *** ***
Diploid 95 97 99 100 97 6.1
Tetraploid 105 105 102 105 100 5.6
Significance *** **NS * NS***
Early 97 117 94 95 97 6.2
Intermediate 99 99 100 103 99 5.8
Late 104 87 107 110 100 5.7
Significance NS*** ** *** NS**.
27
Although  the genetic-driven  trend for earlier  maturity  to be associated  with higher  spring  
production  is clearly  expressed  among  these varieties,  exceptions  are again evident.  
For example,  the total annual  yield ranking  of Foxtrot  and Millennium  are reversed  in 
spring  and there is a 4% difference  between  Merbo  and AberDart  at this time, despite  
them having  a similar  total yield potential.  Following  the spring  period  the late varieties  
optimise  production  during the main summer  period and the high spring performers  
generally  show  a dip in performance  particularly  in early  summer.  In the autumn  period,  
variety  maturity  has no influence  on performance  but again exceptional  performances  
are evident. For example  AberDart  had the highest  autumn  yields  despite  its low total 
annual  yield, Navan  and Millennium  were consistently  high performing  in summer  and 
autumn  following  their relatively  low spring performance,  whereas  Calibra  excelled  in 
spring  and summer  but its performance  fell in autumn. Clearly  such information  is of 
value to farmers  and seeds merchants  as it identifies  varieties  and helps design  
mixtures  that deliver productivity  instep with the herd requirements  throughout  the 
season.
Sward  morphology  differences
Grass intake rates are a key factor in driving animal performance  at grass. This is 
particularly  true for dairy cows due to their requirement  for up to 20 kg d ' DM and the 
limited time in the day to graze such large quantities  of grass (Gibb, 1998). From a 
grass  variety  evaluation  perspective,  it is known  that grazing  intakes  are greatly  affected  
by the canopy  structure  of the sward  (Forbes,  1988),  including  characters  such as sward  
surface  height,  tiller length,  bulk density  and leaf mass.
The results  in Table 3 show that there are substantial  differences  between  varieties  in 
the structure  of the swards  they form, which can be expected  to impact  on the grazing  
animals  ability  to achieve  high intakes  of herbage.
Table 3. Comparison  of perennial  ryegrass  varieties  for sward morphological  and 
nutritive  characters  under  a simulated  grazing  management  (seasonal  averages)
Sward Tiller Bulk Leaf Leaf WSC WSC In vitro
Height Length Density Stem Weight Content Yield Digestibility
Variety (cm) (cm) (kgm 3DM) ratio (kgha ’DM) (gkg 'DM) (kgha'DM) (%DM)
AberTorch  (T) 17.2 24.0 0.80 0.85 1164 278.1 364.8 80.6
Frances 16.8 22.3 0.72 0.80 972 233.5 272.0 73 9
Sambin 16.5 22.0 0.68 0.75 828 231.7 247.2 71.0
Tetramax  (T) 16.6 23.2 0.77 0.85 1076 259.1 322.4 79.0
Merbo 16.7 22.4 0.71 0.79 943 248.6 288.0 73.5
AberDart 16.7 22 6 0.70 0.86 1027 286.0 332.0 81.5
Calibra  (T) 17.2 23.9 0.79 0.86 1180 277.5 369.8 80.1
Missouri  (T) 17.4 23.9 0.75 0.83 1108 272.4 347.9 77.8
Navan  (T) 15.8 23.2 0.87 0.88 1259 277.6 383.2 80.1
Foxtrot 15.7 21.7 0.85 0.84 1167 272.4 369.9 79.9
Choice 14.9 20.7 0.81 0.87 1094 245.6 297.4 79.5
Millennium(T) 15.4 22.0 0.84 0.91 1215 260.6 330.7 78.9
Average 16.4 22.7 0.77 0.84 1086 261.9 327.1 78.0
Significance*** *** *** ir** *** *** ***
Diploid 16.2 22.0 0.74 0.82 1005 253.0 301.1 76 6
Tetraploid 16.6 23.4 0.80 0.86 1167 270.9 353.1 79.4
Significance NSiMr* ** * **NS* ***
Early 16.8 22.9 0.74 0.81 1010 250,6 301.6 76.1
Intermediate 17.0 23.2 0.74 0.84 1064 271.1 334,4 78.2
Late 15.4 21,9 0.84 0.88 1184 264.0 345.3 79.6
Significance** * ***NS * NS NS***
WSC  = water  soluble  carbohydrate
28
As a general  guide, the larger the values in Table 3 the more favourable  is the 
characteristic  for high grazing  performances.  In all these  factors,  substantial  differences  
existed  between  the varieties  and it was possible  to identify  those with characteristics  
that indicated  a high or low intake potential. For example.  Choice  was a short low 
growing  variety  whereas  the three tetraploid  varieties  AberTorch,  Calibra  and Missouri  
were tall growing  with long tillers. Furthermore,  Sambin  scored  poorly  for density  of 
grovifth  and leaf content  whereas  Millinneum,  which had a sorter  sward  with similar  tiller 
lengths  to Sambin,  had very high leaf contents  in a very dense growth. Across  all 
characteristics,  only the tetraploid  varieties  AberTorch  and Calibra  were above  average  
in all cases,  suggesting  that they could be expected  to provide  greater  levels  of intake  
and support  higher animal productivity  than swards  of many of the other varieties.  
Tetraploids  in general,  displayed  excellent  sward heights,  tiller lengths  and herbage  
density. Sward leafiness  has been consistently  found to associate  with high intake  
potential,  however,  in addition  to the wide range  of differences  between  varieties  in Table  
3, there were much larger differences  during the season linked closely  to variety  
maturity. This makes this aspect of sward structure  difficult  to interpret. Overall,  
however,  the tetraploids  were again clearly  superior  to diploid  varieties  and the top two 
performers  were the late tetraploids  Navan  and Millennium.  This is consistent  with the 
reports  of O'Donnovan  et al., (1999),  who recorded  higher  dry matter  intakes  with dairy 
cows for two late varieties  (Portstewart  and Millennium)  in comparison  with two 
intermediate  varieties  (Spelga  and Napoleon),  with the tetraploids  performing  best in 
each case.
These results  show that existing  recommended  varieties  differ substantially  in such 
grazing  value factors  as leaf content  and herbage  presentation  and that while maturity  
and ploidy may have an influence,  individual  varieties  are not totally subordinate  to 
these influences.
Nutritive  value  differences
Water-soluble  carbohydrate  concentration  of pasture  grasses  increases  the amount  of 
readily  available  carbohydrate,  so affecting  the efficiency  of conversion  of nitrogen  to 
microbial  protein  in the rumen. This has been shown  to increase  live weight  gain in 
sheep (Lee et al., 2000a)  and in cattle (Lee et al.. 2000b)  and to enhance  the milk 
production  and quality  in dairy cows (Miller et al., 2001). In the current  study, WSC  
concentrations  were generally  higher in tetraploids  than diploids,  with the lowest  
concentration  being in Sambin  (Table  3). Despite  this trend, the top variety  was the 
diploid AberDart,  which was specifically  bred for high WSC. Other notable 
performances  included  Foxtrot  in achieving  a similar  WSC concentration  to the majority  
of tetraploids  and to the relatively  low WSC concentration  of Millennium  and Tetramax.  
When  WSC yield was examined,  the high performing  AberDart  no longer  excelled  due 
to its low overall  production  potential,  but Foxtrot  remained  very high and as good as 
almost all the tetraploids,  having a high herbage  yield and WSC concentration  
combination.  The importance  of these variety  differences  of over 50 g kg-i DM are 
apparent  when it is considered  that Miller et al., (2001)  found that WSC concentration  
differences  of 40 g kg-i DM significantly  improved  feed protein  conversion  to milk protein  
in dairy cows.
29
The digestibility  differences  between  the varieties  displayed  a similar  variety  pattern  to 
that found for WSC concentration.  Clearly  high WSC concentrations  promote  higher  
total digestibility,  however  around  30% of the variation  in digestibility  could not be 
accounted  for by WSC differences  alone and so other factors  were also having an 
influence.
Recommending  varieties  for grazing
The presented  variety  data provides  a very complex  pattern  of performances  that are 
not easily translated  into an overall measure  of grazing  value. Moreover,  current  
knowledge  is not sufficient  to permit yield advantages  to be compensated  for in a 
quantitative  way by any of the aforementioned  value indicators.  Clearly  high values  in 
all parameters  are desirable,  but converting  them into a transparent  indicator  of grazing  
worth  is a difficult  task. One possible  approach  is to set positive  and negative  thresholds  
on the range  that exists  among  the varieties  in each character.  A simple  approach  is to 
designate  the top 33 percentile  as a positive  attribute  and the bottom  33 percentile  as 
negative,  with the middle  values  as neutral.  Therefore,  if a variety  produced  a result  that 
put it in the top third of performances  among  a group  of varieties  it would  be awarded  a 
+ 1 (or +2 or more depending  on how important  the character  is for grazing).  Similarly,  
if the result  was in the bottom  third of the performances  the variety  would  score  -1 (or- 
2 etc) and if it was in the middle  third it would neither  gain nor lose any marks. This is 
only one simple example  of many possible  different  ways of how to apply such a 
weighted  scoring  system. The exact one chosen  would depend  on research  backed  
information  on how the different  parameters  interact  and to what extent  they impact  on 
grazing  performance.  Even so, if this simple  example  is applied  to the existing  variety  
results,  with the data combined  to create  four categories;  ‘total yield’, 'sward  structure',  
nutritive  value ’ and ‘sward  density ’, then the variety  comparisons  are as shown  in Table  4.
Table  4. Example  variety  comparison  table for grazing  use rankings.
VarietyTotal
Yield 
Ranking  
+ 1 to -1Sward
Structure  
Ranking  
+5 to -5Nutritive
Value  
Ranking  
+2 to -2Sward  
Density  
Ranking  
+ 1 to -1Ranking
Ranking
Total
+9 to -9
Calibra  (T) + 1 +4 +2 0 +7
AberTorch  (T) + 1 +2 +2 0 +5
Navan (T) + 1 +3 +2 -1 +5
Foxtrot + 1 0 0 + 1 +2
Tetramax  (T) 0 + 1 0 0 +1
Choice 0 0 -1 + 1 0
Millennium  (T) 0 + 1 0 -1 0
AberDart -1 -2 +2 + 1 0
Missouri  (T) 0 + 1 -1 -1 -1
Frances -1 -2 -2 + 1 -4
Sambin -1 -4 -2 + 1 -6
Merbo -1 -3 -2 0 -6
. All parameters  were simply  given the same  weighting  of +1/0/-1. As WSC yield was 
a direct  calculation  of total yield and WSC concentration  it was excluded  from the table
30
to avoid double  counting.  The ranking  total in the last column  of the table shows  how 
the varieties  separated  out overall. It is notable  that the top three varieties  were  
tetraploids.  It is also clearly  evident  that total yield had a major impact  on the overall  
grazing  value ranking  as only AberDart  with its exceptionally  high WSC concentrations 
had a final ranking  that was totally  inconsistent  with its yield performance.  However,  this 
observation  oversimplifies  what is occurring,  as it is possible  to distinguish  between  
varieties  of similar  yield potential  but with different  grazing  values. For example  Choice  
and Frances  had a similar  yield of 97% and 95% of the control  (Table  3), yet their final 
value rankings  of 0 and ~4 respectively,  were very different. Similarly  Foxtrot  and 
Calibra  yielded  107% in Table  3 but had grazing  value  scores  of +2 and +7 respectively.  
Furthermore,  Missouri,  Millennium  and Tetramax  had similar  yields  of 103,102  and 101 
respectively  but this order changed  to -1, 0 and +1 respectively  in the final rankings.
Clearly  the value  of such a ranking  system  is only as good as the information  from which  
it is created. Specific  research  information  is required  to determine  what weighting  
should be applied  to each factor to account  for its individual  influence  on grazing  
performance  and to counteract  the interactions  that clearly  occur  between  the different  
factors  examined  in this study.
Summary
The present  study showed  the existence  of substantial  differences  among currently  
recommended  varieties  for a number of sward structure  and nutritional  factors  
associated  with enhanced  grazing performance.  However,  before this type of 
information  can be incorporated  into routine recommended  testing protocols,  better  
information  is needed  on the quantitative  impact  of each factor  on the performance  of 
the grazing  animal. Furthermore,  the workloads  associated  with assessing  the sward  
structure  parameters  were very high. Some way of reducing  the workloads  is 
necessary,  either  by reducing  the number  of measurements  taken  or by estimating  them  
from other information  that is routinely  measured  on varieties,  such as the detailed  
morphological  examinations  that are made during Plant Breeders  Rights tests. In 
contrast,  assessment  of WSC appears  more achievable  on a routine  basis, particularly  
if it could be conducted  at a single  time of year. Given  the increasing  evidence  that high 
WSC concentration  has measurable  impacts  on animal  performance  with no additional  
Input costs  to the farmer,  inclusion  in testing  systems  would  seem  justified.
Some time will be required  to build up databases  of Information  on all existing  
recommended  varieties  for any of the characteristics  examined.  Before  this can be 
embarked  upon, clear evidence  of the value of the information  to farmers  must be 
established  plus an unambiguous  and non-complicating,  yet scientifically  valid way of 
presenting  the information  must be established.
References
Barrett,  P. D., Laidlaw,  A. S., Mayne,  C. S. & Christie,  H. (2001).  Pattern  of herbage  
intake rate and bite dimensions  of rotationally  grazed dairy cows as sward height  
declines.  Grass  and Forage  Science,  56, 362-373.
Davies,  D. A., Fothergill,  M., & Jones,  D. (1991). Assessment  of contrasting  perennial  
ryegrasses  with and without  white clover, under continuous  sheep stocking  in the
31
uplands.  3. Herbage  production,  quality  and intake. Grass  and Forage  Science  46, 39- 
49.
Gibb, M. J (1998).  Animal  grazing/intake  terminology  and definitions.  Pasture  Ecology  
and Animal Intake. Proceedings  of a Workshop  held in Dublin, September  1996.  
Occasional  Publication  No. 3. pp. 21-37.
Gilliland,  T. J, P. D. Barrett,  R. L. Mann, R. E. Agnew  and A. M. Fearon  (2002). Canopy  
morphology  and nutritional  quality  traits as potential  grazing  value indicators  for Lolium  
perenne  L. varieties.  Journal of Agricultural Science,  Cambridge  (In Press).
Hodgson,  J. (1981).  Variations  in the surface  characteristics  of the sward  and the short­
term rate of herbage  intake  by calves  and lambs.  Grass  and Forage  Science,  36, 49-57.
Lee, M. R. F, Jones,  E. L., Moorby,  J. M., Humphreys,  M. O., Theodorou,  M. K,. Macrae,  
J. C. (2000a).  Production  responses  from lambs  grazing  on Lolium  perenne  selected  for 
high water  soluble  carbohydrate  grazing  management:  the principles.  The Principle  and 
Practice  of Grazing  for Profit  and Environmental  Gain in Temperate  Grassland  Systems.  
British  Grassland  Society  (BGS) Occasional  Symposium  34. (Eds. A. Rook and P. D. 
Penning)  pp 45-50, British  Grassland  Society,  Reading.
Lee, M. R. F, Evans, R. T, Moorby,  J. M., Humphreys,  M. O., Theodorou,  M. K. & 
Macrae,  J. C. (2000b).  Increased  intake responses  from beef steers  zero-grazed  on 
Lolium  perenne  selected  for high levels of water  soluble  carbohydrate.  Proceedings  of 
the British  Society  of Animal  Science  Annual  Meeting,  York.
Miller, L. A., Baker, D. H., Theodorou,  M. K., Macrae,  J. C., Humphreys,  M. O, Scollan,  
N. D. (2001). Efficiency  of nitrogen  use in dairy cows grazing  ryegrass  with different  
water  soluble  carbohydrate  concentrations  in grassland  ecosystems.  In: An Outlook  Into 
the 21" Century,  International  Grassland  Congress,  Sao Paulo,  Brazil.
O'Donnova,  M., Casey,  I., Gowen,  N. (1999), Milk production  potential  of different  sward  
varieties.  In; Moorepark  99’A new  Agenda  for Dairying,  pp. 53-56.  Cork.
Orr, R. J., Parsons,  A, J., Treacher,  T. T, & Penning,  P. D. (1988).  Seasonal  patterns  of 
grass  production  under  cutting  or continuous  stocking  managements.  Grass  and Forage  
Science  43, 199-207.
Penning,  P. D., Parsons,  A. J., Orr, R. J. & Hooper,  G. E. (1994),  Intake  and behaviour  
responses  by sheep  to changes  in sward  characteristics  under  rotational  grazing.  Grass  
and Forage  Science  49, 476-486,
Weddell,  J. R., Gilliland,  T. J. & McVittie,  J. (1997).  Evaluation  procedures:  past, present  
and future.  In Seeds  of Progress,  Occasional  Symposium  No. 31 (Ed. J. R. Weddell)  p, 
202-225.  British  Grassland  Society.
32
Improving  cow performance  at grass,  what  do grass  cultivars  offer?
Noel Gowen,  Michael  O'Donovan,  Imelda  Casey  and Gearoid  Stakelum  
Teagasc,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co Cork.
Introduction
High performance  from dairy cows is central  to achieving  high financial  returns  from the 
farming  enterprise  (Stakelum  et al, 1997). This is achieved  when the cow consumes  
high levels of high quality  feed. Grass  when grazed  efficiently  is by far the cheapest 
feed available  on the farm (Sheedy,  2000). Therefore,  the production  and utilisation  of 
grass has a central  role in maintaining  the competitiveness  of the Irish dairy industry.  
Much of the focus of grassland  research  has centred  on grass utilisation  and grass  
production.  Very little focus  has been given  to identifying  the most  suitable  grass  for the 
grazing  system. Perennial  ryegrass  cultivars  are divided  into three groups  according  to 
the date of ear emergence  viz. early, intermediate  and late. It is known  that differences 
exist in maturity  group  thus, early heading  cultivars  decline  in digestibility  earlier  than 
late heading  cultivars  during  the early summer  period (Gately,  1984). In the past few 
years,  there have been dramatic  changes  in plant breeding  and within  the seed industry.  
Plant breeding  has contributed  a 0.08%  increase  in dry matter  production  annually  over 
the past decade.  However,  the most  recent  published  DAP figures  show  a growing  trend  
of increased  usage  of late heading  grass cultivars.  Early heading  grass cultivars  now 
only constitute  2% of all grass  seed sold.
It is a difficult  task to make meaningful  comparisons  of herbage  cultivars.  All of the 
comparative  work is completed  in terms  of dry matter  production  under  cutting,  which  is 
the method  of evaluation  used by DAF in compiling  recommended  lists. A criticism  of 
this method  is that the cultivars  are not subjected  to an animal  influence  i.e. selective 
grazing,  treading  damage  and the return  of faeces  and urine. It is essential  to compare 
cultivars  by using animal  intake  and performance  as a measure  of their productivity.  
Gately, (1984) examined  an early heading  and late heading  ryegrass  at two stocking  
rates with dairy cows. At low stocking  rate, cows grazing  the late heading  cultivars 
produced  8.8% more milk than cows grazing  the early cultivars,  however  at the high 
stocking  rate the cows grazing  the early heading  cultivar  gave 6.6% more milk. The 
digestibility  of the late heading  ryegrass  was significantly  greater  than that of the early  
heading  ryegrass. Minson  et al. (1960) reported  that early maturing  S24 perennial  
ryegrass  was lower in digestibility  at a given date in spring  than the late maturing  S23 
cultivar. Tetraploid  grass cultivars  now constitute  up to 30% of all grazing  mixtures  
(Culleton  etal. 1998). Vipond  etal. (1993)  found  under  continuous  grazing  with sheep,  
an advantage  to tetraploids  compared  to diploid  grass cultivars.  Lantinga  et al, (1996)  
reported  a milk yield advantage  to tetraploids  relative to diploids over a short  
experimental  period. In a grazing  preference  experiment  (O'Riordan,  1997) found  that 
tetraploid  grasses  predominated  in the highest  ranked  grasses  for grazing  preferences.  
This paper reports  on the results  of a 2 year investigation  on the effect of perennial  
ryegrass  cultivars  differing  in both heading  date and ploidy  on daily milk production  and 
grass dry matter intake of spring calving dairy cows. The difference  in sward  
characteristics  between  cultivars  was also investigated.
Experimental  Methodology
The experiment  was carried  out at the Moorepark  Research  Centre  during  the 1999 and 
2000 grazing  season.  The soil type was a free-draining  acid brown  earth of sandy  loam
33
to loam texture. A permanent  grassland  site (17.2 ha) was reseeded  in August  1998.  
Table 1 shows  details  of cultivar,  heading  date, ploidy,  and seeding  rate. A further  3.9 
ha was reseeded  in April 2000 and incorporated  into the experimental  area in that year.
Table 1. Grass  cultivar,  heading  date, ploidy,  seeding  rate and experimental  land area.
Cultivar Heading  date Ploidy Seeding  rate 
(kg/ha)Land area
(ha)
Millenium 10-June  (L) Tetraploid 42 4.30
Portstewart 07-June  (L) Diploid 34 4.30
Napoleon 20-May (1) Tetraploid 42 4.30
Spelga 17-May  (1) Diploid 34 4.30
Design  and layout
At sowing,  the experimental  area was divided  equally  into the four treatments  consisting  
of 4.3 ha each. This area was divided  into 10 paddocks  ranging  in size from 0.35 to 0.47 
ha. In 2000, the additional  3.9 ha was divided  equally  between  treatments,  thereby  
increasing  the total area and paddock  number  per treatment  to 5.28 ha and 12, 
respectively.  Table  2 shows  the stocking  rate changes  over the grazing  area during  the 
experimental  periods  of 1999 and 2000.
Table  2. Mean stocking  rates (SR) (cows/ha)  of the grass cultivars  during  the grazing  
seasons  of 1999 and 2000.
1999
Date SR2000
Date SR
April - May 4.95 Apr- May 4.70
June - July 4.20 June - July 4.20
Aug - 26 Sept 4.20 Aug - 1 Get 3.80
Animals
In 1999 and 2000, 72 and 80 respectively,  spring  calving  holstein  friesian  dairy cows  
were blocked  into groups  of four. Each animal was randomly  assigned  to a grass  
cultivar  treatment.  Treatments  were applied  for 168 days in 1999 (April 12 to September  
26) and 161 days in 2000 (April 24 to October  01). The trial start date was delayed  in 
2000 due to poor spring  grass  growth. In 1999 and 2000,  treatment  group  size was 18 
and 20, respectively.  In both years  prior to experiment  start up, the animals  grazed  the 
experimental  area and were supplemented  with 5 - 6kg concentrate  per cow/day  during  
this grazing  period.
Grazing  Management
Rotational  grazing  management  as described  by (Dillon et al., 1995) was applied.  
Individual  paddock  residency  time ranged  from 2 to 2.5 days in both years. Grass  
supply  was monitored  weekly  by completion  of a farm grass  cover (O' Donovan,  2000).  
Grass  supply  was considered  to be in excess  when supply  exceeded  280 kg DM/cow.  
When a similar  surplus  occurred  In each cultivar,  grass was harvested  as round bale 
silage. This occurred  on May 5th and July 7th In 1999, and May 8th in 2000. When  a
34
grass surplus  was not common  across  cultivars,  non-experimental  dairy cows were  
used to graze the surplus,  this was recorded  as 'extra cow grazing  days' for each  
cultivar. A total of 1.06 ha and 0.89 ha per treatment  was conserved  as round bale 
silage  in 1999 and 2000, respectively.
A soil moisture  deficit  occurred  in mid July and extended  into mid August  (1999),  during  
which ail treatments  were supplemented  with silage and concentrate.  Each paddock  
was mechanically  topped  or cut as round bale silage  once in 1999. In 2000, only three 
paddocks  were mechanically  topped,  with a further  2 paddocks  from each treatment  
harvested  as round bale silage. Rotation  lengths  in 1999 averaged  24 days from mid 
April to late June, 17 days for July and 23 days from  August  to late September.  In 2000,  
rotation  lengths  averaged  19 days from late April to mid July and 23 days from mid July 
to late September.  In both years  the first application  of nitrogen,  (granular  urea) was in 
early January,  at a rate of 57 kg N/ha. Nitrogen  was applied  in the form of calcium  
ammonium  nitrate  (CAN)  at rates of 33 and 50 kg N/ha after each subsequent  grazing  
for the duration  of the experiment  in both years. Concentrate  supplementation  for the 
experimental  period  averaged  1.40 and 0.28 kg/cow  day in 1999 and 2000, respectively.
Results
Weather  and grass  production
Total rainfall  (mm) for 1999 and 2000 was 973 and 1082 respectively  compared  to the 
33 year average  of 1001 mm. Duration  of sunshine  (hours)  in 1999 and 2000 was 1184 
and 1318 respectively,  compared  to the 33 year average  of 1297 hours. Mean daily 
temperature  (°C) for 1999 and 2000 was 10.3 and 9.9 compared  to the 33 year average 
of 10.0 degrees. Grass production  was measured  in a separate  experiment  at the 
Moorepark  Research  Centre  using the method  described  by Corral  and Felon (1978).  
Total grass production  averaged  15.7 and 15.5 tonnes  of DM/ha  in 1999 and 2000,  
respectively.  This is compared  to the average  of 13.8 tonnes  of DM/ha  from 1982 to 
2000. Therefore,  total grass production  was above  normal  in both years.
Herbage  analysis
Chemical  analysis  of the herbage  consumed  during  periods  of intake  measurement  in 
1999 and 2000 is shown  Table 3. In 1999, during  Intake  period 1, late heading  grass  
cultivars  had significantly  higher (P<0.05)  grass digestibility.  No other chemical  
parameter  was significant.  Herbage  digestibility  did not differ significantly  between  
cultivars  in period 2, however  grass ploidy had a significant  (P<0.05)  effect on ash 
content. In 2000, late heading  grass cultivars  were found to have a significantly 
(P<0.05)  higher  NDF content  than intermediate  heading  cultivars.
Table 3. Chemical  analysis  of the herbage  selected  by the animals  during intake  
measurements  of each grass  cultivar  in 1999 and 2000.
Cultivar Significance
Millennium  Portstewart  Napoleon  Spelga s.e.d Heading
datePloidy
Period  1 (May 14-May  20 & June 30 - July 6) 1999
CP (g/kg)  194.5  186.0  205.3  195.5  12.6 NS NS
NDF (g/kg)  356.8  363.1  362.6 381.7  13.4 NS NS
Ash (g/kg)  86.2 83.5 82.4 77.7 4.7 NS NS
OMD (g/kg)  855.4  850.3  843.9 835.1  6.2 * NS
35
Period  2 (Sept 1 -Sept  6) 1999
CP (g/kg)  
NDF (g/kg)  
Ash (g/kg)  
OMD (g/kg)237.1
379.8
77.6
857.3269.2
376.3
88.5
852.8243.0
369.5
86.2
843.9250.2
378.1
89.2
840.515.0
7.5
3.5
7.7Ns
Ns
Ns
0.08Ns
Ns
*
Ns
(July 9 -July  14) 2000
CP (g/kg) 200.9 176.1 178.0 179.0 18.8 Ns Ns
NDF (g/kg) 387.9 394.0 412.4 413.8 13.4*Ns
Ash (g/kg) 88.7 81.7 82.3 81.1 2.9 Ns Ns
OMD (g/kg) 847.1 837.0 829.8 829.2 10.4 Ns Ns
CP - Crude  protein;  NDF - Neutral  detergent  fibre; OMD- Organic  matter  digestibility
Sward  Measurements
Average  pre-grazing  yields and pre- and post grazing  sward  surface  heights  over the 
1999 and 2000 grazing  seasons  are outlined  in Table 4. Late heading  cultivars  had 
significantly  higher  pre grazing  herbage  yields  (P<0.01)  and post grazing  sward  surface  
height  {P<0.05)  in 1999. Grass  ploidy had a significant  {P<0.05)  effect on pre grazing  
herbage  yield. Tetraploid  cultivars  had lower pre grazing  yield. In 2000, late heading  
cultivars  had significantly  {P<0.001)  higher  pre grazing  herbage  mass.
Table  4. Pre-grazing  herbage  yields,  and pre and post-grazing  sward  surface  height  for 
each cultivar  during  the 1999 and 2000 grazing  season.
Cultivar Significance
Millennium Portstewart  Napoleon  Spelga s.e.d Pleading Ploidy
date
1999
Pre yield 
(kg DM/ha) 2243 2426 2056 2210 96.8■irk *
Pre height  (cm) 19.2 19.2 19.1 18.9 0.65 NS NS
Post height  (cm) 7.27 7.53 7.13 7.21 0.01*Ns
Bulk density
(kg DM/m3) 1.51 1.65 1.40 1.52 0.07 ★ ***
Tiller density/m2 4411 5767 4804 6106 128*** ***
Leaf content 0.65 0.57 0.61 0.63 0.02 Ns ★
Stem content 0.26 0.32 0.30 0.27 0.02 Ns Ns
Dead content 0.09 0.11 0.08 0.10 0.01 Ns 0.064
2000
Pre yield
kg DM/ha) 2384 2601 2235 2579 82.4 NS***
Pre height  (cm) 21.3 21.8 21.0 21.7 0.48 NS 0.07
Post height  (cm) 7.81 7.78 7.41 7.82 0.15 NS 0.07
Bulk density
(kg DM/m3) 1.40 1.47 1.34 1.46 0.05 NS■kk*
Tiller density/m2 4691 6519 5878 6634 0.08 0.076★**
Leaf content 0.68 0.62 0.63 0.63 0.01■k ***
Stem content 0.23 0.28 0.26 0.25 0.02 NS NS
Dead content 0.09 0.10 0.11 0.13 0.01*0.072
36
As each cultivar  has different  seasonality  of production,  the extra DM production  was 
measured  in extra cow grazing  days and higher  pre-grazing  DM yields. Table  5 shows  
the surplus  of grass for each treatment  removed  by non-experimental  cows. In 1999  
late heading  cultivars  had substantially  more cow grazing  days than the intermediate 
heading  cultivars  (163 versus  61). The majority  of the extra  grazing  days were recorded  
in early July and late August. In 2000, there were substantially  less cow grazing  days 
than the previous  year (which was a primary  reseed). The late heading  cultivars 
recorded  a higher amount  of cow grazing days (56 versus 40). However,  the 
intermediate  heading  cultivars  recorded  their extra cow grazing  days in May.
Table 5. Extra cow grazing  days recorded  for each cultivar  during 1999 and 2000  
grazing  seasons.
MilleniumCultivar
Portstewart Napoleon Spelga
1999
May 38 4 20
June 12 12 28 4
July 48 52
August 76 84 70
Total 174 152 48 74
2000
May 64 20
June 86 25
July
Total 86 25 64 20
Milk Production  and milk composition
Table 6 shows the effect of grass cultivar  on milk yield, milk constituents  and milk 
composition  for both years. In 1999, there was a significant  (P<0.05)  interaction  
between  heading  date and ploidy  on milk yield, lactose  yield and milk fat concentration.  
Late heading  grass  cultivars  had significantly  (P<0.05)  higher  milk fat and protein  yields.  
In 2000, milk yield (P<0.01),  fat yield {P<0.05),  protein  yield (P<0.001),  lactose  yield 
(P<0.01)  and protein  concentration  (P<0.01)  were significantly  higher  for late heading  
grass cultivars.  There  was no effect  of grass ploidy  for any milk production  parameter 
in 1999 or 2000. Figures  1 and 2 show  the milk yield, milk protein  and fat yield profiles  
for each cultivar  during  the 1999 and 2000 grazing  seasons.
Table  6. The effect of grass cultivar  on milk production  and milk composition  for 1999  
and 2000.
Cultivar Significance
Millennium Portstewart  Napoleon  Spelga s.e.d Head
datePloidy
1999
Milk yield 
(kg/cow/day) 22.9 22.3 21.2 22.1 0.27*NS
Fat yield 
(kg/cow/day) 0.87 0.87 0 .84 0.82 0.01■kNS
Protein  yield 
(kg/cow  day) 0.74 0.74 0.69 0.72 0.01kNS
Lact yield 
(kg/cow  day) 1.07 1.03 0.98 1.03 0.01kNS
37
Fat cone
(g/kg) 3.83 3.93 3.96 3.77 0.05 NS NS
Protein  cone
(g/kg) 3,28 3.35 3.30 3.25 0.02 NS NS
Lact cone
(g/kg) 4.66 4.62 4,63 4.62 0.01 NS NS
2000
Milk yield 
(kg/cow/day) 21.9 21.9 20.3 20.7 0,33*★NS
Fat yield 
(kg/cow/day) 0,86 0.85 0.79 0.82 0.02★NS
Protein  yield 
(kg/cow/day) 0.75 0.75 0.69 0.69 0.01***NS
Lact yield 
(kg/cow/day) 1.01 1.02 0.94 0.95 0.02★*NS
Fat cone
(g/kg) 3.98 3.95 3.95 4,00 0.05 NS NS
Protein  cone
(g/kg) 3.46 3.45 3.40 3.37 0.02★*NS
Lact cone
(g/kg) 4.62 4.63 4.61 4.54 0.02 0.08 NS
cone - concentration
The different  levels  of grass  dry matter  intake  achieved  with the grass cultivars  during  
four different  grass intake measurements  is shown  in Table 7. In 1999, during intake  
period 1, late heading  cultivars  had a significantly  (P<0.001)  higher  total dry matter  
intake  compared  to intermediate  heading  cultivars  (16.0 versus  14.1). The late heading  
tetraploid  (Millennium)  had a substantially  higher total dry matter intake. In intake  
measurement  3 (autumn)  there  was no significant  difference  between  grass  cultivars.  In 
2000, only one intake  measurement  was completed  (mid June),  during  which  there  was 
a significant  (P<0.05)  effect  of heading  date.
Table  7. The effect  of grass cultivar  on dry matter  intake  (DMI) in 1999 (3 intake  runs)  
and 2000 (one intake  run).
Cultivar Significance
Millennium Portstewart  Napoleon  Spelga s.e.d Flead
datePloidy
DMI 1999
May 14 
(kg/cow/day) 16.7 15.3 14.0 14.1 0.66IrtrkNS
Jun 30
(kg/cow/day) 18.5 17,9 14.3 16.2 0.84*irk
NS Sept 1 
(kg/cow/day) 17.8 16.7 18,6 17,8 0.82 0.07 0.08
2000
July 9
(kg/cow/day) 16.6 16.1 15.8 15.3 0.62■kNS
38
Figure  1. The effect of grass  cultivar  on a) milk yield, b) milk protein,  and c) milk fat in 
1999.
a). The effect  of grass  cultivar  on mean  milk yield 1999
b). The effect  of grass  cultivar  on milk protein  yield 1999
c). The effect  of grass  cultivar on milk fat yield 1999
Week  of experiment
39
Figure  2. The effect  of grass  cultivar  on a) milk yield, b) milk protein,  and c) milk fat in 
2000 .
a). The effect  of grass  cultivar  on mean  milk yield 2000
35
b). The effect  of grass  cultivar  on milk protein  yield  2000
c). The effect  of grass  cultivar  on milk fat yield  2000
40
Table 8 shows  the effect of treatment  on live weight  and body condition  score  for 1999  
and 2000. Cows grazing  intermediate  heading  cultivars  had a significantly  (P<0.01)  
higher  bodyweight  in 1999, However  in 2000, cows grazing  tetraploid  cultivars  had a 
significantly  (P<0.01)  higher bodyweight,  whilst those grazing  diploid  cultivars  had a 
significantly  (P<0.001)  higher  body condition  score.
Table  8, The effect  of grass  cultivar  on live weight  and body condition  score  in 1999  and 
2000
Cultivar Significance
Millenium Portstewart Napoleon Spelga s.e.d. Head
datePloidy
1999
Live weight
(kg) 506.7 503.2 510.6 512.7 3.16*★NS
Condition
Score 2.97 2.84 2.92 2.89 0.03 NS**
2000
Live weight
(kg) 539.5 533.5 538.0 534.3 2.34 NS*rk
Condition
Score 2.87 2,89 2.94 2.93 0.02***NS
Conclusions
Milk production
In 1999, there was a significant  (P<0.05)  interaction  between  heading  date and grass  
ploidy for milk yield, lactose  yield and fat concentration.  The main source of this 
interaction  was the reduction  in milk yield on Napoleon  (intermediate,  tetraploid) 
compared  to Millennium  (late, tetraploid)  swards,  especially  during rotations  2 and 3 
(coinciding  with the cultivars  heading  date). In rotation  2 and 3 the difference  in milk 
yield between  both cultivars  was 1.3 and 2.8 kg milk/cow/day,  respectively.  In 2000, the 
cows grazing  late heading  grass  cultivars  had a significantly  {P<0.01)  higher  milk yield.  
The reduction  in milk yield was again most pronounced  during  rotation  3. The difference  
in milk yield between  late heading  and intermediate  heading  grass  cultivars  was 1.4 kg 
milk/cow/day.  Figures  1 and 2 clearly  illustrate  the reduction  in milk yield between  the 
grass  cultivars  at their  time of heading.  The results  of this study  is consistent  with Gately  
(1984). Grass  ploidy  had no significant  effect  on any milk production  parameter  in this 
study, which is in contrast  to other experiments.  Previously  (Hageman  et al., 1993)  
obtained  promising  results  from experiments  comparing  diploid  and tetraploid  cultivars  
of perennial  ryegrass.  (Castle  and Watson,  1971.,  Vipond  et al., 1993) found  tetraploid  
perennial  ryegrass  cultivars  superior  to diploid  cultivars  in terms  of animal  performance.  
The poor performance  of Napoleon  in both years  of the trial however  may have reduced  
the impact  of tetraploids  in this study. In both years late heading  grass cultivars  had 
significantly  higher  milk protein  and lactose  yield. They also had significantly  higher  fat 
yield (P<0,001)  and protein  concentration  (P<0.01)  in 2000 compared  to intermediate 
heading  cultivars.  The trend for milk protein  yield was similar  to that for milk yield. The 
late heading  grass cultivars  had continually  higher  milk protein  yield during  the main 
grazing  season  i.e. rotations  2, 3 and 4.
41
Dry matter  intake  (DMI)
Previously  Hageman  et a.,I (1990),  and Lantinga  and Groot (1996) both found higher  
grass DMI with tetraploid  cultivars. However,  in this study there was no significant  
difference  in DMI between  tetraploid  and diploid  cultivars.  Whilst  late heading  cultivars  
had superior  DMI relative  to intermediate  heading  cultivars  in all but one intake  
measurement,  intermediate  heading  cultivars  had a higher DMI during the autumn  
measurement  period. The reduced  DMI of intermediate  heading  cultivars  early in the 
grazing  season  would  suggest  that the (heading)  inflorescence  period  is antagonistic  to 
high DMI (Greenhalgh,  1966). High pre-grazing  sward  surface  heights  and low leaf to 
stem ratios during this period decreases  grass dry matter intake. Hodgson  (1982)  
concluded  that tall swards  were more prehensible,  but conceded  that the presence  of 
leaf sheath  in the grazed  horizon  may contribute  to or cause  a decline  in herbage  intake.  
Greenhalgh  (1966) reported  that herbage  intake  falls by 2.2 kg DM/cow/day  between  
vegetative  and reproductive  stages,  however  the difference  in this study was 1.9 kg 
DM/cow/day.
In this experiment  it appears  that leaf and stem content  and their association  with grass  
digestibility  is an overriding  feature  influencing  the DMI from the individual  cultivars.  
During  intake measurements  I, II and IV, the late tetraploid  cultivar  maintained  a high 
leaf to stem ratio, high organic  mater  digestibility  and consequently  highest  DMI. The 
positive  relationship  between  high leaf content  and high DMI of late heading  cultivars  is 
amplified  by the position  of free leaf lamina  lower in the grazing  canopy. (O'Donovan,  
personal  communication)  suggests  that the pseudostem  height  and lowest  ligule height  
of intermediate  cultivars  is higher  than in late heading  cultivars.  This indicates  that as 
the cow grazes  into the sward  canopy  there is a higher  proportion  of leaf material  deeper  
in the sward  especially  at low post grazing  height. Quantifying  the height  and proportion  
of free leaf lamina  within the sward profile  and also the pseudostem  and lowest  ligule  
height (which is mainly composed  of ligin) within the sward could lead to a better  
understanding  of apparent  DM intake  differences  between  grass  cultivars.
Sward  structure  and digestibility
Digestibility  differences  in grazed  swards  are most often associated  with changes  in 
sward structure  such as height, distribution  of leaf material,  sheath  or dead material.  
The intake of green leaves is greater  than the intake of stems even at the same  
digestibility  (Laredo  and Minson,  1975). Therefore  a sward  supporting  a high green  leaf 
mass supports  high dry matter  intake (Parga  et al, 2000). It is clear that green leaf 
content  is directly  related  to digestibility.  A 5.5 percentage  unit change  in leaf content  is 
equal to a 1 unit change  in digestibility  (Stakelum  and O'Donovan,  2000). The higher  
grass digestibility's  recorded  by the late heading  cultivars  during both initial intake  
periods  in 1999 is mainly  due to the proportion  of live leaf available  in the sward. The 
largest  difference  in live leaf content  takes place between  the cultivars  at their time of 
heading.  Post heading,  when the swards  reach  their vegetative  stage,  the differences  
in digestibility  are relatively  small. It is clear that cultivars  with an even DM distribution  
of grass production  (late heading  cultivars)  may produce  more live leaf than cultivars  
which  concentrate  their production  in early summer.
Tiller density
Diploid  cultivars  had a significantly  higher  tiller density  compared  to tetraploid  cultivars  
in both years of the study (22% higher in 1999, 25% higher in 2000). In general  
tetraploid  cultivars  are less persistent  than diploid  cultivars.  This is reflected  in a more  
open sward  attenuated  by tetraploids  having  fewer  but larger  tillers.
42
Conclusions  and implications
The study shows clearly  the milk production  advantage  to using late heading  grass  
cultivars  compared  to intermediate  heading  cultivars.  Therefore,  the use of late heading  
cultivars  in intensive  grazing  systems  is recommended.
References
Castle,  M.E. and Watson,  J.N. (1971). A comparison  between  a diploid  and a tetraploid  
ryegrass  for milk production.  Journal  Agric.  Science.,  Cambridge  77: 69-76.
CorrallA.  J. and Fenlon  J.S. (1978). A comparative  method  for describing  the seasonal  
distribution  of production  from grasses.  Journal of Agricultural  Science,  91: 61 -67.
Culleton,  N., Murphy,  W. E,, and Murphy,  W. (1998). Reseeding  - new perspectives  on 
grasses  and clovers. Farm  and Food 8 (2).
Dillon, R, Crosse,  S., Stakelum,  G., and Flynn, F. (1995). The effect  of calving  date and 
stocking  rate on the performance  of spring calving  dairy cows. Grass  and Forage  
Science  50: 266-299.
Gately, T. (1984). Early versus late perennial  ryegrass  {Lolium  perenne)  for milk 
production.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research  1: (23) 1-11.
Greenhalgh,  J.F.D., Reid, G.W., Aitken,  J.N. and Florence,  E. (1966). The effects  of 
grazing  intensity  on herbage  consumption  and animal  production.  I. Short  term effects  
in strip-grazed  dairy cows. Journal  of Agricultural  Science  67: 13-23.
Hageman,  I.W., Lantiga,  E.A. and Schlepers,  H. (1990). Herbage  intake, digestibility  
characteristics  and milk production  of some diploid  and tetraploid  perennial  ryegrass  
cultivars.  Proceeding  Second  British  Grassland  Society  Research  Conference,  Scottish  
Agricultural  College,  Ayr, 11-13 September  1990, paper  5, session  1.
Hageman,  I.W., Lantinga,  E.A., Schlepers,  H. and Neuteboom,  J.H. (1993). Herbage  
intake, digestibility  characteristics  and milk production  of a diploid  and two tetraploid 
cultivars  of perennial  ryegrass. Proceedings  of the XVII International  Grassland  
Congress.  Palmerston  North, New Zealand,  pp. 459-460.
Hodgson,  J. (1982). Influence  of sward  characteristics  on diet selection  and herbage  
intake by the grazing animal. In: Hacker, J.B. (ed) Nutritional  Limits to Animal  
Production  from Pasture.  CAB International,  Wallingford,  pp.153-166.
Lantinga,  E.A. and Groot, J.C.J. (1996). Optimization  of grassland  production  and 
herbage  feed quality  in an ecological  context. EAAP  Publication  No 84, pp 58 -67. 
Laredo,  D.A. and Minson,  D.J. (1975). Journal of the British  Grassland  Society,  30 73- 
77.
Minson,  D.J., Raymound,  W.F.,Harris,  C.E. and Millford,  R.J. {I960). Studies  in the 
digestibility  of herbage.  Journal  of the British  Grassland  Society,  15: 174- 180.
O'Donovan,  M.A. (2000). The relationship  between  the performance  of dairy cows and 
grassland  management  on intensive  dairy farms in Ireland. Phd Thesis, National  
University  of Ireland,  366pages.
O’Riordan,  E.G. (1997). Grazing  preference  among lolium perenne  cultivars. In: 
Proceedings  of Agricultural  Research  Forum  1997 pp139-140.
Parga, J., Peyraud,  J.L. and Delagarde,  R. (2000). Effect of sward structure  and 
herbage  allowance  on herbage  intake  by grazing  dairy cows. In: Grazing  management,  
the principles  and practice  of grazing  for profit and environmental  gain in temperate 
grassland  system. 29 February-2  March,  Harrogate,  British  Grassland  Society.
43
Sheedy,  S.J. (2000). The competitive  of grass  silage. UCD Publication  2000.
Stakelum  G. and O’Donovan,  M. (1997). Grazing  severity,  sward  digestibility  and intake  
and farm cover  targets  for profitable  summer  milk production.  In: The production  of high  
quality milk from  grass  and other  feeds, Cahir, 1998.
Vipond,  J. E., Swift, G., McCelland,  T.H., Milneand  J.A., and Hunter,  E.A. (1993). A 
comparison  of diploid  and tetraploid  perennial  ryegrass  and tetraploid  ryegrass/white  
clover  swards  under  continuous  sheep  stocking  at controlled  swards  heights.  2. Animal  
production.  Grass  and Forage  Science  48: 290 -300.
44
The impact  of grazing  management  on improving  milk solids
production
John McNamara  
Teagasc.  Bandon
Introduction
The information  presented  here is derived  from a number  of monitor  farms,  which are 
part of a Joint programme  between  Carbery  Milk Products  and Teagasc,  Carbery  Milk 
Products  is the processing  arm of the four West Cork Co-ops;  Bandon,  Barryroe,  
Drinagh  and Lisavaird.
In looking  at milk solids production,  the main focus should  be on protein,  as this is not 
constrained  by quota. However,  increasing  milk protein  is only one of several  ways of 
increasing  the value of milk output from a farm in a quota situation. The impact  of 
grazing  management  on milk protein  production  can be considered  under  four headings:  
Topping,  Grass  Allocation,  Leader-Follower  system  and Overgrazing.
Topping
It is the view of the author  that topping  should  always  err on the side of undergrazing.  It 
is accepted  that there will be some wastage  of grass In this way, but the cost of this 
wastage  is small relative  to the benefit  in cow performance.  There is little point in 
topping  in order  to have the field looking  nice for the neighbours.  If you are going  to top 
anyway,  get the benefit  from the cow performance  by erring  on the side of undergrazing.
Figure  1 illustrates  the protein  graphs  for Farms  A and D, Farm A achieves  a minimum  
of -1-0.05 increase  per month after March each year. This contrasts  with the typical  
spring  calving  protein  profile,  which we see for Farm D. Farm A is topping  after most 
rotations.  Herd performance  is not hit on the current  rotation  and the quality  of grass is 
always  excellent  on the next rotation,  because  if anything,  grazing  is always  to a height  
greater  than 6 cms.
Provided  there is a topper  on the farm, then in practise  the cost of topping  is mainly  the 
man-hours  involved.  It is contended  that for the farm mentioned  here the opportunity  
cost of the labour  was small, and that the farmer ’s time was well spent by doing the 
topping. Obviously  at some point topping  does become  unprofitable.
Farm A 3.48®/o Farm D 3.387#
4.10
4.00
45
Figure  1. Milk protein  profile  (2001)  for Farms  A and D involved  in the Joint 
programme  between  Carbery  Milk Products  and Teagasc
Grass  Allocation
It can be argued  that the strip-wire  as a method  of grazing  should  be banned  when  there  
is plenty  of grass  on the farm. If it is accepted  that grazed  grass is the cheapest  source  
of dry matter  we can produce,  then the objective  must be to get as much as of this 
product,  as possible,  into the cow each milking. Surely  the cow is the best judge of 
how much grass she will eat between  each milking? If this is so, then she should  be 
allowed  to make  that decision  as often as possible.  Allocate  the herd sufficient  grass  for 
up to three milkings  at a time. This way the herd is only restricted  in grass  intake  once 
every  day and a half. The added  bonus  is less time and effort  shifting  strip-wires.
Figure 2 shows  for Farm B the change  in milk protein  over three years. Note the 
dramatic  difference  in protein  between  May 1999 and May 2000. In late April 2000, this 
farm began allocating  grass for up to four milkings  at a time. There was no other  
significant  change  in either the management  or the herd in 2000 over 1999. The 
improvement  in milk protein  was 0.08. From  the graph  it can be seen that there  was an 
issue regarding  grass quality during the mid-season  2000, as there had been each 
previous  mid-season.  In 2001 a regime  of topping  after each grazing  was put in place,  
which helped  to correct  this mid-season  grass quality  issue. Milk protein  increased  a 
further 0.10. The challenge  now is how to achieve  this same effect more cost 
effectively?
Figure  2. Milk protein  profile  from 1999 to 2001 for Farm B involved  in the Joint 
programme  between  Carbery  Milk Products  and Teagasc
1999 -3.32%  2000-  3.40%  2001 -3.50%
Leader  - Follower  Grazing
Anyone  currently  grazing  drystock  on land that could be grazed  by milking  cows should  
assess  the possibility  for a leader-follower  cow system. Figure 3 shows  the protein  
percentage  for a split autumn  / spring  calving  herd. This farm is achieving  exceptional  
protein  levels  and averaged  3.60%  protein  for 2001.
In a leader-follower  system,  the followers  need to be at least 30% of the L.U. of the cows
46
to derive  benefits  from the system. The demand  for grass  from the drystock  followers 
decides  when  the cows move  on from the paddock.  The higher  the cover  the cows are 
leaving  behind,  the higher  the quality  of material  they will have grazed. Well-laid  out 
paddocks  with good access  and entrances  make operating  this system  non-labour  
intensive.  Some  labour  can be saved  due to the reduced  need for topping.
Ideally  all stock  should  be in and out of the paddock  in three  days (i.e. three milkings  for 
cows and then 36 hours, the equivalent  of three milkings,  for the drystock).  If all the 
paddocks  are the same  size it simplifies  the system.
Based  on visual  estimates,  performance  of the followers  (drystock)  is not compromised.  
In fact it maybe  that grass quality  is higher because  they are on cow ground. This 
system is a compromise  between  grazing hard and immediately  affecting  cow 
performance,  or grazing  laxly and affecting  grass quality and therefore  subsequent 
performance.
Figure  3. Milk protein profile (2001) for Farm C 
between  Carbery  Milk Products  and Teagascinvolved  in the Joint programme
2001 - 3.60%
Overgrazing
Despite  guidelines  from Moorepark  re. grazing  recommendations,  there is considerable  
confusion  as to what a field grazed  to 6 cm looks like during  the different  months  of the 
year. Arguably,  on some  farms  we are erring on the side of overgrazing.
The following  farm is typical  of an overgrazing  scenario.  Ironically  the same situation  
occurs  on a farm where  grass  quality  deteriorates  midseason.  The quality  of the grass  
on this farm in front of the cows is always  excellent.  However  this quality  is not being  
exploited  to the maximum.  Figure  1 shows  the milk protein  production  for 2001 for Farm  
D. This farm has improved  its solids production  since 1998. However  the target of 
increasing  protein  percentage  by a minimum  of 0.05 each month from March is not 
being achieved.  The high volume  milk months  from April to August  are showing  too flat 
a protein curve. These are the months  that even a small improvement  in milk 
composition  can yield significant  milk cheque  increases.
47
Conclusion
At farm level, grazing management  can have a significant  impact on milk solids  
production.  Regular  topping  and a 36-hour  grass allocation  have a positive  effect on 
milk composition.  Running  milking  cows as the leaders  in a leader-follower  system  also 
has a positive  effect. Each of the farms profiled  have increased  farm profitability.  
Increasing  milk composition  is a clear objective  and the results  are easily identified.  
However,  it may not increase  profit if it is achieved  through  increased  costs. The overall  
cost benefit  of the grazing  management  methods  mentioned  here will vary from farm to 
farm. The decision  to use any of them should  be based on their effect on your farm 
profitability  not just milk solids  production.
Acknowledgment
The author  is indebted  to the farmers  involved  for allowing  the use of data collected  from 
their farms.
48
Dairy  cow improvements  using  selection  and crossbreeding
Dorian  J. Garrick
Institute  of Veterinary.  Animal  & Biomedical  Sciences,  Massey  University.  Palmerston
North.  New  Zealand
Introduction
Genetic  change  is readily  obtained  by the selection  of individuals,  strains  or breeds  \A/ith 
performance  that differs  from average.  In contrast,  genetic  improvement  is more difficult  
to achieve  - it requires  a balance  of genetic  change  in favourable  characteristics  without 
simultaneous  erosion  in others  - this does not typically  come  about  by chance  - but from 
careful  analysis  of the impacts  of the likely genetic  change  in the context  of the whole 
farm system.
Farmers  have been the architects  of genetic change far more often than the 
beneficiaries  of genetic  improvement.  They have for example,  changed  breeds or 
strains  without  careful  consideration  of consequences  from a whole  farm perspective.  
This paper  introduces  a systematic  approach  to animal  improvement.
Determination  of the Goal
The first step in the logical  development  of an improvement  programme  is definition  of 
the goal. Suppose  the selection  or breeding  goal is to improve  farm profitability.  
Livestock  Improvement,  an artificial  breeding  company  in New Zealand,  summarises 
this thinking  in one of its advertising  campaigns,  “if you are not breeding  for profit, we 
wish you well in your hobby ”.
Defining  the Selection  Objective
A selection  objective  cannot  be developed  until the goal has been clearly  defined.  The 
selection  objective  can then be developed  in a two-step  procedure.  First, the list of traits 
that influence  the goal must be identified. This is usually a straightforward  task. 
Second,  the relative  emphasis  that should  be placed  on each trait in the list must be 
determined.  This is a difficult  task in practice,  due to the complexity  of the farming  
system  and the predictive  nature  of future  circumstances.  Many  of the disappointments  
that have been experienced  by farmers  that have changed  breeds  or strains  may have 
been avoided  if those  individuals  had given  careful,  comprehensive  prior  thought  to their 
selection  objective  in the context  of their farm system.
The construction  of a selection  objective  can be simplified  by partitioning  the problem  
into manageable  pieces. Given  a profit-based  goal, and recalling  the obvious  definition  
of profit as income  less expenses,  the objective  should  include  all traits that influence  
income  and all traits that influence  costs. The income  traits include  those influencing  
milk revenue  and beef revenue.  The cost traits might include  those  that influence  feed 
costs, reproductive  costs, replacement  costs and animal  health  costs. Fixed  costs  such 
as rates, or accounting  need not be included  as these  apply  to the farm business  rather  
than the individual  animals.
The systematic  approach  quantifies  the economic  impact  of the traits in the list, before  
consideration  of the availability  of information  on individual  cows and bulls for each trait 
in the list. This calculation  needs  to be undertaken  for each trait in the list one at a time, 
and must consider  the impact  on profit of a unit change  in the trait with all other  traits in 
the list being held constant.  The calculation  can be undertaken  using a partial budget
49
of the farming  system.  Bear in mind that due to the time delays  between  ranking  parents  
and the milking  of the resultant  offspring,  it is the future  economic  and management  
circumstances  that must be considered  in this partial  budget  exercise.
In practice,  a common  error has been to discard  many traits (such as fertility)  from 
further  consideration  at this stage, due to the absence  of information  allowing  animals  
to be ranked. One could easily  reduce  the list to including  only those  traits influencing  
milk revenue,  such as milk volume  and concentrafions  of fat and protein. This leads  to 
undue  focus on per head milk income,  and ignores  feed costs, body size and fertility.  
Accordingly,  farmers  may be tempted  to alter their milking  strain solely  on the basis of 
per head income  wifhout due account  for changes  in feed costs, stocking  rates,  
reproductive  costs and replacement  rates. Such an oversight  was one of the main 
factors  responsible  for the rapid Holsteinisation  of international  dairying.
Including  milk volume  and composition  traits  in the selection  objective
One approach  to determining  future milk payment  is based on the current  industry  
payment  system.  This might  be appropriate  in a perfect  market  system  but few markets  
are perfect. In New Zealand,  farmers  have been paid the average  international  market  
returns  of their dairy products,  less the processing,  marketing  and transport  costs.  
Payment  has been partitioned  according  to an assessment  of the relative  contributions  
of fat and protein. In respect  to the value of fat in the form of butter,  the actual  market  
realisation  often varies  markedly  according  to the product  destination.  Some butter  is 
sold at high prices whereas  the remainder  may be sold at prices below the cost of 
production.  The market  signals  based  on these  average  returns  do not reflect  the real 
market  circumstances.  Rewarding  farmers  for fat sold below  its marginal  cost does not 
make long-term  economic  sense.
A more informed  approach  to value  future  milk is to model  the collection  and processing  
of milk and the marketing  of dairy products  in order  to derive  the true value  of milk from 
the expected  market  realisation  of the resultant  products,  less manufacturing,  marketing  
and transport  costs. The value of milk assessed  in this manner  is shown  in Table 1. 
More details  on this topic are in Garrick  & Lopez-Villalobos  12000).
Table 1. The value of milk (EUR/litre)  of average  composition  and from Holstein  (H), 
Holstein-Friesian  (HF), Jersey  (J), crossbred  (XB) and Ayrshire  (A) breeds  when 10% or 
70% milk is processed  as a fluid product  and the residual  is processed  into cheese,  or 
a mixture  of cheese,  whole  milk powder,  skim milk powder,  casein  & buffer.
Product  Mix Milk Source
Fluid Residual Average H HF J XB A
10% Cheese 0.21 0.19 0.20 0.24 0.21 0.21
10% Mix 0.23 0.21 0.23 0.26 0.24 0.23
70% Cheese 0.39 0.38 0.39 0.40 0.39 0.39
70% WMP-Cheese 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.40 0.40 0.39
Table 1 shows  that the value of the milk varies  markedly  depending  upon the breed it 
comes  from (i.e. its composition)  and the product  mix for which  the milk is used. Milk 
has its greatest  value  when used for fluid supply. The difference  in value between  milk 
of different  breeds  is greatest  when most of the milk is processed  rather  than sold in 
standardised  fluid form.
50
The marginal  value of each milk component  can be calculated  from the true value of 
milk, accounting  for the average  composition  of the milk supplied  and the product  mix 
for which the milk will be used. Some milk payment  systems  based  on milk-solids  or 
yields  of fat and protein  less volume-related  costs are shown  in Table 2 for a subset  of 
the circumstances  in Table 1.
Table  2. A milk-solids  (EUR/kg)  and multi component  payment  systems  for fat, protein  
and volume  of milk from Holstein  (H), Holstein-Friesian  (HF), Jersey  (J) and crossbred  
(XB) cows when 10% is used for fluid milk and the residual  processed  into a 
comprehensive  mix (Row 2 Table 1) or 70% fluid and residual  into whole milk powder  
and cheese  (Row 4 Table 1).
Multi-component  payment
Market Breed Milk-solids Fat Protein Volume
10% H 3.15 1.20 6.17 -0.03
70% H 5.83 0.65 12.04 -0.02
10% HF 2.90 1.45 5.62 -0.03
70% HF 5.05 2.36 9.03 -0.02
10% J 2.65 1.33 5.26 -0.03
70% J 4.10 2.14 7.39 -0.02
10% X B 2.81 1.40 5.50 -0.03
70% X B 4.67 2.29 8.47 -0.02
The results  in Table 2 show  that the value of milk-solids  varies  with the breed (i.e. milk 
composition)  and the product  mix. Even when 70% milk is used for fluid sales, a yield 
based  payment  system  would  be characterised  with a small volume  charge. The fat to 
protein  relativity  varies  with the milk composition  and product  mix. Note in Table  2 that 
for a given product  mix the value  to a processor  of marginal  components  such as fat or 
protein  depends  upon the nature  of the milk provided  by other suppliers.
Farmers  need to appreciate  that the calculation  of milk value is not trivial. Ideally,  the 
assessment  of milk value and the value of its components  should  not be based  on the 
current market circumstances,  but an informed  analysis  that accounts  for future 
expectations  in terms  of milk supply,  its composition,  resultant  products  and consumer  
demands.
Cow size as an objective  trait
in comparing  dairy breeds  such as Jerseys,  Friesians,  Holstein-Friesians  and Holsteins,  
farmers  have noted the larger  strains  tend to produce  more milk. Farmers  have also 
identified  the fact that within a breed or strain, larger cows tend to produce  greater  
volumes.  Some  farmers  may therefore  have deliberately  selected  for cow size, in order  
to improve  production.  Given a goal of income  per cow, larger cows would be an 
advantage.  However,  given a goal of profit per farm (or per unit of land or unit of feed)  
the implications  of selection  including  the size of cow needs  to be carefully  considered.
Suppose  mature  cow size and production  is known  for a strain of cows. A feed and 
financial  budget  can be undertaken  to determine  the likely physical  and economic  
performance  of such a farm system  (Garrick  1996). The resultant  economic  information  
can then be used to determine  the worth of any cow given knowledge  of her likely  
performance  with respect  to each of the traits in the objective.
51
Consider  a simple  calculation  to demonstrate  this thinking. Suppose  a herd of cows  
produce  an average  of 200 kg fat, 183 kg protein,  5500 kg of milk and weigh 500 kg. 
From the viewpoint  of animal  improvement,  the actual profitability  of this herd is of no 
particular  interest.  What really matters  is the extent  to which  profit changes  when herd 
performance  is modified.
Suppose  fat production  increased  by 1 kg, all other factors unchanged.  The milk 
revenue  would increase  by the value of 1 kg fat. In addition,  the feed requirements  
would  increase.  Assuming  it requires  56 MJ ME (metabolisable  energy)  to produce  1 kg 
fat, an animal  fed pasture  would require  almost  6 kg DM (dry matter)  to produce  the 
additional  fat. The economic  value for a unit increase  in fat would therefore  be the 
income  from the extra fat less the cost of supplying  about 6 kg DM. The cost of 
supplying  the DM could be obtained  from the cost of purchased  feed, or from the 
opportunity  cost of DM in the production  system. Suppose  the fat price was €l 00 per 
kg, DM opportunity  cost was €0.15  per kg, the economic  value  for fat would  be .00 - 
6 X 0.15 = *-0.10. That is profit would increase  by €0.10  for a unit increase  in tat, all 
other  traits held constant,  A similar  approach  can be used to obtain  an economic  value  
for protein  and for milk volume.
Suppose  the mature  live-weight  of the cows  was increased  by 1 kg. This would  increase  
the maintenance  feed requirements  and the beef revenue  and may be associated  with 
an increase  in lactation  production.  It is not necessary  to calculate  the value of extra  
milk production,  (as shown  in the previous  paragraph)  if milk yield traits are included  in 
the list of traits in their own right. To determine  the value of cow size, only the beef 
revenue  and feed costs need be assessed.  The aggregate  worth of an individual  
animal,  strain or breed,  will then be obtained  using the assessed  performance  for each 
trait in the objective  along with its associated  economic  value.
Assuming  a 49% dressing  out percentage  and a beef price of €3 per kg carcass,  the 
beef revenue  would increase  by 3 x 0.49 = €1.47  per kg live-weight.  However,  if the 
average  cow has five lactations,  only 1 /5 of the herd will have  a salvage  value  each year. 
Accordingly,  the beef revenue  component  of the live-weight  increase  is 1/5 x 1.47 = 
€0.29. The maintenance  feed costs of a cow on an annuri  basis is about 231 MJ ME 
per kg°^5. Assuming  a ME concentration  of 10.8 MJ ME per kg DM, a 500 kg cow 
requires  (231 x 500°^^)/10.8  = 2261,6  kg maintenance  and a 501 kg cow requires  
2265.0,  an increase  of about  3^2 kg DM. The value  of cow size is therefore  €0.29  less 
the cost of 31/2 kg DM, Assuming  the DM cost €0.15  per kg, the value of cow size is 
0.29 - 31/2 X 0.15 = - €0.24. That is, the profit erodes  by €0.24  for a unit increase  in 
live-weight,  other traits held constant.
Combining  the above results it is apparent  that a 1 kg heavier  cow would need to 
produce  an extra 0.24/0.10  = 2.4 kg fat to have the same  profit as the lighter  cow, given  
the assumed  feed costs, milk fat and beef prices.
The values  of fertility  and longevity
The economic  values of longevity  and fertility are much more difficult  to calculate  
compared  to lactation  yields  or live-weight.  Modifications  to longevity  can alter the age 
structure  of the herd, which  will in turn alter its productivity  and its feed requirements  as 
younger  cows and very old cows produce  less than mature  equivalent  cows. Longevity  
can also influence  the number  of replacements  required,  therefore  modifying  beef 
revenue,  A1 and feed costs. It also affects  the level of voluntary  and involuntary  culling,  
therefore  modifying  salvage  beef returns  and the influence  of culling on production.
52
Changes  to fertility will influence  longevity,  In addition  to modifying  the calving  
distribution  of the herd, which  will influence  milk production  and Al costs with carryover  
effects  for a number  of years. In contrast  to measures  of lactation  yield, there are no 
universally  accepted  methods  of describing  fertility  or longevity.  The economic  values  
for these traits are also sensitive  to the average  levels of performance.  Economic  
values  are higher  in seasonal  calving  than in continuous  calving  herds. In herds with 
high reproductive  performance,  fertility  is less important  than in herds  that are struggling  
to obtain  sufficient  Al-bred  early born heifer replacements.
The NZ selection  objective
The development  of a selection  objective  for dairy cattle in New Zealand  has been  
rapidly  developing  and further  changes  are likely. The original  selection  objective  was 
based  solely  on milk-fat  yield and the index was Fat Bl (Breeding  Index). In 1986, the 
objective  was modified  to reflect milk payment,  by the addition  of milk volume  and 
protein  yield. The resulting  a+b-c  index was known  as Payment  Bl and was really an 
income  rather  than a profit index. In 1991, an index known  as Total  Bl was developed  
to include  live-weight  and survival  information.  It was not until 1996  that the feed costs  
for lactation  traits were introduced  to the index. At that time, the indexing  went across  
breeds  and was renamed  Breeding  Worth  (BW).
The index is currently  being revised  to directly  include  fertility  and will likely involve  the 
lactation  yields  of milk volume,  fat and protein,  mature  live-weight,  functional  longevity  
(days of productive  life adjusted  for lactation  yield) and fertility. The economic  values  
are updated  annually  and the most recent update (excluding  fertility) is in Table 3 
(www.aeu.org.nz ). The principle  behind  the calculation  of these  weights  is as discussed  
in this paper,  although  the derivation  is much more involved  to account  for future  prices  
and costs, to discount  traits based on the timing and numbers  of expressions  and to 
account  for the calving  distribution  and age structure  of the herd.
Table  3. Economic  values  and traits in the NZ selection  objective
Milk-fat Protein Volume Live-weight Longevity
Trait (kg) (kg) (litres) (kg) (days)
Economic  Value 1.23 5.97 -0.07 -0.92 0.03
It is worth noting  that type traits such as udder  scores  are not explicitly  included  in the 
selection  objective,  as these  do not directly  influence  income  or costs. Scores  for all the 
recorded  traits other than production  (TOP) are used along with other information  to 
predict  the remaining  life of cows that are currently  still alive in the national  herd - the 
influence  of these traits is therefore  through  their impact  on longevity.  However,  type 
scores  may also be the basis of independent  culling,  regardless  of BW.
Concurrent  changes  in cow size and production
Analysis  of the economic  trade-off  between  cow size and lactation  yields using the 
weights  in Table 3 demonstrates  that a 1 kg heavier  cow would need to produce  an 
additional  0.92/1.23  = 0.75 kg fat or 0.92/5.97  = 0.15 kg protein  to have the same  profit  
as a lighter cow. If, as a consequence  of being heavier,  the production  increase  is 
greater  than 0.75 kg fat or 0.15 kg protein,  the heavier  cow will be more profitable  and 
will be favoured  in index selection.
This approach  to valuing  the worth of cows neither  favours  nor discriminates  large or 
small cows specifically.  Rather  it values  their production  while accounting  for their costs
53
of production.  Larger  cows or strains  will be rewarded  if their extra productivity  more  
than pays for their increased  maintenance.
A consequence  of these  tradeoffs  between  size and production  is that there  exists  large  
efficient  dairy cattle and small efficient  dairy cattle. Inspection  of the bull evaluations  in 
terms of their BW index and their live-weight  EBV will quickly  confirm  this finding. A 
consequence  of this fact is that if the goal is to improve  economic  efficiency  (defined  as 
profit) it is better  to select  for profit  than to select  on indirect  indicators  such as cow size. 
This is particularly  true when selection  is across  breeds  or strains  of cows.
Industry  determinants  of within-breed  rate of improvement
The dairy industry  is often held up as a glowing  example  of a livestock  industry  with a 
high rate of annual  genetic  progress  relative  to say beef cattle  or sheep  industries.  Most 
dairy farmers  probably  pat themselves  on their backs  when they hear such comment.  
However,  in considering  the people  that control  the nature and direction  of industry  
progress,  it turns out that farmers  have little direct  influence.
Dairy improvement  programmes  in use today are, at best, fine-tuned  examples  of a 
scheme  that was researched  and communicated  some 50 years ago. The rate of 
progress  achieved  in the scheme  is determined  by the ages of the animals  and the 
selection  practices  that exist in the four so-called  pathways  of selection.  The scheme  
involves  two conceptual  populations  - one for breeding  replacement  bulls and the other  
for breeding  replacement  cows. The pathways  represent  the selection  of bull fathers,  
bull mothers,  cow fathers  and cow mothers.  The number  of young  bulls that are progeny  
tested,  the number  of graduate  sires required  and the number  of progeny  per bull are 
major  determinants  of both the rate of gain and the cost of the breeding  scheme.  
Farmers  choose  the cows they will use to produce  replacements.  However,  In the 
absence  of yearling  Al, the opportunity  to select  among  cows is negligible  when one 
accounts  for the sex ratio, calf losses  and the calving  spread. Farmers  choose  the bulls 
they will mate to their cows to produce  replacements,  but this is only among  the bulls 
the AB company  has chosen  to make  available  to them.
The AB companies  choose  the bulls they will use to produce  sons, and the elite cows  
they would like to mate with these bulls. Farmers  of course  decide  whether  to accept  
such contract  matings.  About  five years  later, the AB company  chooses  among  the bulls 
graduating  the progeny  test to determine  those  that will be made  available  to the farmer.  
Thus three of the four pathways  are controlled  by the AB company  rather than the 
farmer. The path the farmer  controls  is the one with the least impact  on industry  gain. 
The primary  basis for selection  in the three pathways  controlled  by two major NZ AB 
companies  is BW using weights  such as presented  in Table 3. The within-breed  
response  to this selection  on BW, accounting  for the four pathways  of selection,  is an 
annual  increase  of about 1.5 kg fat/cow,  1.6 kg protein/cow,  23 litres volume/cow  and a 
negligible  change  in live-weight.  Note that the response  in the component  traits is 
determined  by the genetic  relationships  between  the traits as well as their economic  
values. Despite  a negative  economic  value for volume,  it increases  as a result of 
selection.  Further,  the negative  economic  value  for live-weight  does not result in cows  
getting  smaller.
This four pathway  co-operative  scheme  will continue  to be successful  providing  a 
significant  proportion  of farmers  herd test (allowing  identification  of prospective  bull 
mothers),  use Al (providing  linkages  between  herds and cash flow to the AB company  
to pay for fhe progeny  testing)  and relinquish  sons from elite matings  for subsequent  
progeny  test.
54
strain  comparison  and selection  among  strains
The previous  section  argued  farmers  have relatively  little impact  on the annual  rate of 
progress  provided  they continue  herd-testing  and purchasing  semen from their 
respective  breeds/AB  companies.  In contrast,  farmers  can have enormous  impact  on 
genetic  progress  and AB company  business  by their choice  of breed/strain/AB  company.  
In some countries  farmers  have changed  strain (e.g. to Holstein)  eroding  the semen  
revenue  of their existing  AB companies.  In extreme  cases,  AB companies  may have 
been forced  out of business.  From  the perspective  of the farmer,  such quantum  genetic  
change  is highly  desirable  if it results  in progress  towards  their goal. However,  genetic  
improvement  may not result if proper  account  has not been considered  for the effects  
on all the traits (particularly  feed costs and fertility)  in the selection  objective.
Given a sound selection  objective  and knowledge  of breed and heterotic  effects,  it is 
possible  to make objective  comparison  among  existing  and new strains  of dairy cattle.  
In NZ production,  management  and economic  circumstances,  such analysis  (Figure  1, 
from Lopez-Villalobos  et al., 2000) shows  that farming  systems  using crossbred  cattle  
are more profitable  than purebred  Holstein-Friesian  (F), Jersey (J) or Ayrshire  (A) 
systems.
Figure  1. Profitabilities  of straight-breeding  and some  cross-breeding  systems.
600
500 -
g 400
^ 300
200
100
l-'xJxA
However,  with respect  to individual  bulls or cows there is enormous  overlap  between  
strains.  A list of the most profitable  bulls will likely include  Jerseys,  Holstein-Friesian  and 
Holstein  representatives  and these strains  will also be represented  in the list of least 
profitable  bulls. In such circumstances,  uninformed  breed change is unlikely  to 
guarantee  an increase  in farm profitability.
Summary
Animal  improvement  schemes  in practice  are all about  compromise.  In selection,  there  
needs  to be compromise  between  the progress  in individual  traits that contribute  to the
55
objective,  and compromise  in terms  of the rate of progress  in relation  to the cost of the 
progress. In comparing  strains or breeds  there is never a perfect  animal - some  
attributes  will normally  be enhanced  whereas  others  will be eroded. Such compromises  
must be quantified  in order  to provide  informed  decision  among  alternatives.
A systematic  approach  to making  informed  decisions  about dairy cattle selection  and 
strain choice begins  with the definition  of a goal, followed  by the construction  of a 
selection  objective.  The objective  includes  a list of traits that influence  the goal and the 
relative  emphasis  that should  be attributed  to each trait in the list. The calculation  of 
relative  emphasis  should account  for future production,  economic  and management  
circumstances  including  the manner  in which milk sales will be rewarded.
Dairy farmers  are part of an integrative  business  that requires  many skills to achieve  
repeated  success. It is important  that dairy farmers  and other players  in the dairy  
industry  work together  with animal  breeders  and animal  recording  agencies  if they are 
to be early exploiters  of new opportunities  while avoiding  costly  mistakes.
References
Garrick,  D.J. (1996). Genetic  improvement  in your herd - improving  profit through  
genetic  gain. Proceedings  of the 1996  Massey  Dairy  Farmers ’Conference,  48:129-135.  
Garrick,  D.J., and Lopez-Villalobos,  N. (2000). Potential  for economic  benefits  to the 
producer  from altering  the composition  of milk. British  Society  of Animal  Science.  
Occasional  Publication  No. 25:93-108.
Lopez-Villalobos,  N., Garrick,  D. J., Holmes,  C. W., Blair, H. T. and Spelman,  R. J. 
(2000). Profitability's  of some  mating  systems  for dairy herds  in New Zealand.  Journal  
of Dairy  Science,  83:144-153.
56
Breeding  objectives  for a seasonal  calving  pasture  based  system
of milk production
R Dillon, 3 R Buckley,  R. Evans,  J. Kennedy,  D. Berry, B. Horan  and R.F. Veerkamp^  
^Teagasc,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork, Ireland  
^ID-Lelystad,  P. O. Box 65, 8200  AB Lelystad,  The Netherlands
Introduction
Milk production  in Ireland  is characterised  by relatively  low milk production  per cow and 
low costs of production.  This is primarily  due to the pasture  based, seasonal  calving  
system  of milk production  (Dillon  etal., 1995). For the foreseeable  future,  it is envisaged 
that this system  of milk production  will pre-dominate  in Ireland,  making  the country  
unique  within Europe.
Irish dairy farmers  have many  options  to breed herd replacements.  In recent  times,  the 
practice  has been to use semen from Holstein-Friesian  dairy bulls sourced  mainly  
abroad. However,  the potential  of other breeds to replace Holstein-Friesians,  or 
crossbreeding  is attracting  much interest,  the latter originating  from the perceived  lower  
reproductive  performance  and survival  of to-days  Holstein-Friesian  dairy cow, and from 
questions  about the suitability  of Holstein-Friesian  cows to Irish production  systems.  
The objective  of this paper  is to investigate  ways of producing  dairy herd replacements  
that result in the highest  profit under Irish milk production  systems.
Irish trends  in milk production  and reproduction
Until the mid-1980's,  the predominant  dairy cow breed in Ireland was the British  
Friesian,  which  had been upgraded  from the dairy Shorthorn  from the late 1960 ’s. Table  
1 shows the change  in the proportion  of North American  Holstein-Friesian  genes  
(NAHF)  in cows registered  with the Holstein  UK and Ireland  (HUKI)  from 1977 to 1998.  
This proportion  of NAHF in bulls has increased  from 10% in 1977 to 80% in 1998.  
Therefore  in the Irish dairy cow population,  replacement  of the British Friesian  by the 
NAHF  has occurred  at a rapid rate since the late 1980 ’s. Average  milk production  per 
cow, for all milk recorded  cows, increased  from 5,400  kg in 1990 to 5,884  kg in 2000, or 
an increase  of 19 kg per cow per year (ICBF  2000).
Table 1. Change  in the proportion  of Holstein-Friesian  (HF) genetics  in cows (by year 
of birth) registered  with Holstein  UK and Ireland  (HUKI)  from 1977 to 1998.
Year of Birth Holstein  %
1977 <10
1990 50
1998 80
The reproductive  performance  of the Irish dairy herd was accessed  in a number  of early  
surveys (Crowley  et al., 1967; Roche et at., 1978; Cunningham  et at, 1978;  
Cunningham  and O'Byrne,  1980). All of these surveys  indicated  a calving  rate to first 
service  in excess  of 60 %, and a culling rate for infertility  of less than 10%. However  
since these surveys,  milk production  per cow has almost  doubled  as a result of the 
increased  genetic  merit for milk production,  as well as better  feeding  and management.  
A more recent  survey  on 32 spring  calving  herds  showed  that calving  rate to first service  
decreased  from 59% in 1991 to 54% in 1998 (Mee et. at, 1998). Over  this period  there
57
was a significant  decline  in calving  rate to first service  of approximately  0.9 % per year. 
This reduction  in reproductive  performance  was associated  with a significant  increase  of 
108 kg in milk yield per cow per annum.
Table 2 shows  the results  of three long-term  strain comparison  studies  carried  out at 
Moorepark  in recent  years. The objective  of these  studies  was to compare  the biological  
and economic  efficiency  of different  genotypes  in seasonal  grass  based  systems  of milk 
production.  The results  show  that cows  with higher  genetic  potential  for milk production  
and a greater  proportion  of NAHF genetics  had reduced  reproductive  performance  
(Buckley  et al., 2000). As the proportion  of NAHF genetics  approached  100%,  
conception  rate to first service  was reduced  to approximately  40%, calving  to conception  
interval  increased  to > 90 days, and the proportion  of cows empty at the end of the 
breeding  season  was greater  than 20%.
Table 2. Studies  at Moorepark  (CRT = Curtins;  CLY = Castlelyons)  comparing  milk 
production  and reproduction  from high genetic  merit (HM) and medium  genetic  merit  
(MM) cows.
CRT (96-97)
HM MMCRT (99-00)
HM MMCLY (96-00)
HM
Proportion  of Holstein-Friesian  (%) 92 50 80 60 94
Milk yield (kg) 7779 6862 7841 6855 6471
Submission  rate (%) 88 93 85 90 75
Pregnancy  rate to 1st service  (%) 41 53 48 54 37
Calving  to conception  Interval  (days) 87 89 91 89 99
Services  per cow (No) 2.1 1.8 1.9 1.8 2.8
Empty  rate (%) 23 6 19 13 26
In the past three years a more comprehensive  study on 74 commercial  spring  calving  
herds  in the south of Ireland  has been carried  out (Evans  et at., 2002). In the first year 
of this study the average  calving  to conception  interval,  pregnancy  rate to first service  
and proportion  of cows conceiving  in the first 200 days of the breeding  season  were 90 
days, 48% and 87% respectively.  Similar  results  have been obtained  in the second  year 
of the study. The pregnancy  rate of 48% to first service  is much lower than that found  
in previous  studies.  The average  proportion  of NAHF  genetics  of the cows in the study  
was 51%. This figure  may be an underestimate  since the proportion  was calculated  as 
50 %* sire plus 25 %* maternal  grand  sire, and it was assumed  that the maternal  grand  
dam had zero NAHF.
Table 3 shows  the genetic  correlation  between  milk production  and fertility  traits for 
spring-calving  Holstein-Friesian  cows in Ireland,  after adjusting  for both milk yield and 
fertility  for proportion  of NAHF (Evans  et al., 2002). The results  indicate  that selection  
for milk yield alone leads  to deterioration  in fertility  performance.
Table  3. Genetic  correlation  (and standard  errors)  between  milk production  and fertility  
traits for spring-calving  Holstein-Friesian  cows in Ireland.
Trait®Milk yield
Correlation  s.e.
Calving  to first service  interval  (CFS) -0.09 (0.25)
Number  of services  per cow (NS) 0.98 (0.35)
Pregnancy  at day 42 of the breeding  season  (PR42) -0.51 (0.51)
Pregnancy  rate to first service  (PRES) -0.51 (0.61)
58
Figure  1 shows  the genetic  trend  for calving  interval  and survival  for bulls born between  
1984 and 1995 (Olori etal.. 2002). These  latest results  from ICBF show  that in genetic  
terms, calving  interval  has increased  by about 0.5 days per year for the last 6 years.  
Similarly  survival  has decreased  by about 1 % the over the last 4 years.
These results confirm the international  trend that a reduction  in reproductive  
performance  in the Irish dairy cow population  can be ascribed  to both selection  for 
higher  milk yield, and an increased  proportion  of NAHF  genetics.
Selecting  within  the Holstein  Friesian
(aj Using  the Economic  Breeding  Index  (EBt)
Selection  of bulls for improved  reproductive  efficiency  is one possible  solution  to the 
problem  of reduced  reproductive  performance.  Careful  genetic  selection  may allow  
dairy producers  the use of high milk production  genetics  from NAHF  and still maintain  
acceptable  reproductive  rates. Reproductive  traits have a low heritability,  but the 
coefficient  of variation  of reproductive  traits is very large (Philipsson,  1981; Evans  et al., 
2002). A recent  study  in the Netherlands  showed  genetic  standard  deviations  of 9 days,  
for days to first service  and calving  interval,  0.25 for number  of services,  and 5 % for 
conception  to first service  (Veerkamp  et al., 2001). Therefore,  genetic  selection  for 
improved  daughter  fertility is feasible  in dairy cattle. Scandinavian  breeding 
programmes  have included  non-production  traits (fertility,  mastitis  resistance  etc.) in 
addition  to production  traits in their selection  indices  for many  years (Philipsson  et al., 
1994). Prior  to 1990  the genetic  trend in days open (reduced  reproductive  performance)  
was increasing,  but this has now reversed.  Although  progress  towards  increase  milk 
production  is less, their models  suggest  that better economic  efficiency  is achievable  
when functional  non-production  traits are included  in selection  programmes.
In Ireland,  the Irish Cattle Breeding  Federation  (ICBF) introduced  a new economic  
breeding  index (EBI) for dairy  cattle breeding  in Spring  2001. The new index is different  
to the old 'RBI' in that it contains  2 new traits (survival  and calving  interval)  as well as 3 
milk production  traits (Veerkamp  et al., 2002). The weightings  on the five traits in the 
new index are as follows:-
EBI (€) = -0.76* PD milk (kg) + 0.9* PD fat (kg) + 5.7* PD protein (kg) + 11.4* PD 
survival  (%) - 2,0* PD calving  interval  (days)
59
Therefore  the index indicates  that increasing  protein  yield at farm level \A/ill improve  farm 
profit by €5.70/kg produced.  Reduced  culling percentage  by 1 % will increase  farm 
profit by about  €11.40  for each cow in the herd. Likewise  each one-day  increase  on 
calving  interval  will reduce  farm profit by €2.00  for each cow in the herd. In terms of 
relative  importance  of the traits, improving  protein  yield is the most important,  followed  
by survival  and milk yield, calving  interval  and fat yield. Survival  and calving  interval  
contribute  almost  30 % of the weighting  in the EBI index.
The EBI index was further improved  in 2002, to include  more information  (multiple  
lactation  data, type traits and condition  score)  to improve  the reliability  of the survival  
and calving  interval  traits. Data are also available  on survival  and calving  interval  for 
most imported  semen.  The new index has resulted  in the re-ranking  of many  sires. The 
best example  of this is Delta Cleitus  Jabot (DCJ), which in the old RBI system  was 
ranked  No.1 in Ireland,  now ranks  954 in the new EBI Index. This is mainly  because  of 
his + 8.6 days in calving  interval  and - 3.4 % in survival. For the spring  of 2003, Irish 
dairy farmers  should  first look to the top 25 active sires ranked  in EBI. If fertility  and 
longevity  is an issue  for the herd, more  cognisance  should  be placed  on the survival  and 
calving  interval  traits in the index. There is a selection  of bulls available,  which will 
improve  survival  and reduce  calving  interval,  and simultaneously  increases  milk yield.
(b) Current  research  within  the Holstein-Friesian
Genotype  by feeding  system  comparison  studies : A study compared  2 levels  of genetic  
merit by 3 levels of concentrate  feeding  on a spring calving  system  of milk production  
over three years at Moorepark.  A total of 48 high genetic  merit (HM) and 48 medium  
genetic merit (MM) Holstein-Friesian  cows were randomly  assigned  to the three  
concentrate  feeding  levels. The mean PD (00) for fhe HM and MM groups  is shown  in 
Table 4.
Table 4. Predicted  difference  PD (00) and (SD) for the high genetic  merit (HM) and 
medium  genetic  merit (MM) cows.
Milk
(kg)Fat
(kg)Protein
(kg)Fat
(g/kg)Protein
(g/kg)Holst
(%)
HM -r276 +8.9 +9.7 -0.03 +0.01 75
(100.1) (4.75) (3.19) (0.086) (0.035)
MM -f81 +3.8 +4.3 +0.013 +0.031
(94.9) (4.95) (2.59) (0.099) (0.036) 65
All cows were first lactation  animals  in 1998. In May 1998, cows were grouped  into 
blocks of three within genotype,  on the basis of calving date and milk yield, and 
randomly  assigned  to one of three  concentrate  feeding  levels. Cows  remained  on these  
feeding  systems  for the duration  of the trial. The low concentrate  (LC), medium  
concentrate  (MC), and high concentrate  (HC) feeding  sysfems  were allocated  376, 810 
and 1540 kg/cow/lactation,  on average  over the three years. The aim was to have 
similar  grazing  management  across  all three concentrate  feeding  levels and this was 
successfully  carried  out for each of the three years of the trial.
Both genotype  and concentrate  feeding  level had a significant  effect on yield of milk, 
SCM, faf, protein  and lactose  (P<0.001)  (Table  5). There  was a significant  genotype  by 
concentrate  feeding  level interaction  for fat yield and milk fat concentration.  Regression  
analyses  showed  a significant  interaction  (P<0.05)  between  concentrate  feeding  level
60
and Predicted  Differences  (PD) for milk and protein  yield (as used) (Figure  2). Similarly  
when pre-experimental  milk and milk protein  yield were used as covariates,  interactions  
approached  significance  (P = 0.08 for milk yield: P = 0.12 for protein  yield). The 
differences  in protein  yield between  the concentrate  feeding  systems  increased  as both 
pre-experimental  protein  yield and pedigree  index for protein  yield increased.
Figure  2. The relationship  between  predicted  difference  (PDOO)  for protein  yield and 
pre-experimental  protein  yield on cow performance  (' ' JC; □ nMC; ---------- FIC)
Predicted  Difference  (PDOO);  Protein  Yield (kQlOM/)
Pre Experimental  Protein  Yield  (kg/day)  
61
Table  5. The effect  of genotype  and concentrate  feeding  on milk production  1998 - 2000
Genotype HM MM P Value
Feed LC MC HC LC MC HC SE Feed Geno G X F
(kg/cow)
Milk 7389  7739 8461 6421 6681 7196 86,4*** ***0.21
Fat 274 288 313 247 269 272 4.0irtrk0.07
Protein 247 261 288 217 232 250 3.0irk* *★*0.02
(9/kg)
Fat 37.2 37.3 37,2 38.6 40.6 38.0 0.50***0.03
Protein 33.5 33,8 34.1 34.0 34.8 34.9 0.24**0.60
Responses  to concentrate  varied  from 0.44 kg milk per kg of additional  concentrate  for 
cows with PD Milk of less than 100 kg, up to 1.33 kg milk for cows with PD Milk of 200 
to 300 kg. The results  suggest  the value  of increased  genetic  merit for milk production  
is much less on a low concentrate  grass  based  system  than on a high concentrate  grass  
based system,  and also that feeding  additional  concentrates  to HM is much more  
beneficial.  Genotype  had no significant  effect on live-weight,  however  the condition  
score  of the medium  genetic  merit cows  was higher  at all stages  of lactation.  There  was 
a significant  {P<0.05)  genotype  by feeding  system  interaction  for body condition  score  
at the end of lactation  (Figure  3). These  results  indicate  that even in a high concentrate  
system  the HM cows continued  to direct feed towards  milk production  rather than 
repletion  of body reserves.
Figure  3. The effect of genotype  (HM and MM) and feeding  system  (LC, MC and HC) 
on condition  score  at the end of lactation.
3.5
3.4 
3 . 3 
3 . 2 
3 . 1
3
2 . 9 
2 . 8 - 
2.7
2.6
2.5HC
M C
LCHC
LC M c
M M H M
Genotype  or feeding  system  had no significant  effect on reproductive  performance,  
however  there was a tendency  for poorer reproductive  performance  with the high 
genetic  merit cows, especially  in the third year of the trial. Cows  that did not conceive  
to first service  had greater  weight  loss from calving  to Al and lower energy  balance  in 
the first three weeks  of the breeding  season.
62
Condition  score: Because  of the low heritability  of ferfility  traits (Evans  et al.. 200f),  
there is increasing  interest  in accruing  alternative  traits which may be more easily  
measured,  possess  moderate  to large heritabilities  and are genetically  correlated  with 
fertility. These  traits will allow  indirect  selection  tor improved  fertility  within  the HF breed.  
Examples  of such traits include  body condition  score (BCS),  live weight,  and other  type 
traits. BCS throughout  lactation  has shown  moderate  heritabilities  (0.27 to 0.37) (Berry  
et al.. 2002), this means  that 27 % to 37 % of the variation  in BCS observed  on Irish 
dairy farms is due to the genetic  background  of the animal. The heritability  for BCS 
tended  to be greatest  when mean BCS was minimum  (Day 60). BCS change  in early  
lactation  exhibited  a lower heritability  (0.09) but was still greater  than that of all the 
fertility  traits measured  on the same  data set (Evans  et at.. 2001). Genetically  superior  
milk producing  cows  tend to have genetically  lower  BCS and lose the most BCS in early  
lactation.  Most recent  results  confirm  strong  and significant  genetic  correlation  between  
BCS and fertility  traits. There  are indications  that mating  a sire with an EBV for BCS at 
calving  of +0.5 BCS units, with an average  cow, will result in a genetic  reduction  in 
calving  interval  of 1.25 days and an increase  in pregnancy  rate to first service  of 3.7 
percentage  units in the subsequent  progeny
In the current  trial on Curtins  Farm, Moorepark,  obvious  different  phenotypic  trends  in 
BCS have been observed  between  the three HF strains  (Figure  4). All animals  were in 
first lactation  and were managed  in a simiiar  manner. The HM strain consists  of HF 
cows selected  intensively  tor increased  miik yield while the MM strain animals  were  
selected  tor both improved  milk yield and management  traits (e.g., muscularity)  The NZ 
strain originated  from embryos  imported  from New Zealand,  and have less than 20 % 
NAHF  genetics.  The NZ strain  had a significantly  greater  BCS throughout  lactation  than 
either  of the other  two HF strains. Although  the difference  between  fhe HM and the MM 
were not significantly  different  at first calving,  significant  difference  did arise at Week  40. 
with the MM having  significantly  higher  body condition  that their HM counterparts.  No 
difference  in reproductive  performance  was observed  in the first year of the study (when  
all animals  were first lactation).
Figure  4. Body Condition  Score (BCS) of Medium  Merit (MM), High Merit (HM) and 
New Zealand  (NZ) Holstein  Friesian  cows
Alternative  breeds  and crossbreeding
At present  greater  than 95 % of the dairy cow population  in Ireland  is Holstein-Friesian.  
Therefore,  in the short term, the best practicai  way to introduce  a new breed  or strain of 
dairy cow is through  cross breeding. Cross breeding  has an advantage  in that we
63
normally  would expect  the offspring  to produce  mid-way  between  their parents  (on 
average),  but in crosses  heterosis  (hybrid  vigour)  is expected  to play a role. This is 
illustrated  in Figure  5. Hybrid  vigour is generally  important  for traits associated  with 
reproduction,  survival  and overall  fitness,  and the effect might be that the offspring  are 
better than either of the parents. This approach  may also represent  a “fast track ” 
solution  for the improvement  of the reproductive  performance  of Irish dairy cows. Cross  
breeding  can be a step towards  breed or strain substitution,  or it can be used in a 
systematic  way to maximise  hybrid  vigour. It should  be noted  however  that hybrid  vigour 
is only expressed  in a crossbred  animal  and is not all passed  on to the offspring.  When  
the crossbred  is mated  to one of the original  breeds,  half of the hybrid  vigour  is lost in 
the offspring.  However  the additive  genetic  merit is passed  on to the offspring,  and it is 
then that the average  breeding  values  of each bull from the alternative  breed become  
very important.
In New Zealand  and to a lesser  extent  in Australia,  systematic  crossbreeding  has been  
used to maximise  hybrid  vigour. Table 6 shows  the results  of a study  that investigated  
the milk production,  live weight,  fertility  and survival  of Jersey  (J), NZHF,  NAHF  and their 
crosses  in New Zealand  (Harris  et al., 2001). Crossbreeding  increased  milk production  
and live-weight,  but also a favourable  effect  on the fertility  and survival  traits. The hybrid  
vigour  effect  was largest  for the NAHF*Jersey  cross, and smallest  for the NAHF*NZHF  
cross. Crossbreeding  increased  the proportion  of cows surviving  from 1st to 2nd 
lactation  and from 1st to 5th lactation.
Figure  5. Heterosis  or hybrid vigour is defined  as the advantage  in performance  of 
crossbred  animals  above  the mid-parent  mean of the two parent  breeds.
64
Table  6. Estimates  of heterosis  effect  for breeds  in New Zealand
NZHF  X Jersey NAHF  X Jersey NZHF  X NAHF
Fat yield (kg) 7.5 9.6 2.6
Protein  yield (kg) 5.5 6.2 2.1
Milk yield (kg) 147 157 67
Live weight  (kg) 9.2 10.4 5.0
Successful  Al calf {%) 6.8 10.1 3.3
Survival  1st to 2nd lactation  (%) 3.4 8.8 2.7
Survival  1st to 5th lactation  (%) 9.6 18.3 6.3
The decision  on whether  to opt for a crossbreeding  breeding  strategy  in an Irish scenario 
may depend  on the system  of milk production  being carried  out. in low concentrate,  
seasonal  calving grass-based  systems,  the relative difference  in milk production  
between  Holstein-Friesian  and alternative  dual-purpose  breeds  will not be as large as 
high concentrate  input systems.  Recent  results  from Moorepark  showed  a higher  milk 
yield response  to concentrate  supplementation  at pasture  (>1 kg milk per kg concentrate  
DM) with high merit Holstein-Friesian  cows than with lower genetic  merit dual-purpose  
breeds  such as the Montbeliarde  and Normande  {<0.75  kg milk per kg concentrate  DM). 
Therefore,  in a low concentrate  input system  the milk production  of the FI cross (i.e. the 
first cross)  will be much closer  to the Holstein-Friesian  milk production  than it will be in 
the high concentrate  system. Likewise,  health  traits such as reproduction,  survival  and 
overall  fitness  may be more important  in a low concentrate,  seasonal  calving  grass-  
based  systems.  Therefore  the reproductive  performance  and survival  of the Irish cow 
population  could be improved  by crossing  the Irish Holstein-Friesian  with a dairy breed  
already  selected  for important  production  and non-production  traits. The two breeds  that 
could be considered  at present  are the Montbeliarde  and the Scandinavian  Red breeds.  
The Jersey  breed could not be recommended  in a milk quota  scenario  because  of the 
large increase  in milk fat content  and reduced  cull cow and calf values. However,  it is 
important  to remember,  that similar to the Holstein-Friesian  breed, there is large  
underlying  genetic  variation  within both the Montbeliarde  and the Scandinavian  Red 
breeds. Until it is possibile  to include  alternative  breeds  within  the EBI, the selection  of 
bulls from an alternative  breed  will be based  on proofs  from the country  of origin, and it 
will have to be assumed  that a superior  animal  in the country  of origin will retain its 
superiority  in Ireland.
Summary
The future economic  efficiency  of Irish dairy farmers  will be affected  by the genetic  
make-up  of the dairy cow population.  The reproductive  performance  of the Irish dairy  
cow population  has reduced  in recent years. Genetic  selection  for improved  
reproductive  performance  has a role to play in reversing  this decline. This will be 
achieved  by including  functional  non-production  traits in a selection  index,  as in the new 
EBI index. Further  development  of the index in the future  will be important,  including  
other important  traits relevant  to Irish dairy farmers. There is a requirement  for an 
increased  level of milk recording  and progeny  testing  in the Irish dairy industry. In the 
short-term  there may be a place  for crossbreeding  with breeds  like the Montbeliarde  and 
the Scandinavian  Red breeds.  The genetic  merit  for milk production  of these  two breeds  
would not be as high as the Holstein-Friesian,  however  their genetic  merit for fertility 
traits would on average  be better. However  for this to be a success  all breeds  and 
strains  require  to be evaluated  within  the one index,  as differences  between  sires within  
a breed  for any one trait may be as large as between  breeds.
65
References
Berry, D.P, Buckley,  R, Dillon, R, Evans, R.D., Rath, M. and Veerkamp,  R.F. (2002).  
Genetic  Parameters  for level and change  of body condition  score and body weight  in 
Dairy cows. Journal  of Dairy  Science  (In Press)
Buckley.  R, Dillon, R, Rath, M. and Veerkamp,  R.F. (2000). The relationship  between  
genetic  merit for yield and liveweight,  condition  score, and energy  balance  of spring  
calving RIolstein-Friesian  dairy cows on grass based systems  of milk production.  
Journal of Dairy  Science  83. 1878-1886.
Cromie, A.R., Kelleher,  D.L., Gordon, F.J. and Rath, M (1998). Genotype  by 
environment  interaction  for milk, fat and protein  yield in RIolstein-Friesian  dairy cattle in 
Ireland. Proceedings  of ihe British  Society  of Animal  Science,  p.52.
Crowley,  J.P., RIarrington,  D. and Lacey, M. (1967) A survey  of reproductive  efficiency  
in cattle. 1. The reproductive  performance  of Irish cattle artificially  inseminated  Ir. J. 
Agnc Res. 6: 237,
Cunningham,  E.P. and O Byrne,  TM. (1980) Survey  of AJ. Results  1979:  Final  Report  
Trinity  College  Dublin.  Applied  Research  and Consultancy  Group.  Dublin  2. 
Cunningham,  E P, O'Byrne.  TM. and Murphy,  N. (1978) Survey  on A.I. Results  1978:  
Final  Report  Trinity  College  Dublin. Applied  Research  and Consultancy  Group,  Dublin  
2.
Dillon, R, Crosse,  S., Stakelum,  G. and Flynn, F. (1995). The effect  of calving  date and 
stocking  rate on the performance  of spring-calving  dairy cows. Grass  and Forage  
Science  50: 286 299.
Evans,  R D , Buckley,  F, Dillon, P. and Veerkamp,  R.F. (2002) Genetic  parameters  for 
production  and reproduction  of spring-calving  Holstein-Friesian  dairy cows In Ireland.  
Irish Journal of Agricultural  Research  (Accepted).
Harris, B.L., Holmes,  C.W., Winkelman,  A M. and Vu, Z.Z. (2001). Comparisons  
between  fertility  and survival  of strains  of Holstein-Friesian  cows, jersey  cows and their 
crosses  in New Zealand.  In: Diskin,  M.G. (Ed) Fertility  in the high producing  dairy  cow. 
Occasional  publication  No. 26, British  Society of Animal  Science  pp. 491—493.
ICBF (2000) Irish Cattle  Breeding  Statistics.  Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation,  Shinagh  
House,  Bandon.  Co. Cork.
Mee, J.F., Fahey,  J. and Crilly, J. (1999). Breeding  the dairy cow of the future  - today's  
challenges.  In: Dairying  in the new millenium.  Teagasc  National  Dairy Conference,  
Adare, pp7-16,
Olori, V.E., Meuwlssen,  T.H.E.  and Veerkamp,  R.F. (2002). Calving  interval  and survival  
breeding  values  as measures  of cow fertility  in a pasture-based  production  system  with 
seasonal  calving. Journal  of Dairy  Science  85: 689-696.
Philipsson,  J., Banos,  G. and Arnason,  T, (1994). Present  and future  uses of selection  
index methodology  in dairy cattle. Journal of Dairy  Science  77: 3252-3261.
Roche, J.F., Sherington,  J., Mitchell,  J.P and Cunningham,  J.F, (1978), Factors  
affecting  calving  rate to Al in cows. Irish Journal of Agricultural Research  17: 149-157.
Veerkamp,  R.F, Dillon, P, Kelly, E., Cromie,  A.R. and Groen,  A.F. (2002). Dairy cattle  
breeding  objectives  combining  yield, survival  and calving interval  for pasture-based  
systems  in Ireland. Livestock  Production  Science  (In Press)
Veerkamp,  R.F., Koenen,  E.P.C. and de Jong, G. (2001). Genetic  correlatir'ns  among  
body condition  score, yield, and fertility in first parity cows estimated  by random  
regression  models. Journal of Dairy  Science  84
66
Crossbreeding  results  at farm level in the Dungarvan  area
Brian Hillard
Teagasc,  Dungarvan,  Co. Waterford
Introduction
Five years  ago in 1997, a number  of farmers  in a local discussion  group  embarked  on 
a 3 year project  to compare  crossbred  heifers  from different  dual-purpose  breeds  to 
Holstein  Friesian  heifers  within their own herds, under the same management  and 
conditions.
The breeds  used for crossing  in 1997, 1998 and 1999 were Montbeliarde,  Normande,  
and Robunt.  In 1999  a fourth  breed,  Norwegian  Red was also Included.  Friesian  heifers  
(New Zealand  or otherwise)  could also be considered  for crossing  but may not exhibit 
as high levels  of hybrid  vigour. In the future  it may be possible  to include  some  Swedish  
Red semen  in this comparison.
Dual-purpose  breeds  cross well, with most benefit  derived  from crossing  them on the 
more extreme  Holstein  type cows. Crossbreds  can produce  good levels  of fat & protein  
through  high percentages,  which increases  the value per gallon. Crossbreeding  also 
increases  the sale value  of calves,  stores  cattle,  finished  cattle & cull cows (see Table 5).
Why Crossbreed?
Profitable  Spring  milk production  in Ireland  is based  on a compact  calving  pattern,  with 
cows calving  as close as possible  to early grass. However,  maintaining  a compact 
calving  pattern,  without  a high replacement  rate, is proving  difficult. Infertility  associated  
with increased  usage  of high milk volume  Holstein  bulls is now a significant  problem  on 
many farms. This has come about because  in general  the Holstein  breed societies  
concentrated  mostly  on milk production  at the expense  of health factors  and fertility.  
Also many of the Holstein  bulls are related and unless proper records  are kept, 
inbreeding  can easily occur. In contrast,  the Scandinavian  countries  have included  
health  and fertility  in their bull selection  programs  since the 1970's.
The crossing  of two different  breeds  results  In hybrid  vigour. This in turn should  result  
in healthier  animals  with better  fertility  and higher  milk solids/milk  price per gallon.
Bull Selection  Criteria:
High protein  bulls within each breed were selected,  with similar  or lower fat figures,  
medium  milk volume,  and above  average  muscularity.  It was the intention  that bulls 
would not increase  the size of heifers  when crossed  with the more extreme  Holstein  
cows (big, heavy  cows are not desirable  for a grass based  system,  they have a higher  
maintenance  requirement  and are not suitabie  for heavy  land).
The Rotbunt  and Norwegian  Red heifer crosses  are small, compact  animals. The 
Normande  & Montbeliarde  crosses  are bigger  - the Montbeliarde  bull used initially  had 
an above average  figure for stature,  which was not taken into account  at the time. 
Subsequently,  average  stature  was added  to the selection  criteria  for bulls.
The Montbeliarde  and Normande  distinctly  mark  their  progeny  when crossed  with black  
and white. The first crosses  when crossed  back with a Holstein  (i.e. Holstein,  25% 
Montbeliarde)  still look like Montbeliarde/Normande.  The Rotbunt  crosses  are similar  to 
Holstein  Friesian  but can still be picked  out. Some  are red and white. The Norwegian  
Reds are mostly  black or dark red.
67
Production  Performance  - 1st and 2nd Lactation:
The average  overall  performance  of each breed in their first and second  lactations  are 
summarised  in Tables 1 to 4. A total of 29 crossbred  heifers (9 Montbeliardes,  10 
Normandes,  10 Rotbunts)  and 28 Holstein  Friesians  heifers are now in their first 
lactation.  The Montbeliardes  are off the bulls Electro  (ELO), and Vassal (VSL). The 
Normande  are off Diametre  (lAM), Bunuelo  (BNO) and a stock bull on one farm. The 
Rotbunts  are mostly  off Parole  (PAE)  and also Pebe. The Holstein  Friesians  are off the 
positive  protein  Dairygold  bulls MALI, JOS, ELC and 1 LEW. These  are now in their 3rd 
lactation  with more crossbreeds  following  on in their 1st and 2nd lactation.
The average  production  of all crossbreds  taken together  is slightly lower than the 
Holstein  Friesians.  The average  protein  % for all breeds,  including  the Holsteins  is very 
good. Individually  the Montbeliardes  in their 1®* lactation  had the highest  kg and % of 
fat and protein,  and milk value. This is interesting  because  most of the Montbeliarde  
heifers  are off Electro  whose  milk lift proof has fallen  to zero since 1997 - yet the '.eifers  
have done well.
The Rotbunts  also performed  well and produced  good cattle.
Normandes  had the lowest production  figures  - even heifers  off Diametre  who was 
ranked  as one of the top bulls in that breed  in 1997. There  were no foot problems  worth  
talking about, which found favour with some farmers. The Norwegian  Red heifers  
milking this year are smaller,  more compact  than the other crossbreds.  The 2nd 
lactation  results  show similar  production  and milk value for the Holstein  Friesian  and 
Rotbunts.  The Montbeliardes  had the highest  price per gallon  in both lactations.
Fertility:
All crossbreds  went back in calf, but three of the Holstein  Friesians  did not. Two more  
did not make it to their second  lactation  - injury/TB.  Farmers  find that heifers  that milk 
very well in their first lactation  are difficult  to get back in-calf,  end up calving  late or not 
going in-calt at all. Most of the crossbred  heifers  were subsequently  bred back to a 
Holstein  bull (Eastland  Cash) and Norwegian  Red (Kommisrud  and Nordbo).
Calves/Cattle:
The bull calves  from these breeds  sold well and commanded  a higher  price than their 
black & white counterparts.  Most of the crossbred  cattle that were finished  at 2 years  
graded  O with a small number  making  the R grade  and slightly  better  kill out.
Summary
Caution  must be exercised  with the results  as they are from a small base. However  they 
show that dual-purpose  breeds can cross well giving satisfactory  production.  The 
biggest  benefit  may be healthier  cows with better  fertility. It is however  important  that 
there are good Holstein  Friesian  cows to cross with, and that the better  dual purpose  
bulls within  each breed are used.
Crossbreds  can produce  good levels of fat & protein  through  high percentages.  This 
increases  the value per gallon. Crossbreeding  also increases  the value of the bull calf 
and store  cattle  with smaller  benefits  in finished  cattle  and cull cows. Crossbred  heifers  
are very docile/easy  to milk from the start (their  SCC's  were also lower  than the Holstein  
Friesians  in the first lactation).
68
Acknowledgements
Our Thanks  to the Farmers  Journal  Trust for supporting  this project and the Al 
companies  and breed societies  involved.
Table 1. 1 St Lactation  - 2000
Montbeliarde  (9) Normande  (10) Robunt  (10) Flolstein/
Friesian
Calving  Date 12/2/00 17/2/00 14/2/00 14/2/00
Production  Index 104 92 99 100
Price/gal 1,08 1.03 1.04 1.05
Milk Value 1114 1015 1084 1087
Table 2. 1 st Lactation  - 2000
Montbeliarde  (9) Normande  (10) Robunt  (10) Holstein/
Friesian
Days Milking 259 163 258 255
Yield 1037 971 1041 1038
Fat % 3.93 3.75 3.69 3.93
Protein  % 3.61 3.42 3.52 3.45
Kgs Fat & Protein 366 326 351 358
Table  3. 2nd Lactation  - 2001
Montbeliarde  (9) Normande  (10) Robunt  (10) Holstein/
Friesian
Calving  Date 3/3/01 14/2/01 21/2/01 24/2/01
Calving  Interval 386 363 373 374
Production  Index 105 96 105 109
Price/gal 1.14 1 09 1.09 1.10
Milk Value 1354 1334 1415 1414
Table  4. 2nd Lactation  - 2001
Montbeliarde  (9) Normande  (10) Robunt  (10) Holstein/
Friesian
Days Milking 243 273 257 255
Yield 1188 1230 1301 1282
Fat % 3.94 3.80 3.65 3.86
Protein  % 3.60 3.41 3.48 3.43
Fat & Protein  (kg) 416 411 433 436
Table 5. Cattle  sales - 2000
Average Live Weight Carcase  Wt.
Breed Birth Date 3/3/00  10/3/00  Kill Out Value
(kg) (kg) (%) {€)
Flolstein/Friesian  (6) 14/2/98 658 344 52.3 857
Montbeliarde/
Normande  (4) 1/3/98 684 371 54.2 923
All the cattle  graded  04L/04H  except  for 1 Montbeliarde  - R5
69
Table  6. Two year old steer performance  - 2000
BreedLive Weight
7/2/00
(kg)Carcase
10/2/00 
(kg)Kill Out 
(%)Price
cent/kgValue
{€)
Holstein/Friesian 634 314 50 246 772
Normande  (2) 608 322 53 249 801
Montbeliarde  (2) 628 333 53 249 825
Table  7. Two year old steer performance  - 2001
Breed Carcase Price Value
(kg) cent/kg (€)
Holstein  Friesian  (10) 286 240 687
Montbeliarde  (7) 296 244 724
Rotbunt  (3) 335 244 819
Table  8. Two year old steer performance  - 2001
Carcase
Breed Birth Date 23/2/01
(kg)(kg) Price  
cent/kgValue
(€)
Holstein  Friesian  (6) 19/02/99 344 229 789Montbeliarde  (5) 12/02/99 340 231 785
Rotbunt  (2) 03/03/99 353 232 819
70
A blueprint  for growing  maize
J.G. Crowley
Teagasc,  Crops  Research  Centre,  Oak Park, Carlow
Introduction
Research  and practical  experience  have established  that, when a high proportion  (50- 
75%) of grass silage is replaced  by alternative  high dry matter  forage like maize or 
whole-crop  cereals,  there invariably  follows  an increase  in DM intake. Whether  this is 
converted  into increased  output (beef or milk), depends  largely  on the quality  of the 
alternative  feed offered  - quality  being measured  in terms  of dry matter  content  (>25%),  
starch  content  (>22%)  and digestibility  (>65%). Over the past number  of years maize  
has become  a significant  feature  on many  livestock  farms. In cropping  terms,  at around  
20,000  ha (50,000  ac) it is now the third largest  crop in the country  after cereals  and 
sugar beet. While good quality  maize (DM @ 28%; starch @ 25%) is the best winter 
forage  to have on the farm, much of the maize  harvested  in recent  years falls short of 
these  targets.
With the huge expansion  in the maize  area over the past two years,  the country  is fast 
approaching  the point where Area Aid on maize will be reduced  in line with the % 
overshoot  of our National  Base Area of 345,500  ha. This is unlikely  to have any effect  
on the maize area sown in the more favourable  areas of the country,  but could (and 
possibly  should),  slow expansion  into the more marginal  areas  in the country.
To grow maize  successfully  every  effort must be made  to produce  a high quality  product  
at minimum  cost by following  carefully  the well-established  guidelines  outlined  below.
How much maize  to grow?
The answer  depends  on a number  of factors  including  the expected  yield and the length  
of the feeding  period  (see Table 1).
Table 1. The area (ha) of maize  required  assuming  daily intake  = 15 kg forage  DM x 
number  of cows x 200 day feeding  period x inclusion  levels, divided  by the expected  
yield (12.5 t/ha DM =16 tonnes  fresh at 27% DM)
Inclusion  rate (% of forage)
No. of cows 30 40 50 70
20 1.5 2.5 2.5 3.5
40 3.0 5.0 5.0 7.0
80 6.0 10.0 10.0 14.0
120 9.0 15.0 15,0 21.0
To benefit  from feeding  good quality  maize  silage an inclusion  rate of at least 50% is 
required.  The optimum  for dairy cows  is closer  to 75%. Fattening  beef can be fed 100%  
maize.
The real benefits  of maize  follow  only if the crop meets  the following  standards  of yield 
and quality. A DM yield of 12.5 t/ha with a DM % between  26-30%  and starch  levels  of 
20-25%.  The main factors  affecting  performance  are site, seedbed  preparation,  variety,  
sowing  date, weed control  and, at the end of the season,  harvest  date.
71
Where  to sow?
Maize can be successfully  grown south and east of a line roughly  from Limerick  to 
Dundalk,  but site selection  is more critical  than location.  Avoid fields over 120 m (400 
ft) above sea level and heavy poorly drained  soils (remember  that heavy harvest  
machinery  will be working  up to the end of Octoberl).  Equally,  light drought-prone  soils 
will in the odd drought  years, produce  poor yields. Ideally  sites should  have immediate  
access  to a roadway.  Maize  can be grown  on a wide range  of soil types provided  the 
pH is above  6.0. If pH is 6.0 or below,  spread  lime and postpone  growing  maize  for a 
year. Soil sampling  is an essential  first step, particularly  where  planning  to plough  up 
grassland.
Seedbed  preparation
Perennial  weeds  such as docks and scutch should be eliminated  before ploughing.  
These  weeds  are very difficult  and costly to control  once maize is sown. As a crop, 
maize  is very sensitive  to compaction,  and with its deep rooting  requirement,  will suffer  
badly if the site is compacted.  Where compaction  is known  to be a problem,  sub-soiling  
will be necessary.  Sub-soiling  is best carried  out in late summer  when soils are dry.
Plough deep (25-30 cm) and bury all trash and organic  manures. Ideally organic  
manures  should  be spread  as early as possible  and ploughed  in immediately.  Early  
ploughing  is recommended  on heavy  soils. A single  slow pass of a power  cultivator  tiller,  
fitted with deep wheel-track  eradicators  (to at least 10 cm) is the best approach.  The 
seedbed  does not need to be too fine, but should  be ready  by mid-April.  Drill the seed 
at 104 - 112,000  seeds/ha.  (Maize  can be established  via a one-pass  cereal  drill, but 
results  are variable.  Calibration  of the drill is difficult  and must be undertaken  for each 
variety. Research  figures  suggest  that in well-distributed  stands,  yields are marginally  
increased  but the starch  content  is reduced  relative  to precision  drilling).
Varieties
The value  of maize  lies in its ability  to produce  high DM (+28%)  and high starch  (+25%)  
conserved  feed. To achieve  these values  it is essential  to use early or medium-early  
varieties  described  in the Department  of Agriculture ’s recommended  list published  each 
year. Match  the variety  to the potential  of the site e.g., Alcyone  for very favourable  sites;  
Loft, Hudson  etc. for less favourable  ones.
Sowing  date
Sow early but not too early. The optimum  date is from mid-April  to May 10. Later  sowing  
can lead to reduced  grain yield (% starch)  and DM content  - the two quality  factors  that 
gives  maize  its advantages  over grass. The trends  shown  in Tables  2 and 2a have been  
repeated  in many  trials.
Table  2. The effect  of sowing  date on the yield and quality  of maize  silage
Sowing  date April  3 April 11 April 23 May 3 May 13
DM yield (t/ha) 13.9 13.0 14.3 14.1 13.2
DM%
Feed value ME33.7 33.4 31.6 30.2 28.4
(MJ/kg  DM) 11.3 11.4 11.3 11.1 11.0
*Normal  light, MGA. UK 1992
72
Table  2a. The effect  of sowing  date on yield (t/ha), DM% and grain yield (t/ha)
Sowing  date April 10 April 20 May 10 May 20
DM yield (t/ha) 11.75 13.38 12.50 11.9
DM% 30.00 28.9 24,8 22.1
Grain yield (t/ha) 5.27 6.02 5.0 3.88
*J. Crowley,  Teagasc,  Oak Park, 1996
In the two sets of data the best combination  of yield and quality  was recorded  at the late- 
April sowing.
Sowing  under  plastic
Growing  maize  under  plastic  film is one way of significantly  increasing  total DM yield and 
quality  of the maize  crop. On average  the Punch  Plastic  system  has increased  DM yield 
by 4.2 t/ha (1.7 t/ac) within  the range  2.5-5.0  t/ha. The higher  increases  were obtained  
in poor production  years, on marginal  sites, or in late-sown  crops where the 
conventional  or no-plastic  crops  failed  to reach a good level of maturity.  For most crops  
grown under plastic,  over 80 % of the measured  yield increase  comes  in the form of 
grain.
The complete  Cover or X-Tend  system  (first introduced  in 1996) has given variable  
results  over the years. Trial results  at Oak Park have shown  that at best this system  
produces  yields equivalent  to those produced  by the Punch system,  with a slightly  
higher  grain yield. Damage  caused  to the young  plants  during  the period  of three  to four 
weeks  while they break through  the plastic  cover significantly  reduces  the potential  of 
the system. This was particularly  evident  in the results  from Oak Park trials in 2001 
(Figure  1).
Figure  1. Dry matter  yield (t/ha) of three maize  varieties  using  three production  systems  
- sown  April 23, 2001
□ No. PI. 
SP P
□ X-Tend
73
In general,  2001 was a very good year for maize,  with a long warm growing  season.  
High autumn  temperatures  combined  with no frost, meant  that the conventional  (no 
plastic  plots) produced  high yields  of mature  maize. The data (Fig. 1) shows  clearly  that
(a) different  varieties  behave  differently  under the X-Tend  system  and (b) the Punch  
system  produced  the highest  yield across  all three  varieties.  Due to the strength  of the 
plastic  film used, not all varieties  will suit the X-Tend  system.  Selecting  the wrong  variety  
will result in significant  yield losses. Changes  from year to year in the nature and 
strength  of the plastic  film used in the X-Tend  system  mean it is not possible  to predict  
the outcome  for 2002 .
Fertiliser
The fertiliser  recommendations  for maize  are presented  in Table 3. 
Table  3. N, P and K fertiliser  recommendations  for maize  (kg/ha)
N, P, K Index Nitrogen Phosphorus Potassium
4 75 Nil Nil
3 100 40 190
2 110 50 225
1 150 70 250
*Assumes  no slurry applied
Since most maize receives  organic  manure,  an application  of 54,000  I/ha (5000 g/ac) 
will supply  all or most of the P and K requirements  of the crop. Nitrogen  supply  is more  
difficult  to predict. For ground  that has not received  regular  applications  of slurry, an 
application  of 125 kg/ha of N is sufficient.  On ground  receiving  regular  application  of 
organic  manures  this can be reduced  to 60 kg/ha. Too much nitrogen  will delay crop 
maturity  without  increasing  yield.
Maize  sown without  plastic  should  receive  at least 20 kg/ha  of phosphorus  drilled with 
the seed in the form of superphosphate  or one of the proprietary  maize  starter  products  
which  will deliver  24 kg N and 20 kg/ha P at a rate of 125 kg/ha  of product.
Potassium  is vital for maize and the crop requires  more potassium  than nitrogen. It 
plays a vital role is the transfer  and conversion  of soluble  sugars  into starch  and should  
not be restricted.
Pests  and Diseases
Frit fly, leatherjackets,  wireworms  and rooks are the main pests of establishing  maize  
crops. All maize seed is now treated  with fungicides  and Mesurol,  which gives full 
protection  against  bird damage  and almost  100% protection  against  Frit fly. Where 
maize  is preceded  by grass,  wireworm  and leatherjackets  must be controlled  for a year 
or two. In this situation  spray Dursban  on the seedbed  and incorporate  before  sowing,  
or use Yaltox  drilled  with the seed. There  is no need to use insecticides  in continuous  
maize  or where  maize  is grown  in an arable  rotation.
The only leaf disease  to cause  concern  is Eyespot  {Kabatulla  zeae). It has shown  up 
on many crops in the last few years but rarely causes  yield loss. The fungus  spreads  
under  cool damp  conditions  appearing  in September.  It has been more prevalent  in the 
West Cork area. Since there is no way of applying  a fungicide  to maize in 
August/September,  good hygiene  practice  and the use of resistant  varieties  are the only
74
control  methods  available.  The spores  overwinter  on maize  stubble  and trash. Maize  
ground  should  be ploughed  as early and cleanly  as possible.  There  is some  suggestion  
(from field observations),  that some  varieties  are more resistant  than others,  but to-date  
no variety  is fully resistant.
Weed  control
Despite  its size and growth rate from July onwards,  maize cannot  tolerate  weed  
competition  from sowing  to late June. Effective  herbicides  are available  but timing of 
application  is vital. The crop must be kept clear of weeds at all times and post­
emergence  herbicides  must be applied  to small weeds,  i.e. before  the four-leaf  growth  
stage. The following  herbicide  programmes  are the best available:  -
(i) For fields/farms  new to maize apply Atrazine  @ 3.75 to 5.0 I/ha. Atrazine  
incorporated  before  sowing  will produce  the most reliable  results. It can be applied  
post-sowing  or post-emergence.
(ii) From year two onwards  Atrazine  resistant  weeds, Nightshade,  Orache,  and 
Groundsel  will appear, so switch to the following  post-emergence  control 
programmes:-
(a) Atrazine  -r Bromotril-P  at 2.0 + 2.5 I/ha In two splits
(b) Atrazine  -r Lentagran  at 2.0 I -r 2.0 kg/ha again in two splits
(c) Atrazine  -r Stomp  at 2.0 -r 3.7 I/ha; one application  when  weeds  are emerged
(d) Stomp  -r Lentagran  3.75 I + 2.0 kg/ha; one application  when the crop is at 
the 2-4 leaf stage
Docks, thistles and volunteer  potatoes  can occasionally  cause problems  in maize.  
Starane  at 0.5 to 1.0 I/ha will control  docks and potatoes  but will set back the maize.  
Dow Shield at 1 I/ha will control  thistles. It is expensive  and is best used as a spot 
treatment  on dense  patches  only. Once  the crop is well established  and weed  free (mid-  
to late-June),  no further  action is required  until the crop approaches  maturity  from late 
September  to late October.
Harvesting
The decision  as to when  to harvest  can have a very profound  effect  on the quality  of the 
silage  produced.  The objective  is to harvest  the crop when the cob has matured  to the 
extent  that the cob DM%, (i.e. grain + central  core (rachis)  minus  the covering  leaves)  
has reached  50 to 55% and the stover  (stem -r leaves)  are still in a healthy  green  state.  
This will result in a total crop dry matter  content  of 28-33%. Crops harvested  much  
before  or too far beyond  this stage  will reduce  the value of the ensiled  crop (Table  4).
Table  4. The relationship  between  crop DM%, quality  and ensiling  losses
Whole  crop 
DM%Organic  matter  
Digestibility  (%) Effluent  lossesFermentation  
losses  %
15 66.7 6.9 17.7
20 69.6 4.2 14.5
25 70.3 2.0 11.4
30 71.1 0.2 8.3
35 71.9 Nil 5.1
The best field guide as when to harvest  is provided  by the maturity  of the cobs,  
relationship  between  cob maturity  and overall  crop DM is set out in Table 5.The
75
Table  5. The relationship  between  cob maturity  (cob DM%)  and crop dry matter  content
Cob DM% Crop DM% % Cob DM*
30 18-22 25-35
40 21-26 35-45
50 27-33 45-55
*% of the total DM made up of cob material
The optimum  harvest  point is when  the cob reaches  a dry matter  content  (DM%)  of 50% 
or more. Once  this point is reached  it does not matter  if the rest of the plant is green.  
Harvest  date should  be based on the cob rather  than on the overall  look of the crop. 
With a little experience  the DM% of the cob can be very accurately  assessed  by an 
examination  of individual  grains  on the cob (Table  6).
Table  6. Stages  of maturity  in maize  cobs
Cob DM% Description  of maize  grains
20-25 Completely  formed  but white
30-35 Milky soft-pale  yellow
35-40 Some  milky material  - darker  yellow
40-45 Beginning  of dough  stage
50-55 Grain hard - bright  yellow
For confirmation,  select  3-5 cobs at random  from the crop. Chop into 1 cm thick rings,  
and dry overnight  in an oven at 100°C. This will confirm  your visual assessment.
Dry wt.
DM% - X 100
Fresh  wt.
Ensiling
Since all maize harvesting  is carried  out by contractor,  the biggest  problem  in getting  
maize  cut at the optimum  stage is getting  the contractor  to turn up on time. The main 
focus  now should  be on chop length  and the degree  to which  the grain is processed.  No 
grain should  get through  without  some  “damage ”. The harvester  must be set to deliver  
a fine chop of 4-6 mm, or animals  will not eat leaf portions.  If you have mature  grains,  
then insist  that the machine  "corn cracker ” is being used.
A narrow  clamp  filled quickly,  with the cut material  spread  out in thin layers — inches  
rather  than feet thickness  is essential  for successful  ensiling. Roll the pit continuously 
and use salt at 3-5 kg/m^  on the surface  to avoid spoilage,  particularly  at the corners.  
Sheet down and maintain  close contact  between  the plastic cover and the maize.  
Protect  the clamp  and the open face from birds. Most growers  now use a net. Bait to 
prevent  rats invading  the pit.
Maize ensiles  easily and preservation  rarely causes  problems.  If pit management  is 
good, additives  will not be necessary  when ensiling  maize. However,  there are two 
situations  where  maize  silage  will benefit  from a good inoculant,  (i) where  the DM% of 
the harvested  crop is above  35% and (ii) where  there is the intention  of relocating  the 
clamp  later in the year.
76
Environment
With all agricultural  systems  under  close scrutiny  regarding  pollution  it is only a matter  
of time before  the spotlight  falls on maize. On the continent  and particularly  in France,  
maize  production  has acquired  a very bad reputation  regarding  pollution.  Maize  has a 
very strong  visual impact  on the environment  and has the potential  to cause serious  
nitrogen  and phosphorus  pollution  of waterways.  Now that the area sown in Ireland  has 
exceeded  20,000  hectare,  the crop will not go unnoticed.  The overuse  of organic  and 
inorganic  fertiliser,  both nitrogen  and phosphorus  is of no benefit  to the crop and will 
increase  rather  than reduce  production  cost.
Allowing  maize  stubble  to lie bare over the winter  can lead to nitrogen  leaching,  and soil 
erosion  may carry phosphorus  into waterways.  While  ploughing  early across  the slope  
will reduce  run-off,  it does little for nitrogen  leaching.  Maize  stubble  would  benefit  from 
a green cover  crop over the winter. Undersowing  or in some case establishing  a crop 
after the harvest  would significantly  reduced  worries  about nutrient  losses from the 
system.
There is little doubt that the use of plastic will be questioned.  With the continuing  
improvement  in maize  varieties  the use of plastic  is becoming  no longer  necessary  in 
many areas. Unless  the degradability  of the plastic  film on offer to growers  improves  
significantly  it will become  more and more difficult  to justify  its use.
Conclusions
• Maize  will give high yields (12.5-15  t/ha DM) at a competitive  cost with or without  
Area  Aid.
• Achieving  high yields  of high DM, high starch  maize  is vital in achieving  increased  
output.
• The provision  of a high DM, high starch  feed such as maize  fed in conjunction  with 
grass  silage  will help in improving  both the performance  and well-being  of animals  
in intensive  beef, dairying  and possibly  sheep  enterprises.
• To achieve  high returns  on maize  particular  care and attention  must be paid to the 
details  outlined  in growing  and ensiling  the crop.
References
Crowley,  J.G. (2000).  Guidelines  for growing  maize. Todays  Farm,  V 10 No. 5, pp11-13.  
Crowley,  J.G. (1998). Improving  yield and quality of forage maize. End of Project  
Report. Teagasc,  ISBN 1 901138  72 0.
Crowley,  J.G. (1996). Growing  maize under photodegradable  polythene  film. 
Agricultural Research  Forum,  UCD, pp173-174.
Crowley,  J.G. and Keane,  G. (2000). Maize  and Plastic. MGAAnnual  Conference.  Jan. 
2000 .
Crowley,  J.G. (2002). Maize  - proceed  with more caution. Todays  Farm,  Vol. 12 No. 5, 
pp.34-35.
Crowley,  J.G. (2001). Maize and Other Forage  Crops as Cash Crops for the Tillage  
Farmer. National  Tillage  Conference,  Teagasc,  pp53-66.
Teagasc  2001: Growing  and Feeding  Forage  Maize.
Teagasc  2001: Nutrient  and Trace Element  Advice  for Grassland  and Tillage  Crops.  
ISBN 1 84170-246-3.
77
What  are the advantages  to using  maize  silage  for a 
spring  calving  system
Eamon  Phelan
Ballyneety,  Dungarvan,  Co. Waterford.
Introduction:
After leaving  school  in 1981, and following  a 2-year  certificate  in Agricultural  Science  at 
Waterford  Regional  & Kildalton  Agricultural  College,  the author  spent  9 months  in New 
Zealand  working  tor Marvin Farm Relief Services,  managing  herds up to 280 cows.  
Next came Australia  where he worked  in Western  Australia  during  the wheat-planting 
season.
On returning  home  with the intention  of starting  farming,  I quickly  realised  that the home  
farm was too small and the father too young,  to allow me to realise my ambitions.  
Subsequently,  I left and went to work for Masstock  Saudia  Ltd., where  I spent  five years  
managing  a 1200 cow herd (average  yield of over 9,000  litres on 4 times  a day milking).  
Here I came  to experience  maize  for the first time and subsequently  learned  a lot about  
this crop. I also travelled  to America  with Masstock  and have visited  large dairy herds  
in Phoenix  Arizona,  Chino  Valley,  California  and Masstock  Macon  in Georgia. During  
this time I also got married,  returning  to Ireland  permanently  during the Gulf War of 
1990,
The home  farm
In 1990, the home  farm comprised  85 acres, 10 of which  were rented. A 78,000-gallon  
milk quota included  14,000  gallons  of liquid milk and winter  milk. Of the total quota,  
10,000 gallons  were leased. Ten acres of land and 5,000 gallons  of quota were  
purchased  in 1991, which  was reclaimed,  drained  and fenced  in 1992.
In 1994 a 52-acre  block of land with 25,500-gallon  quota  was leased. This land was in 
poor order  and needed  a lot of work, but it had a modern  wintering  unit with 44 cubicles  
and a slatted  tank. Subsequently  this property  was bought  in 1998 and is still being  
developed  to-day.
Tablet,  Farm profile  - 2002
Adjusted  acres owned 126
Acres  rented 29
Total acres 155
Quota  (gallons) 114,439
Cows 80
Bulling  heifers 20
Bullocks  for autumn  sale 22
Male bull calves 20
Female  replacement  calves 24
Bulls 2
78
Farm Profile:
The farm is divided  into 4 blocks:  -
1. Home  Farm (52 adjusted  acres);
This is the only land available  to the milking  cows to graze and is divided  into 21 
paddocks.  Silage  is cut here only when grass is in surplus.
2. Killadangan  (25.5 adjusted  acres);
This is used for a 2 cut silage  system  and grazed  in the autumn.
3. Quinlans  (49 adjusted  acres);
Comprises  15 acres of maize  and 34 acres of grazing.  The grazing  area is under  
development  and has yet to reach It's full potential.  At present  15 acres have been 
re-seeded  and Improved.  More work remains  to be done.
4. Rented  Block  (29 adjusted  acres);
This block is in one field and will be sown to maize  for sale.
Why Maize?
With only 52 acres of grazing  available  tor 80 cows, this represents  a stocking  rate of 
0.65 acres/cow  for the year. Prior  to 2000  the farm serviced  a winter  milk scheme.  2000  
was the first year in spring  milk. Initially  maize  was grown  as an alternative  forage  for 
winter  milk production,  but as the farm is aiso susceptible  to drought,  maize  is an ideal 
supplement  during  grass shortage.  This proved  very successful,  easy to operate  and 
held milk yield while keeping  cows happy.
As a member  of the Dungarvan  Discussion  Group,  most of who were in spring milk, I 
looked  at them and was jealous  of their life sfyle. I had 80 cows, a fragmented  farm,  
was in winter  milk and was working  life a fool and for what? After examining  the costs  
with my Teagasc  advisor  (Figure  1), I finally  made  the decision  to opt out of winter  milk.
Figure  1. Cost kg Dry matter  of various  supplements
Cost  kg 8 
D.M(P) 6□ G R A S S
□ MAIZE  WITH  AREA  AID
□ MAIZE  NO AREA  AID
□ GRASS  SILAGE
□ CONCENTRATE
Foodstuff
It is intended  to replace  acres  of grazed  grass  with acres  of maize  silage. At present  the 
farm is two years into the system. It is too early to give a definitive  answer,  but the 
system  is a lot easier  than winter  milk, with feeding  confined  from July to December  as 
opposed  to starting  in October,  and continuing  for the following  12 months. I feel I am 
competing  financially  with other spring  calving  systems  despite  my small grazing  base.
79
Table  2. Dairy MIS 2000
Yield
(gal)Cone, fed
X 50 kgsCost
(p/gal)Margin  over feed & fertilizer  {£)
0; £1,000£/cow £/acre  ,,gall
E. Phelan 1478 13 6 1284  1130 921
Gp. average 1176 11.1 6 1044  951 887
Table  3. Profit monitor  2000
Dairy Dairy Dairy Total Farm
G M/acre G M/cow GM/gallon GM/acre Net margin/ac
(£) {£) (E) (E) (E)
E. Phelan 1020 1200 0.81 731 495
Gp. average 832 940 0.80 518 293
The system:
Growing  the crop:
"Drill and Shut the Gate ’’ - as crops  go, maize  is very easy to grow. Dairy  farmers  as a 
rule are not good  tillage  farmers  but most dairymen  succeed  in growing  excellent  maize  
crops  with high yields  of consistent  quality.
Husbandry  is as follows:
1. 5,000  gals/acre  slurry
2. Plough  in immediately
3. Sow early to mid April
4. Spray 1. Mid May. 1 ''/2 pts/acre  Atrazine
11/2 pts/acre  Stomp
5. Spray  2. Mid June. 1/2 pt/acre  Bromotril
6. Harvest  as early as possible,  usually  late September  to mid October.  
No additive  added.
Table  4. Maize  costs {£)/acre  - 2001
Rented  ground Owned  ground
(E) (E)
Rent 50
Ploughing 20 20
Power  harrow 22.5 22.5
Sow 22.5 22.5
Spray 10 10
Seed 50.32 50.32
Fertilizer 80.71
(No Slurry) 35
Slurry  spreading 16
Chemicals 7 17
Harvesting 80 80
Total cost 343 273
Area aid 112
Net cost 343 161
Cost/ton  DM @ 5.5 t DM/acre 62 29
80
Feeding  the Crop:
The aim is to start calving  on February  1, and to be out on grass by day as soon as
In wagon  from 2 pm - 1 amweather  allows. The cows are feda complete  i
Concentrate  (28%) 5 kg
Molasses 1 kg
Straw 0.2 kg
Minerals 0.15 kg
Grass  silage 1 kg
Maize  silage 6 kg
Table  5. Concentrate  formulation
Maize/grass  silage  (%)
Hi-Pro  Soya 35
Maize  distillers 28
Barley 16
Citrus  pulp 16
Molasses 5
Cows  are left out after am milking  and brought  in as determined  by weather.  Because  
of the small land base, no risk is taken that pastures  will be damaged,  and for this 
reason I am not as consistent  at leaving  cows out as many other farmers. “If the 
weather  is dodgy  the cows  stay in’’ - weather-dial  is useful  for this purpose.  This system  
will remain  in place until cows go out by night, which is usually  early  April.
In general  there is adequate  grass  until early July, or if it rains in June  or July then grass  
supply  will be fine until August.  As soon as grass  supply  comes  under  pressure,  maize  
comes  back into the system. Feeding  just a few kg DM will hold milk well. However  in 
August  or September,  up to 6 kg DM can be fed as maize. At this stage  0.75 kg/DM/day  
of soya is introduced.  This is fed in the parlour,  and works  well to prevent  milk drop due 
to lack of protein. Cows  will now be fed maize  silage  until they are dried off. The maize  
is used to supplement  grass supply  as necessary,  with cows being brought  in by night  
from mid to late October,  and out by day as long as weather  permits  or grass  runs out
Tips:
Always  feed cows after milking  to avoid having  them congregate  at exits of paddocks.  
Aim is to reduce  labour  input by having  cows feed themselves.  For this reason  I have 
made  a long low maize  pit beside  the milking  parlour,  with the intention  of allowing  the 
cows to self feed the maize.
Conclusions
Maize  silage  is an important  crop as it is the cheapest  alternative  feed source  to grazed  
grass. It allows  the utilization  of some  of the out-farm  land in it’s most  economic  manner  
within  the dairy enterprise.
Each year approximately  80 tons of dry matter  is fed as maize.
This costs:  (80 tons maize  @ E35/ton  DM = £2,800).
Alternatively,  if it were replaced  with citrus pulp it would  cost?
81
Citrus  Pulp (80 tons citrus  pulp @ £113/ton  DM = £9,040)
This equates  to a saving  of approx.  £6,000. Having  the necessary  land and using it in 
its most economic  fashion,  facilitates  leaving  cows out early in February  and having  
enough  grass  to last until April 10. It also allows  for keeping  grass  in the system  as long 
as possible  in the autumn.  However,  in an ideal world  where  land area was not limiting,  
there would be no need to grow maize - instead  a simpler  system  would operate,  
concentrating  on growing  and utilising  what is after all “the cheapest  feed - grazed  
grass
82
Complementary  forages  for dairy  production
T. Keady
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  Co Down,  BT26  6DR
Introduction
Recently  there has been a major increase  in interest  in the production  and feeding  of 
alternative  forages  for dairy cattle during  the indoor  feeding  period. This interest  has 
been driven mainly by the improvement  in cow genetics,  and producers  wanting  to 
increase  milk production  as cheaply  as possible  from home produced  feed. 
Furthermore,  the cost of producing  alternative  forages  may be reduced  if land is eligible  
for arable  aid, and recent  costings  have shown  that the costs of producing  maize and 
whole crop wheat can be similar to grazed grass when arable aid payments  are 
involved.  However  grass  silage is, and will remain  the main forage  offered  to the vast 
majority  of dairy cattle in Northern  Ireland  during  the winter  period  for the foreseeable 
future. Given  the increasing  interest  in alternative  forages,  particularly  forage  maize,  a 
series  of studies  have been undertaken  at Hillsborough  to investigate  factors  influencing  
both the growing  of forage  maize and effects  on feeding  value when offered  to dairy  
cows.
In the last year the area of maize silage has increased  considerably.  Recent  
developments,  namely  new varieties  and the use of plastic mulch, has enabled  the 
consistent  production  of high feed value maize silage. Research  from Hillsborough  
clearly illustrates,  from the mean of 5 years of studies,  that, on average,  the use of 
plastic  mulch increases  crop yield by 2.5 t DM/ha,  cob yield by 3.2 t DM/ha,  crop dry 
matter content  by 7 % units and crop starch content  by 9 % units. However,  the 
response  to plastic mulch is greater  with later maturing  varieties  compared  to early  
maturing  varieties.  To achieve  a high forage  yield, which is one of the most important  
factors  affecting  the cost of production,  the crop should  be planted  early, i.e. mid-April,  
using medium  to late maturing  varieties  and covered  with plastic  mulch. When  selecting  
varieties  it is important  to take into consideration  the site on which the crop is to be 
grown.
Studies  from Hillsborough  have  clearly  illustrated  that inclusion  of high feed value  maize  
silage  in the diet increases  milk yield and composition,  consequently  increasing  margin  
over feed costs, relative  to high quality  grass silages. To obtain optimum  levels of 
animal  performance  from maize  silage:
1. Ensile  the crop at about  30% dry matter  (Table  1).
2. The extent  of the benefit  obtained  from including  maize  silage depends  on grass  
silage quality. For poor quality grass silage, responses  will be obtained  by 
replacing  up to 70 % of the forage  component  as maize  silage. For high quality  
grass silage,  most of the benefit  will be obtained  from offering  maize  silage  as 40 
% of the forage  component.
As maize  silage  has lower  crude protein  concentration  relative  to grass  silage  it is 
necessary  to increase  the protein  content  of the concentrate.  Formulate  the diet so 
that with cows in early lactation,  total diet crude protein  concentration  is 17-18 % 
whilst  for cows in mid-lactation  16-17  % will suffice.
Reduce  the starch  content  of the concentrate  to 15-20  % of the dry matter.  
Including  high quality maize silage will enable concentrate  feed levels to be 
reduced  by up to 3.3 kg/cow/day  to produce  a given quantity  of milk in a quota  
situation.3.
4.
5.
83
6. Under good grazing  management  in spring/early  summer,  buffer feeding  maize  
silage can replace  grazed  grass in fhe diet of the dairy cows whilst maintaining  
animal  performance.
Whole  crop wheat  can be ensiled  between  35 and 70 % dry matter. Delaying  harvest  
results  in increased  yields and starch concentration  of the resultant  forage. Studies  
undertaken  in the UK using whole crop wheat, ensiled  at a dry matter  concentration  
ranging  from 30 to 58 %, have shown  that inclusion  of whole  crop wheat  increased  food 
intake  but had no beneficial  effect on milk yield, milk composition  or margin  over feed 
costs.
It is concluded  that alternative  forages  should  only be included  in the diet of dairy cattle  
if there is evidence  to show increased  animal  performance  or better cow health and 
consequently  improved  margins  over feed.
The data from Hillsborough  clearly  illustrates  that good quality  maize  silage inr.-eases  
animal  performance  and margin  over feed, whereas  whole  crop wheat  has little ettect.
Table  1. The effect  of maize  maturity  at harvest,  when offered  as 40% of the forage,  on 
animal  performance
Maturity  of maize
Grass  silage Immature
(20% DM)Mature
(29% DM)Very Mature  
(38% DM)
Food intake (kg DM/day)
Grass  silage 10.9 7.3 7.4 7,4
Maize  silage 4.9 4.9 5.0
Total 16.9 18.2 18,3 18,4
Milk (kg/day) 26.8 27.2 27.8 27.8
Fat (%) 3.98 4.24 4.15 4.02
Protein  (%) 3.15 3.23 3.23 3.25
(Keady  et al., 2002)
84
Understanding  the N cycle  and the pathways  of N loss
Michael  Ryan
Teagasc,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford
Introduction
Nitrogen  (N), the most widely  used plant nutrient  in fertilisers,  is long recognised  as a 
key to improving  crop yields  and economic  returns.  That which is utilised,  be it fertiliser,  
manure  or soil N comes  from the atmosphere  and ultimately  returns  there In gaseous  
form via the N cycle (Figure  1) maintaining  the atmospheric  content  at a stable  78%.
N Cycle
The earth is habitable  due to Its constantly  changing  physical,  chemical  and biological  
cycles. The N cycle  is one of many  cyclic  changes  on earth,  which  redistribute  elements 
that are essential  for life, e.g., sulphur,  carbon,  and hydrogen.  Much of the Interest  in 
the N cycle  focuses  on the parts of it that human  activities  influence  e.g., the role of soils,  
plants  and atmosphere,  yet only about  2% of the world's  N Is Involved  in those  aspects,  
almost  all of the remainder  is present  in rocks. In grassland  N cycling,  there  are several  
aspects of interest, e.g., N fixation, mineralisation,  nitrification,  assimilation,  
immobilisation,  volatilisation,  denitrification  and leaching.  Consideration  of these  terms  
and their role In the movement  of N through  soils - plants  - animals  forms  the basis of 
this paper.
Figure  1. Simplified  N Cycle
rjttrooon  FJxotJof*
N fixation
This is a biological  process  whereby  symbiotic  and non-symbiotic  organisms  fix 
atmospheric  N gas into organic  forms; fertiliser  manufacture  is the non- biological  
equivalent.  The best-known  organisms  which symbiotically  fix N, are the Rhizobia  
(bacteria),  living within  the roots of legumes  such as peas and clover. Rates  of fixation,  
in pastures  containing  35-40%  white  clover,  have been estimated  in this country  at 90- 
190 kg N/ha. Non-symbiotic,  free-living,  bacteria  such as Azotobacter,  Clostridium  and 
blue-green  algae,  fix N, but to a less Important  degree.
85
Mineralisation
Organic  N occurs  naturally  as part of the soil organic  matter  fraction.  It is incorporated  
in soil from manure,  plant residues  and biological  N fixation,  etc. Microbes  and soil 
animals  break down, I.e., use organic  matter  in soil as an energy  source  and excrete  
nutrients  in excess  of requirements  e.g., N in the form of ammonium.  A very high 
proportion  of the N in surface  soils is present  in organic  forms, and can vary in Irish 
grassland  soils from 5 to 15 t per ha. Assuming  a mineralisation  (break  down) rate of 
1.5% of the mean value, approximately  150 kg N/ha/annum  are released  from organic  
sources.  Trial results  support  this. Data from 26 sites averaged  over 4 years, indicate  
a N harvest  in DM from zero N plots of 219 kg/ha  (Ryan,  1976). Release  may be much  
higher  - 12 year old swards  in the UK released  321 to 420 kg N per ha, due to a build­
up of the soil N pool.
Nitrification
The decomposition  of organic  substances  in soil leads  to release  of N and the formation  
of ammonium.  When  oxygen  is present,  soil microbes  transform  ammonium  to nitrate  
in a rapid process  (nitrification),  which is completed  In a few days. Nitrification  is 
primarily  carried  out by bacteria,  Nitrosomonas  spp, which  convert  ammonium  to nitrite  
and Nitrobacter  spp, which oxidise  nitrite to nitrate. It is the primary  route whereby  
ammonium  released  from plant residues  or added  as fertiliser  i.e., in urea or calcium  
ammonium  nitrate  (CAN)  is converted  to nitrate. The rate of nitrification  increases  with 
increase  in soil pH and soil moisture  content  up to field capacity,  reflecting  the biological  
nature  of the process.
Assimilation
Plants obtain most of the N required  for growth  from soil by uptake  of soluble,  low 
molecular  weight  compounds,  particularly  nitrate  and ammonium.  When nitrate  taken  
up by plants  and microorganisms  is assimilated,  it is first reduced  to ammonium  prior to 
incorporation  of its N into amino compounds.  The energy  for reduction  comes  from 
photosynthesis  or oxidation  of organic  carbon.  The reduction  proceeds  via the enzymes  
nitrate  reductase  and nitrite reductase.
Immobilisation
Even though ammonium  is the preferred  form, soil microbes  can convert  either  
ammonium  or nitrate  to satisfy  their needs  for N. This assimilation  of N into organic  N 
constituents  of cells and tissues Is called immobilisation  by the soil biomass.  
Immobilisation  of nitrite and nitrate  to organic  forms is sometimes  due to enzymatic  
activities  associated  with plant or microbial  N uptake and N utilisation  processes.  
Disappearance  of mineralised  N is sometimes  due to such immobilisation.  The soil 
biomass  can compete  effectively  with plant roots for available  N and microbial  biomass  
has the capacity  to immobilise  N rapidly. The lack of detectable  change  in soil inorganic  
N levels  when high fertiliser  N is added  to soils Is Indicative  of a high buffering  capacity  
for N, perhaps  through  a rapid uptake  into plants  and into the soil biomass.  Therefore,  
this process  may result  in accumulation  of N over time, with rates  varying  from 56 to 190 
kg N/ha/year.  Ploughing  of such soils provides  quick release  of part of the immobilised  
N.
86
Volatilisation
Ammonium  ions and ammonia  in soil water exist in equilibrium  with each other.  
However,  soil water ammonia  is subject to volatilisation  (gaseous  loss) to the 
atmosphere  and the amount  that occurs is very much dependent  upon soil pH and 
concentration  of ammonium  in the soil solution.  As soil pH increases,  the fraction  of soil 
solution ammonium  plus soil solution  ammonia,  in the gaseous  ammonia  form,  
increases  tenfold  for every unit of pH above 6.0, thereby  increasing  the loss of soil 
solution  ammonia  to the atmosphere  (Follett,  2001). Volatilisation  of ammonia  is of most 
importance  on calcareous  soils; losses  increase  with increasing  temperature  and can be 
appreciable  for neutral  soils as they dry out. It is greater  in sandy  soils and can be high 
when N wastes  such as manure  decomposes  on the soil surface. Losses  can be high 
from urea applied  to grass but losses  from soil and fertiliser  N are reduced  by growing  
plants. Decomposition  of urea by ureases  is an important  reaction  in the ammonification 
process  and the major input of ammonia  to the atmosphere  is thought  to result from 
animal  production  through  the return  of excreta,  particularly  urine. The amount  of N in 
the dietary  intake influences  the extent and form of excreted  N. There is a strong  
positive  relationship  between  the N concentration  of the herbage  at the start of the 
grazing  period  and the amount  of ammonia  (kg/animal/day)  lost during  the period. The 
N concentration  in the diet affects both the total returns of N in excreta  and the 
distribution  between  dung and urine. Urine  has by far the greatest  potential  for ammonia 
loss since 53 to 75% of total urinary  N may consist  of urea. In urea metabolism,  urea is 
converted,  through hydrolysis  to ammonium  and carbon products. The process  
consumes  hydrogen  ions allowing  hydroxyl  ions to react with ammonium,  releasing
ammonia  gas i.e., NH^ OH = NH3 gas + H2O. Ammonia  losses from surface
splashplate-applied  cattle slurry range 25-75%  of applied  N after 10 days; losses  from 
this source  and housing  each amount  to 40% of the total (Hyde,  pers. com.).
Denitrification
Mineralisation  and nitrification  processes  in soils form ammonium,  nitrite  and nitrate  ions 
from organic  soil N. Nitrate and nitrite can be lost to the atmosphere  through  
denitrification,  which is the biological  conversion  by bacteria  of nitrate to the gases,  
dinitrogen,  nitrous  oxide, nitric oxide or other gaseous  N oxide compounds.  Nitrous  
oxide  is a greenhouse  gas and is linked  to thinning  of the ozone  layer. Dinitrogen  is the 
product  of the complete  denitrification  process,  nitrous  oxide results  from incomplete  
denitrification  and to a small extent  from the nitrification  process.  Basically,  nitrous  oxide  
production  in the soil, via denitrification,  is the primary  route  for most losses  of gaseous  
N to the atmosphere.  The conditions  required  for denitrification  to occur include;  (i) 
ample  carbon  substrate;  (ii) reduced  oxygen  availability;  (iii) adequate  concentration  of 
N oxides, nitrite, nitrate, nitric oxide or nitrous oxide, and (iv) presence  of bacteria  
capable  of denitrifying.  Topsoils,  high in moisture  status and well fertilised  with N 
fertiliser  or manures,  provide  ideal conditions  for denitrification.  Factors,  which  increase  
the proportion  of nitrous oxide to dinitrogen  in denitrification,  include decreasing  
temperature,  pH and carbon  availability,  increasing  oxygen  and sulfide  and low nitrous  
oxide-reducing  enzyme  (Betlach  and Tiedje  1981).
Runoff/leaching
Research  shows  that the most important  factor in determining  the extent of losses  
through  runoff on vulnerable  soils, is how quickly  the rainstorm  which causes  runoff.
87
occurs  after spreading  slurry  or fertilisers.  If a storm  occurs  within  forty eight hours  it is 
not unusual  to record  losses  of 20 to 40% of the N applied  from poorly  drained  soils i.e., 
10 mm of rain may be sufficient  to cause  runoff  from impermeable  soils whereas  high 
rainfall  of 25 mm in 24 hours may not cause  runoff  from gravel  and sandy  soils. If the 
rain does not come for 1 week there is a dramatic  drop in the organic  matter  and N, 
potassium  concentration  in the runoff water. Experiments  show that winter rain, 
collected  as runoff, is 17, 30 and 43 % for free draining,  imperfectly  and impermeable  
soils (Sherwood,  1984, 1986, 1990). Runoff of ammonium  and nitrate has been  
recorded  from N fertilised,  grazed  grass  plots in spring  and autumn  on moderately  heavy  
and heavy  soils (Kurz, pers. com.).
Leaching,  the movement  of water  down the soil profile  can be an important  source  of 
nitrate  loss from soil. Leaching  of ammonium  is generally  not important  because  it is 
adsorbed  by the soil, except  perhaps  in sands  and soils having  low retention  capacities.  
As nitrate  is a negatively  charged  ion, it is repelled  by the negatively  charged  clay and 
is readily  leached  below  the bottom  of the root zone into the deeper  layers  from which  
it may eventually  reach groundwater.  Leaching  occurs  mainly  from October  to March,  
when rainfall  exceeds  evapo-transpiratlon  and soil water  movement  is downward.  The 
start - to - end, and amount  of drainage  varies yearly, which In turn determines  the 
amount  of nitrate-N  leached. Soil type has a significant  effect. Nitrate-N  can be 
expected  to move  450, 300 and 200 mm deep with 100 mm effective  rainfall  (rain minus  
evapotranspiration)  in sandy,  loamy  and clayey  soils respectively.  Water  quality  impact  
areas for leached  N, are wells, ground  water supplies,  streams  and surface  water  
bodies.
Irish research  results-grassland
At present  there is much interest  in nitrate-N  loss to water. The knowledge  base with 
regard  to nitrate-N  loss is very limited  but new experiments  under  way will significantly  
broaden  that base. Published  information  on leaching  in Ireland,  divides  along the 
following  lines; trials on grass plots with fertiliser  or slurry, fertiliser  plus slurry, and 
fertiliser  on cultivated  soil. A summary  of results  of leaching  to 1 m from grass plots is 
shown  in Table 1.
Table 1. Mean nitrate-N  leaching  results  from cut (*grazed)  grass  plots.
Soil
Drainage Fertiliserkg N/ha 
Appliedmg/I
NDepth
(m)Yrs
leachedkg N/ha Reference
Mod.Free Pig Slurry 412 3 1 3 13 Sherwood,  1981
Impeded Pig Slurry 403 2 1 3 8 ibidem
Mod.Free CAN* 51 2 0.9 1 15 Sherwood  & Ryan,  
1990
Mod.Free CAN* 408 4 0.9 1 29 ibidem
Mod.Free CAN 40 2 1 5 11 Shenwood,  1986b
Mod.Free CAN 200 6 1 5 34 ibidem
Mod.Free CAN 300 15 1 5 81 ibidem
Mod.Free CAN 400 22 1 5 119 ibidem
Mod.  Free CAN 240 9 1 3 NA Shenwood,  1988
88
Table  2. Mean nitrate-N  leaching  and concentration  in drainage  water  from cut grass  in 
soil columns  (lysimeters).
Soil
Drainagetype
Appliedkg N/ha 
Nmg/I
(m)Depth
leachedYrs kg N/ha Reference
Mod.Free* CAN-rwcsIry 422 2 1 2 14 Ryan & Fanning, 
1999
Mod.  Free* CAN-rscsIry 423 1 1 2 7 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN-f  wpsiry 419 5 1 2 35 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN-rspsIry 420 1 1 2 6 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN-r  wcsiry 250 0.3 1 2 2 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN+scsIry 250 0.3 1 2 2 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN-r  wpsiry 250 0.3 1 2 2 ibidem
Mod.  Free* CAN-rspsIry 250 0.3 1 2 2 ibidem
wcsiry  = winter  cattle  slurry;  scsiry  = spring  cattle  slurry;  wpsiry  = winter  pig slurry;  spsiry  
= spring  pig slurry.  *low N reserves  in soil.
Apart  from two values,  nitrate-N  concentrations  were generally  well below  the drinking  
water  EU maximum  admissible  concentration  (MAC)  of 11.3 mg/litre.  The soils with low 
N reserves  had grown  barley  for 6 years  (thus depleting  organic  N). They  then had a 3- 
month  fallow  period,  following  the first grass  experiment,  resulting  in a flush of released  
N prior to sowing  grass  for the second  experiment.  The soils were thus depleted  in soil 
N contributing  to the low nitrate-N  concentrations  measured.  Allied  with dropping  the N 
input from 420 to 250 kg N/ha brought  nitrate-N  concentrations  in drainage  water (at 1 
m deep)  to very low levels  of 0.3 mg/I. Higher  concentrations  would  be expected  under  
grazing  conditions.  Also it must be remembered  that leaching  results  at depths  of 1 m 
do not represent  corresponding  concentrations  in deeper  groundwater.
The effects  of CAN fertiliser  (300 kg N/ha) plus cattle or pig slurry (120-123  kg N/ha),  
applied  in winter/spring  as before, on nitrate-N  leaching,  at 1 m deep, under grass-  
cutting conditions,  were compared  (Ryan and Fanning,  1996; 1999) in another 
experiment  on five soils. After two years the soils were cultivated,  fallowed  for four 
months  and resown  to grass. Results  are shown  in Tables  3 and 4.
Table  3. Two year mean effects  of soil and N application  (kg/ha)  on nitrate-N  leaching  
(kg/ha)  and nitrate-N  concentration  in grassed  soil lysimeters,  1 m deep.
Soi DrainageSlurry
type AppIN
LeachCone.
mg/INSlurry
type AppIN
LeachCone.
mg/IN
Comer Poor wcsiry 423 16 3 spsIry 420 10 1
CIrch Free wcsiry 423 54 7 spsIry 420 65 8
Elton Free wcsiry 423 66 10 spsiry 420 44 6
Okprk V.free wcsiry 423 79 10 spsiry 420 35 5
Rthgn Poor wcsiry 423 47 7 spsiry 420 38 6
Comer Poor wpsiry 420 28 4
CIrch Free wpsiry 420 87 12
Elton Free wpsiry 420 63 9
Okprk V.free wpsiry 420 100 13
Rthgn Poor wpsiry 420 71 11
Comer  = Castlecomer;  CIrch = Clonroche;  Okprk  = Oakpark;  Rthgn  = Rathangan.
89
Table 4. Pooled  effects  of cultivation,  50 kg fertiliser  N/ha, sowing  grass (Yr 3) and 
fertiliser  (200 kg/ha) + slurry (50 kg/ha) N applications  (kg/ha) in years 4 and 5 on 
nitrate-N  leached  (kg/ha)  and nitrate-N  concentration.
AppIMean yr 3 
Leached mg/IN AppIMean yrs 4 and 5 
Leached mg/IN
Comer CAN 50 177 23 251 1 0.3
CIrch CAN 50 195 24 251 4 0.8
Elton CAN 50 286 36 251 4 0.8
Okprk CAN 50 294 35 251 2 0.4
Rthgn CAN 50 266 34 251 2 0.5
The drainage  water  from the Clonroche  and Oakpark  soils (receiving  fertiliser  plus winter 
pig slurry) breached  the MAC, while water from the Rathangan  soil was borderline.  
Fertiliser  plus winter  cattle slurry resulted  in high values  for the Elton and Oakpark  soil 
water (Table  3). In years  4, 5 reducing  the N input severely  reduced  the loss of N. This 
was also influenced  by a flush of released  N which occurred  in year 3 from cultivation,  
4 months  fallow  and a small fertiliser  input of 50 kg/ha at sowing,  giving high nitrate-N  
concentrations  of 23-36  mg/I (Table  4). Mineralisation  of soil organic  N and absence  of 
a crop to utilise  released  N would have caused  elevated  nitrate-N  concentrations  in the 
drainage  water.
Irish research  results-cereals
Cereal  crops stop assimilating  N around  July but soil microbes  continue  to liberate  soil 
organic  N into the autumn,  resulting  in the accumulation  of large amounts  of nitrate-N,  
which may leach to groundwater  with the autumn-winter  rains. Studies  (Ryan and 
Fanning,  1999; Ryan, Sherwood  and Fanning,  2001) at Johnstown  Castle  in lysimeters  
show that loss of N, as measured  at a depth of 1 m, is high from fallow  land declining  
over time (Table  5).
Table  5. Effect  of crop (barley,  winter  wheat  and fallow)  and treatment  (kg N/ha applied)  
on mean nitrate-N  concentration  (mg/I) and loss (leach)  of nitrate-N  in drainage  water.
Fallow
CropYrs in kg N/ha 
tillage AppI leachmg/lkg N/ha 
N AppI leachmg/I
Nkg
AppIN/ha
leachmg/I
Nkg
AppIN/ha
leachmg/I
N
Barley 1-3 0 86 12 100 50 11 . _ . 0 171 21
Barley 10 0 13 2 120 32 5180 36 6 0 76 12
Wheat 12 0 11 3150 11 3200 18 6 0 56 16
Table  5 shows  high nitrate-N  concentrations  in the drainage  water  from the cereal,  early 
on in the rotation, which declines  significantly  over time so that by year 10 
concentrations  are very low. Fallow  soil releases  high amounts  of organic  N resulting  in 
high nitrate-N  in the drainage  water  to year 12; it was year 14 before  the mean  value  in 
the fallow treatment  declined  below 11.3 mg/I (MAC). The 76 kg N/ha lost from the 
fallow land is the same amount  estimated  as lost from ploughed  land to rivers in the 
south-east  in 1985-86  (Neill, 1989).
90
Losses  in practice
Little is known  in Ireland  re: losses  from farm-size,  grazed  plots. However,  estimates  of 
excretion  can be made  e g., a 250 kg steer ingesting  6 kg forage  DM containing  3% N 
will ingest  180 g N/day, retain about  20 g (12%) and excrete  the remaining  160g N/day.  
Excretion  as faeces  and urine both result  in volatile  losses  of ammonia.  About  74% of 
the total N excreted  is in the urine and a single  urine spot can have an N concentration 
corresponding  to 600 kg N per ha. Some of the N is released  to the atmosphere  as 
volatile  ammonia  while the N remaining  in the excreta  and associated  plant residues  
returns  to available  N pools in the soil. At times of low pasture  growth  and downward 
movement  of soil water,  such returns  to the N pools in autumn  increase  the risk of nitrate  
leaching  (Sherwood  and Ryan, 1990; Follett,  2001). In denitrification  studies,  loss of 
4.6% of 362 kg/ha  applied  N, as nitrous  oxide,  was measured  on a slightly  impeded  soil 
over 1 year. Wetter  soil would  have higher  loss for the same N input.
Conclusions
Lysimeter  studies  have shown  that winter  application  of slurry  in addition  to high fertiliser 
N, creates  risk of nitrate  leaching  on some free-draining  soils; lower risk is associated  
with spring slurry applications.  In small plots, Mulqueen  et al. (1999)  found very low 
nitrate  leaching  from pig slurry  application  to grass  in December  on Athenry  soils; similar 
results were obtained  from low N inputs to a range of N- depleted  soils. Runoff  
experiments  have shown  the impact  weather  conditions  can have on nutrient  losses  to 
water; only one third of Irish soils are vulnerable.  Nutrient  loss is important  because  
when waters become  too enriched,  the aquatic  environment  can become  eutrophic.  
Leaching  losses  from well - managed  grass are lower  than from early rotation  barley;  
continuous  cereals  leach very little nitrate. Cover  crops could reduce  winter  leaching  
from uncropped  land, which tends to leach easily; the management  required  to 
successfully  achieve  this without  harm  to succeeding  crops  requires  research.  Gaseous 
N losses  Ireland,  especially  with regard  to ammonia,  are not well documented;  limited  
information  exists  on nitrous  oxide loss.
References
Betlach,  M.R. and Tiedje,  J.M. (1981). Kinetic  explanation  for accumulation  of nitrite,  
nitric oxide and nitrous  oxide during bacterial  denitrification.  Applied  Environmental  
Microbiology  42: 1074-84.
Follett,  R. (2001). Nitrogen  transformation  and transport  processes,  pp 17-44. In R. F. 
Follett and J. L. Hatfield  (eds) Nitrogen  In the environment:  sources,  problems  and  
management  Elsevier  Press, London.
Mulqueen,  J., Rodgers,  M and Bouchier,  H. (1999). Land application  of organic  
manures  and silage  effluent. Teagasc  End of Project Report  50pp.
Neill, M. (1989). Nitrate  concentrations  in river waters  in the south-east  of Ireland  and 
their relationship  with agricultural  practice. Water  Research  23 (11) 1339-1355.
Ryan, M. (1976). Grassland  productivity  2; effect  of fertiliser  nitrogen  on herbage  N yield 
at 26 sites. Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research  15: 1-10.
Ryan, M. and Fanning,  A. (1996). Effect  of fertiliser  N and slurry on nitrate  leaching  - 
lysimeter  studies  on five soils. Irish Geography  29: 126-136.
Ryan, M. and Fanning,  A. (1999). Leaching  studies  in lysimeter  units. Teagasc  End of 
Project  Report. 27pp.
91
Ryan, M., Sherwood,  M, and Fanning,  A. (2001). Leaching  of nitrate-N  (N03-N)  from 
cropped  and fallow  soil - a lysimeter  study with ambient  and imposed  rainfall  regimes.  
Irish Geography  34: 34-49.
Shenwood,  M. (1981), Nitrate  leaching  following  application  of slurry  and urine to field 
plots, pi 50-157,  In A. Dam Kofoed,  J. H. Williams  and P. L'Hermite  (eds) Efficient  land  
use of sludge  and manure.  Elsevier  Press,  London.
Sherwood,  M. (1984). Nitrogen  is too valuable  to waste. Farm  & Food  Research  15, 
(4), 114-115.
Sherwood,  M. (1986a).  Pollution  in livestock  farming  - its causes  and avoidance.  Irish  
Grassland  & Animal  Production  Association  Journal  20: 69-75.
Sherwood,  M. (1986b). Impact  of agriculture  on surface  water in Ireland. Part 11. 
Prospects  for the future. Environ.  Geol. Water  Sci. 9; 1-14. Springer  Verlag  New York. 
Shen/vood,  M. (1988). Water pollution  and possible  EC constraints  on fertiliser  use. 
Teagasc  Fertiliser Seminar,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford,  Ireland.
Shenwood,  M. (1990). Runoff  and leaching  following  landspreading  of fertilisers  and 
animal manures. Teagasc  Advisors  Seminar,  Johnstown  Castle, 9pp, Wexford,  
Ireland.
Sherwood,  M. and Ryan, M. (1990). Nitrate  leaching  under  pastures  pp323-333.  In (ed 
R. Calvet)  Nitrates,  agriculture,  EAU. INRA, Paris.
92
Environmental  legislation,  current  and pending  and its implications
S. Regan
Teagasc,  Rural  Development  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.  
Introduction
The scope  of this paper  is confined  to environmental  legislation  of immediate  concern  to 
farmers.  This includes  the major  EU Directives  which  Ireland  is currently  under  pressure  
to implement,  notably  the Nitrates  Directive  {91/676/EEC)  and to a lesser extent  the 
Waste Directive  (91/156/EEC).  The on-going  implementation  of domestic  water  
pollution  legislation  is also considered  including  agricultural  bye-laws  and mandatory  
nutrient  management  planning. The Nitrates  Directive  has generated  a particularly  
vigorous  debate  in farming  circles not least because  it seeks to limit the maximum  
amount  of manure  from livestock  that may be applied  to land each year. In order to 
comply, some intensively  stocked  farmers  may have to reduce stock numbers  or 
alternatively  arrange  for some manure  to be spread  off fhe farm on less intensively  
stocked  land. The paper  is primarily  focused  on this Directive.
Nitrates  Directive  Overview
The Nitrates  Directive  is in place  since 1991. The objective  is to reduce  water  pollution,  
caused  or induced  by nitrates  from agricultural  sources  and to prevent  further  pollution.  
Member  States  are required  to identify  waters  affected  by pollution  and waters  that could  
be affected  by pollution  in the absence  of corrective  action,  and to designate  these  areas  
as Nitrate Vulnerable  Zones (NVZs) on the basis of the monitoring  results. Action  
Programmes  containing  mandatory  manure  management  measures  are required  to be 
implemented  in NVZs. In addition,  a Code  of Good  Agricultural  Practice  (CGAP)  has to 
be established  and implemented  within  NVZs. Alternatively,  Member  States  may decide  
to adopt a 'whole  territory'  approach  which implies  that the CGAP is binding  on all 
agricultural  holdings  in the state. Member  States  are obliged  to monitor  the nitrate  
concentrations  in waters  and to assess  the impacts  of the measures  put in place. The 
designation  must be revised  every  four years, taking  into account  changes  and factors  
unforeseen  at the time of the previous  designation.
Nitrate  Vulnerable  Zones
The 'whole  territory ’ approach  was adopted  in Austria,  Denmark,  Finland,  Germany,  The 
Netherlands  and Luxembourg.  This does not automatically  imply  that the whole  territory  
is exceeding  the EU norm of 11.3 mg NO3-N/I in ground  and surface  waters.  The degree
of pollution  does not explain  why a country  may choose  the whole  territory'  or NVZs,  
otherwise  The Netherlands  and Finland  would  not be in the same group. It seems  that 
these countries  wish to maintain  a level playing  field between  farmers  in different  
geographical  locations. They also commit themselves  to uniform environmental  
standards  and to promoting  environmental  awareness  among  all farmers.  In Ireland,  the 
whole territory  approach  would also facilitate  national  regulations  to implement  the 
Waste  Directive,  also overdue.
In other Member  States,  regions  with significant  nutrient  surpluses  are differentiated  as 
NVZs. A large part of Belgian  livestock  production,  for example,  takes  place  in Flanders  
and causes  severe  nutrient  surpluses.  Several  sensitive  areas in Flanders  have been  
identified.  In other intensive  production  zones  such as Brittany  in France  and the Po
93
valley in Italy, governments  designated  NVZs and introduced  measures  to rectify  
nutrient  imbalances.
Whole  territory  versus  NVZs
Reasoned  arguments  for and against  both options  can be made. However,  lack of 
knowledge  of possible  derogations  that may be negotiated  on organic  N limits is a major  
drawback  in this debate. In addition,  economic  assessments  of either  the whole  country  
or NVZ option  for the proposed  range  of organic  N limits are not available.
With the 'whole  territory ’ approach,  all farmers  in the country  would  be obliged  to comply  
with a national  action programme.  This would be likely to improve  national  manure  
management  practices  and water quality and provide  the basis for negotiating  a 
derogation  to retain an organic  N limit of 210 kg/ha after the first four years with 
provision  for up to 250 kg/ha organic  N in certain  circumstances.  All farms would be 
treated  the same and there would be certainty  that there would be no further  widening  
of the designated  area. An important  disadvantage  of this approach  is that it affects  
farmers  in areas where  the level of nitrates  in water is minimal. Compliance  costs for 
agriculture  (particularly  in regard  to additional  manure  storage)  would  be higher,  though  
these could be offset against  the cost of compliance  with the similar measures  
(excluding  organic  N limit) to be applied  on a national  basis under the EU Waste  
Directive.
The mam disadvantage  of the NVZ approach  is the likelihood  that water quality  may not 
improve  in the first four years prompting  a reduction  in the organic  N limit to 170 kg/ha.  
Given  that the proposed  NVZs  account  for the more intensive  agricultural  areas in the 
country  covering  large areas  of the east and south  of the country  this would  be a severe  
blow to future expansion.  The NVZ option would generate  uncertainty  for farmers  
outside  the NVZs in that the four yearly reviews  of water quality may require  the 
designation  of further  areas. This has been the experience  in other countries.  The 
advantages  of the NVZs are the targeted  approach  to dealing  with nitrate-polluted  
waters and only farmers  in the NVZs would be required  to comply  with the action  
programmes.
Action  Programmes
Action programmes  are key requirements  of the Nitrates  Directive. They require  
mandatory  restrictions  on farming  activities  in NVZs including  balanced  nutrient  inputs  
(i.e. the sum of nutrients  from organic  and mineral  fertilizers  must not exceed  the crop 
needs)  and a maximum  application  of 170 kg N/ha/year  from animal  manure  (210 kg 
N/ha/year  in the first four years). The Directive  allows  a Member  State to negotiate  a 
derogation  from the 170 kg per ha restriction  after the first four years,  but only where  this 
is justified  on the basis of objective  criteria,  and does not prejudice  the achievement  of 
the objectives  of the Directive.
Denmark  has recently  won a derogation  for its dairy farmers  to apply all the manure  
produced  on their farms  on their own lands. This implies  that the 170 kg N/ha would  no 
longer  be binding  as long as the N demand  of the crops  is significantly  higher  than the 
N supplied  by the manure.  The derogation  is limited  to existing  grassland  farmers  and 
the milk quota will limit extensions  to other areas. The derogation  applies  to 5 % of 
agricultural  soils in Denmark  and to 6 % of the total N in animal  manures.  In winning  
their case the Danes  had the following  supporting  data — over the last 15 years  there  
has been a significant  reduction  in fertilizer N inputs  as well as reductions  in the N levels  
at the root zone. Agriculture  had reduced  its point sources  by 28 %, The nitrate
94
concentrations  in rivers  draining  agricultural  areas  had dropped  by 20 %. Eutrophication  
of coastal  waters  had begun  to decline.  They had data  from trials to show  that with good  
management  practices  there  was no difference  in N pressures  between  170 and 230 kg 
organic  N inputs. They also have a limit of 140 kg organic  N/ha for the rest of the 
country.  (O.T Carton,  pers. communication).
An action programme  can reiate to all NVZs or to each one separately.  Portugal,  for 
example,  has designated  three NVZs and has set up a different  action programme  for 
each of these,  while Sweden  has designated  five NVZs in which the same programme  
is implemented.  In the countries  with the whole territory  approach  there is only one 
action  programme  which  may vary in certain  respects  across  the territory.
Seeking  a national  derogation
The responsible  Government  Department  has indicated  a preference  for the 'whole  
territory'  approach  to the implementation  of the Nitrates  Directive.  In the event  that this 
approach  is adopted,  Ireland  needs  to negotiate  a derogation  to retain  a national  210 kg 
organic  N/ha limit after four years  with provision  for up to 250 kg/ha N for high stocked  
farms where in can be demonstrated  that this is not in conflict  with the water quality  
objectives  of the Directive.  Clearly,  there would be income  implications  for intensive  
grassland  farms particularly  on the higher  stocked  farms if an organic  N limif of 170 
kg/ha were imposed. This would reduce  the stocking  rate equivalent  from 2.5 to 2 
LU/ha. There would also be serious  cost implications  for intensive  pig and poultry  
enterprises  in relation  to securing  spreadlands.
A coherent  negotiating  strategy  will be required  based on the overall impact of the 
national action programme.  This will revolve around the scientific  input to the 
development  of the action programme,  the quality and degree of commitment  to 
implementation  and the advice and investment  support available  to underpin 
implementation.  Reductions  in nitrate  emissions  from Irish agriculture  to water  will be 
achieved  through  improvements  in farmyards,  manure  and fertilizer  management  rather  
than by controlling  stocking  rates. Ironically,  the latter is likely to be the easiest  to 
enforce  using Area Aid and Herd Regisfer  data. Making  the case for a derogation  
represents  a significant  challenge,  Germany  recently  (March  2002)  failed in its attempt  
to achieve  a higher  national  organic  N limit.
In addition  to monitoring  water quality,  a baseline  survey  of facilities  and practices  at 
farm level is required. A repeat  survey  will be needed  after the four-year  period to 
monitor  improvement.  Water quality  responses  to changes  in nutrient  management  
practices  at farm level need to be demonstrated.  Success  or failure  will depend  on the 
recorded  changes  associated  with the action  programme  as well as the recorded  impact  
on water  quality.
Code  of Good  Agricultural  Practices
Codes of Good Agricultural  Practices  have been introduced  in all Member  States.  
These codes regulate  manure  storage  capacity,  spreading  conditions  and timing,  
spreading  technology  and the application  norms  for different  crops. In some countries  
the codes  are very detailed  and intended  as advisory  instruments  for farmers  (e.g. UK). 
Some  include  the requirement  for mineral  accounting  (e.g. some  regions  in Spain),  while  
others  only contain  the bare minimum  of requirements  (e.g. Greece).  Point  sources  are 
a major problem,  for example,  inadequate  or leaking manure  storage  facilities  or 
uncontrolled  silage effluent  runoff. In this context,  improved  technical  standards  are 
very efficient  in preventing  pollution. Storage  tanks and equipment  can be easily
95
inspected  for compliance  with existing  norms. In France  regulations  are implemented  
which require  bigger  farms  to be certified  in the same way as industrial  plants  with an 
environmental  impact  assessment.  This is similar  to the IPC licensing  arrangements  for 
certain  pig and poultry  units in Ireland.
The practicability  and cost of the control measures  need also to be considered.  
Extensive  on-farm  research  and courses  are used in The Netherlands  to make  farmers  
familiar  with legislation.  In Denmark  a considerable  effort is required  by farmers  each 
year to adjust their fertilizer  plans depending  on plant growth forecasts. The 
effectiveness  of these measures  is closely linked with the control mechanism 
administered  by the government.  Some other countries  have comparable  control  
systems,  but in many, the implementation  of the measures  is not scrutinized.  Although  
a certain  level of control  is required  to implement  the policies,  extensive  control  is costly  
and time consuming.  If, according  to the EU ‘polluter  pays' principle,  the costs  are to be 
passed  on to farmers,  this will be an extra burden  on farm incomes.
Infringement  Procedure
The infringement  procedure  gives the Commission  powers  to take legal action  against  
a Member  State that is not respecting  its obligations.  Infringement  procedures  are 
ongoing  against almost all Member  States except Denmark  and Sweden. The 
infringement  procedure  contains  several  possible  actions.  A 'Letter  of Formal  Notice ’ is 
the first step. In the light of the reply from the Member  State, the Commission  may 
decide  to address  a ‘Reasoned  Opinion'  or second  written  warning.  If the Member  State  
fails to comply  with the ‘Reasoned  Opinion',  the Commission  may decide  to bring the 
case before  the European  Court  of Justice. Finally,  Article  228 of the Treaty  gives the 
Commission  power  to act against  a Member  State. In April 2000, 9 countries  (Belgium,  
France,  Greece,  Germany,  Italy, Luxembourg,  The Netherlands,  Spain  and the UK) were  
facing  a charge  before  the European  Court  of Justice  regarding  the implementation  of 
the Nitrates  Directive  (Environment  Daily, 2000), Ireland  has now joined this list for 
failure  to implement  the Nitrates  Directive.
The Nitrates  Directive  and the CAP rurai deveiopment  pian
At the insistence  of the Commission,  Ireland's  Rural Development  Plan included  a 
commitment  to implement  the Nitrates  Directive  by the end of 2001. The Commission  
has indicated  that it may suspend  the co-financing  of the Compensatory  Allowances,  
REPS,  Forestry  Measure  and the Early Retirement  Scheme  if action  on our commitment 
is further  delayed.  The Commission  has already  decided  to block Ireland's  proposed  
amendment  to the Compensatory  Allowances  measure.  While it was made clear that 
the amendment  itself is acceptable,  it appears  the Environment  Commissioner  is not 
prepared  to agree  to it until Ireland  has taken  action  to implement  the Nitrates  Directive.  
At least 100,000  farmers  are claiming  aid under  one or other  of the schemes  in the Rural  
Development  package.  Eleven  years  after  the Nitrates  Directive  was published  and with 
legal proceedings  pending,  Ireland  is in a vulnerable  position  compared  to most other  
Member  States given the dependence  on EU transfers. The Commission  has the 
means  to penalize  Ireland  without  recourse  to the European  Court  of Justice.
Manure  Regulations  at Farm Level
The Department  of the Environment  and Local Government  has signaled  the need for 
legally binding Regulations  to give effect to the Waste Directive  and the Water  
Framework  Directive  in addition  to the Nitrates  Directive.  The established  CGFP is
96
expected  to form the basis for these Regulations.  The Department  has indicated  that 
an unduly onerous  regulatory  regime is not intended. It is envisaged  that the 
Regulations  will allow  for flexibility  to reflect  regional  variation  due to climate,  rainfall  and 
soil conditions.  This would provide  for differences  in slurry storage  requirements  and 
non-spreading  periods  across  the country. There  is an assurance  that farmers  will not 
require  licenses  or permits  to landspread  animal manures  on their lands, but it is 
proposed  that all farmers  will have to register  with a Local Authority  and provide  some  
basic information  on the location,  nature  and scale  of their activities.  Additional  controls  
are proposed  for inter farm transfer  of animal  manures.
Waste  Regulations  for Contractors
The Waste  Management  (Collection  Permit)  Regulations  (2001)  will govern  the activities 
of agricultural  contractors  involved  with the landspreading  of animal manures.  
Implementation  of the Regulations  for agricultural  contractors  has been deferred  until
the 30^*^ June this year (2002). The regulations  will place a general  obligation  on 
contractors  who ‘collect  waste  for the purpose  of reward  or profit' to obtain a permit.  
Collection  includes  the 'transport  of waste' and ‘acceptance  of control of waste ’.
Contractors  will be required  to submit  records  of work carried  out by the 28^^ February  
each year. The permit fee is €1,200,  though there is provision  for the licensing  
authorities  to refund or waive all or part of the fee. There is concern  that smaller 
operators  may find the new Regulations  too onerous  to continue  and this should be 
taken  into account  in regard  to the waiving  of the permit  fee. More rather  than less slurry  
spreading  capacity  is required  and the emergence  of more contractors  who are 
prepared  to supply  slurry  spreading  services  in tandem  with silage  making  operation  are 
especially  needed.
Additional  Local  Authority  Powers
The sanctions  available  to Local Authorities  under  the Water  Pollution  Act (1990)  have  
been strengthened  to include agricultural  bye-laws  and compulsory  nutrient  
management  planning  (NMP). Bye-laws,  introduced  under Section  21 of the Act, are 
now in force in parts of five local authority  areas  (Cavan,  Cork, Offaly,  Tipperary  NR and 
Westmeath).  They have been adopted  in all cases  to deal with specific  problems  in 
specific  catchments  listed by townland.  Six more  local authorities  have made  proposals  
to bring in bye-laws  and a further  five are assessing  the need for them. So far, bye-law  
slurry storage  requirements  vary from 14 weeks  in Offaly to 24 weeks  in Cavan, in 
general,  where  a farmer  submits  a full nutrient  management  plan the bye-laws  permit  a 
4 week reduction  in the storage  requirement.  REPS  farmers  are generally  exempt  from 
bye-laws  provisions  on the basis they are aiready  in compliance.  Up to 2,000  farmers  
are currently  affected  by this measure.
Under  a separate  section  of the Water Pollution  Act (Sec. 21 A) local authorities  have  
powers  to compel  individual  farmers  to submit  nutrient  management  pians where  this 
approach  is considered  necessary  to prevent  or alleviate  water  pollution.  As is the case 
with bye-laws,  a REPS nutrient  plan is deemed  to meet the requirements  of this 
measure. At least 18 Local Authorities  have indicated  their intention  to introduce  
mandatory  nutrient  management  planning  (NMP)  mostly  in the short term (2002). The 
Department  of the Environment  and Locai Government  has issued  detailed  guidelines  
on the preparation  of nutrient  management  plans to local authorities.  The guidelines  
provide  criteria  for identifying  “hot spots ’’ including  sensitive  lake and river catchments  
where resources  are to be focused. Three  factors  are required  to be addressed  as
97
follows: -
manure  storage  and management  practices  in the farmyard;
land application  of manures  and chemical  fertilisers;
controlled  use of chemical  fertilisers  (ie. in line with crop requirements).
It is understood  that this measure  will be implemented  once specialised  training  of local 
authority  staff, currently  in progress,  is completed.  In contrast  to the bye-laws  this 
measure  does not have to be voted in by local authority  members.
There is significant  overlap  between  these measures  and the requirements  of the 
proposed  National  Regulations  under  the Nitrates  Directive.  There  is speculation  that 
the latter may remove  or reduce  the need to enforce  the bye-law  and mandatory  NMP  
provisions  of the Water Pollution  Act. This would make sense. Farmers  would then 
have to cope with the record keeping  etc. associated  with just one set of regulations  
rather  than several  separate  sets. This would  favour  the 'whole  territory'  appr...ich  to 
the implementation  of the Nitrates  Directive.
Conclusion
It is widely  accepted  in farming  today that agriculture  must respect  the environment.  
This is impacting  positively  on farming  methods  and practices.  It is also clear  that more  
needs  to be done. While  regulation  has a place it is only part of the solution.  The vital 
roles of awareness  building,  education  and investment  assistance  needs greater  
acknowledgement.  It must  be understood  that broad-based  farmer  consent  and support  
for environmental  objectives  is necessary  if regulation  is to have the desired  effect.
References
De Clercq,  P. and Sinabell,  F. (2001). EU legislation  and multinational  environmental  
legislation  with respect  to nutrient  management.  In: Nutrient  Management  Legislation  in 
European  Countries  (Chapter  3). Faculty  of Agriculture  and Applied  Biological  Sciences,  
University  of Wageningen,  The Netherlands.
Department  of the Environment  and Local Governmei:*  (1998). Water Quality  
Standards  for  phosphorus  Regulations  (S.l. No. 258 of 1998)  Water  pollution  Act (1977).  
Dublin.
Department  of the Environment  and Local Government  (2001). Waste Management  
(Collection  Permit)  Regulations  (S.l. No. 402 of 200, Waste  Management  Act (1996).  
Dublin.
Department  of the Environment  and Local Government  (2002). Information  Paper  on 
Good  Agricultural  Practice  and Protection  of the Environment.  Dublin.
Environmental  Protection  Agency (2001). Phosphorus  Regulations,  National  
Implementation  Report.  EPA, Wexford.
Environmental  Protection  Agency  (2001), An Assessment  of the Trophic  Status  of 
Estuaries  and Bays  in Ireland. EPA, Wexford.
Hamell, M. (2001). Policy aspects  of the agriculture  -environment  relationship.  In 
Tearmann,  Irish Journal  of Agri-environmenta!  Research,  1: (1). NUI, Dublin.
O’Donovan,  M. (2002). National  classification  or regional  classification.  Fine Gael  
Symposium  on Nitrate  Vulnerable  Zones,  Bridge  Hotel,  Tullamore.
98
The future  of the Irish Dairy  Industry-  the IGA submission  to the 
Department  of Agriculture
Jim Dwyer
Past  President,  Irish Grassland  Association
The Irish Grassland  Association  was invited by Mr. John Malone,  Secretary  of the 
Department  of Agriculture  and Food at its Dairy Conference  in 2001 to make a 
submission  to him and his Department  outlining  the views  of the IGA on the future  of the 
Irish dairy industry.
The Council  of the IGA looked  on this invitation  as a great  opportunity  to point out some  
of the problems  and possible  solutions  for our dairy industry  going  forward.
Although  this is outside  the role of the Irish Grassland  Association  (IGA), council  
members  felt that on this one occasion  the IGA should  comment  on the state of the 
industry  and provide  some alternative  views going fonward.  As the association  is non 
political  and draws its members  from all elements  of the dairy industry  (farmers,  
advisors,  researchers  and agri-business  personnel),  the council  felt that the IGA could  
offer some  constructive  comment.  Within  the association  it is believed  that dairying  has 
the potential  to be a leading  industry  in the Irish economy,  but changes  must  take place  
if we are going  to realize  this potential.
After New Zealand,  Ireland  has the potential  to have the best thriving  dairy industry  in 
the world - certainly  in the Northern  Hemisphere  we should  be the leaders.
We have a climate  ideally  suited  to growing  grass;
Animals  can stay out on grass  for 9 to 10 months  of the year;
High emphasis  on grazing  is an environmentally  friendly  way of dairy farming,  
which is highly  profitable;
These  advantages  must be worked  on to provide  a thriving  dairy industry  to benefit  
farmers  and ultimately  the Irish economy;
Progressive  dairy farmers  are frustrated  at present  due to the lack of opportunities 
to expand. The ability to expand  is the key driving force for any progressive  
business;
Quotas  inhibit progress,  as other farm enterprises  are not returning  sufficient  
income  for dairy farmers  to change;
Nationally  we need to focus on dairy farming,  as it is the only enterprise  that can 
give a good income  to the farming  community.
There have been significant  changes  in the economy  in the last 10 years. In 1990 
agriculture  accounted  for 10% GDP and 15% of total employment  compared  to 5% GDP 
and 9% of employment  by 1999.
Industrial  wages  have increased  by over 40% in the last 10 years. This increase  has 
resulted  in a large divergence  between  industrial  and agricultural  incomes. Inflation  
averaged  at 5.6%  for the year 2000  according  to the C.S.O. Due to inflation  farmers  can 
expect  a substantial  increase  in production  costs. Costs such as labour,  energy  and 
services  are all projected  to increase  substantially  over the next number  of years. The 
F.A.P.R.I.  Ireland  Partnership  has projected  that such costs  will increase  by over 25% in 
the next 10 years. Also the purchasing  power  of incomes  earned  will be significantly  
diminished  due to inflation.
Young  people  are lured out of farming  by the prospect  of high paid jobs for less working  
hours. Further  farm labour  is difficult  and expensive  to secure.
99
The number  of children  on farms  is projected  to decline  further. The Kennedy  William's  
Report  projects  that by 2011 there  will be little over 12,000  children  of school  leaving  age 
living on farms between  16 and 23 years of age. This is 58% less than the 1996 
estimate.  If the potential  number  of future  farmers  is decreasing  at such a rate, then the 
actual  numbers  will inevitably  decline,  unless  there is more  scope  for young  people  from 
non-farming  families  to enter agriculture.
There has been considerable  change  in the agricultural  policy of the E.U. under the 
Agenda  2000  Agreement  and it seems  that all farmers  can expect  even further  changes  
into the future. By 2010, the price of milk will drop and dairy farmers  will get 
compensation  under Agenda  2000. Revenue  will be up 6% relative  to 2000 levels.  
However,  high rates of inflation  mean that farmers  will be subjected  to price cost 
squeeze. Strong  growth  and inflation  rates, higher  than those experienced  in recent  
years  will result  in continued  increases  in production  costs. Fixed  costs  are projected  to 
increase  by 15 to 20% thus impacting  negatively  on farm net margin. Farmers  ,vho  do 
not re$POnd  bv increasing  efficiency  or enlarging  operations  will be exposed  to a
price  cost squeeze  Dairy  farmers  will have to run faster  to stand  still.
Smaller  farms  with a quota  of 20,000  gallons  or less which  have a poor historical  growth  
record and cost structure  will be unable  to expand  milk quota at the current  fixed 
restructuring  price of €1.57  per gallon. Some 11,000  farmers  may find that the future  
of their farm is not viable and may exit dairy farming. If quotas  were eliminated  this 
same group of farmers  would  find it very difficult  to survive. Research  has shown  that 
up to one third of producers  currently  supplying  less than 35,000  gallons  would find 
investment  unfeasible,  given the level of cash surplus  remaining.  Further  it has been 
shown that where investment  was feasible,  between  20 and 30% of the current  
population  (depending  on the price scenario)  would have a disposable  income  lower  
than the minimum  wage.
Under  Agenda  2000 farmers  supplying  20,000  gallons  or less become  non-viable  by 
2003/2004.  The same  farmers  also become  non-viable  in a non-quota  situation.  These  
facts cannot  be ignored.
If there is a large exodus  from farming  prior to milk quota  elimination  then quota  will be 
available  on the restructuring  market. If those  farmers  who remain  in dairy farming  can 
increase  their production  by acquiring  quota  then their future  following  quota  elimination  
may be brighter  as they will be in a better starting  position  and therefore  will not need 
the same  magnitude  of expansion.
The following  are areas  where  changes  can take place.
1. Elimination  of Milk Quotas
We see elimination  of milk quotas  as a priority. Possibly  in the past it had its merits  but 
that time has long gone. As already  stated  the potential  that Ireland  has to produce  milk 
cheaply  from grass must be exploited  to its full extent. It is argued  that this can only be 
done in the absence  of quotas. This will allow committed  dairy farmers  an opportunity  
to grow, and will present  the opportunity  for young vibrant  people  to join the dairy 
industry,  something  that is not happening  at present.
At present  there is a drift to an inefficient  industry  because  dairy  farms  cannot  grow and 
develop.  Inflation  is rampant  in this tiger  economy  and it will impact  negatively  on dairy 
farming.  Costs  of production  will increase  while  output  prices  are relatively  frozen  under  
the Agenda  2000  Agreement.  Farms  will be exposed  to a price costs squeeze  and the 
purchasing  power  of incomes  will fall due to inflation.
100
In light of this it should be a national  priority that quotas be eliminated.  As the 
accompanying  paper  shows  the largest  capital  requirement  would be for new housing  
and milking  parlors. Capital  for housing  can be reduced  substantially  with the use of low 
cost winter  facilities  such as stand  off pads and keeping  cows on grass  for longer  as we 
develop  our knowledge  in this area. The number  of cases where additional  land is 
necessary  is quiet low. This is a reflection  of the large proportion  of non-dairy  livestock  
kept on dairy farms. Livestock  that in general  provides  little or no income.
2. Greater  movement  of milk within  present system
Greater  movement  of milk within  the present  quota  system  is needed. It is suggested  
that the present  price for restructuring  milk remains  for one year and is then reduced  to 
a very low level. Such a policy  should  be well documented  in advance  and would have 
the effect of reducing  the value of quota and flushing  out those individuals  who are 
holding  on to quotas  in order  to get a high price. This would  free up quotas  at a faster 
level. From  the beginning  of the next quota  year milk should  not be collected  from farms 
that are not certified.  These  farmers  have been given ample  time to certify, and they 
bring down  the standard  of milk in general.  This policy  would  bring out more milk, which  
can then be redistributed,  e.g. to young trained  farmers,  who should be given large  
quantities  of milk say 50,000  gallons  minimum  and not drip fed 1,000  gallons  every  year.
Milk should  be distributed  on a more equitable  basis  to all quota  holders  including  those 
over 55,000  gallons.  These  are the people  who drive the industry  forward;  they should  
not be discriminated  against.
Milk should  not be ring fenced  into less economic  areas, but rather moved  into areas  
where it is more economic  to produce  it. While politically  this policy might not be 
acceptable,  there is no doubt  that on an economic  basis this is the way forward.
The administration  of quota  must be changed.  The control  of quota  by dairy companies 
is not the desired  situation  as it allows  them too much power. Farmers  should  have  the 
right to move quotas  as they wish. Also with dairy companies  having control over 
quotas,  it is slowing  down  the restructuring  of the dairy industry.
3. Change  in Butterfat  Reference  level
The Irish butterfat  reference  level of 3.58 is too low in comparison  to other countries  in 
Europe,  e g. the butterfat  level in Holland  is 4.23%. By 2010 the Irish butterfat  level will 
be at 3.85, which  will result  in a loss of 121 m I of milk in volume  terms. This is effectively  
a penalty  for good farming  and breeding  over the last number  of years. Extra butterfat 
can also be turned  into product  and sold benefiting  the industry  as a whole. It would  
seem ridiculous  that from 2002 there will be one common  currency,  yet quotas  are all 
based  on different  reference  levels. Changes  here are necessary  if only on the basis of 
equality  within Europe.
4. A and B Quota
Ireland  should  fight for an A and B quota  system,  although  it is recognized  that this may 
pose difficulties  under  WTO as stated  in the accompanying  paper. However,  it would  be 
another  angle to get more milk production  in Ireland. The production  of B quota milk 
would  not be a problem  for a lot of producers.  They are already  producing  milk at world  
prices when quota lease and land lease (that is not needed  for quota production)  is 
taken out of the milk price. A and B quota  would  also prepare  the Irish dairy farmer  for 
the day when quotas  will cease.
101
Summary  on quotas
Milk production  is the only farm enterprise  that can return  a good living in Irish farming  
terms. We can grow grass,  the raw material  of milk production  cheaply.  Into the future,  
the dairy markets  have potential.  After New Zealand  we can be the most efficient  dairy 
industry  in the world, but we need to focus and change  in order  to be able to achieve  
this objective.
We can change  in the following  ways:
Look for the elimination  of quotas;  they are suffocating  the dairy industry;
Free up quota within  the present  system;  give milk to those who see a long-term  
future  in the industry;
Look for a change  in butterfat  reference  level; within the EU there is a common  
currency  why not a common  butterfat  reference  level?
Look for an A and B quota  system;  it may not be possible  but it will serve  notice  that 
Ireland  values  the dairy industry,  and intends  to protect  and increase  it in the future.  
If we do not make changes  now the dairy industry  will regress,  young people  will 
continue  to leave  the industry  and inflation  will eat into incomes.  Steps must be taken  
now to reward  people  for their enterprise  or the long-term  future  looks bleak.  
‘(Statistics  from Thia Hennessy,  Teagasc  - Irish Grassland  Association  Dairy  
Conference  September  2001)
Industry
The Irish dairy processing  industry  is a very rigid structure.  It has evolved  over many  
years  to its present  structure  of two large PLCs  and a range  of farmer  owned  co-ops  and 
many  different  disciplines.  It is a high cost industry,  with only a small amount  of national  
milk pool going into added  value products.  The production  profile  for milk insures  a 
continuing  dependence  on commodity  products. Commodity  products  processed  
through  small plants  are inefficient.  There  is little prospect  of this changing  in the near 
future. The Irish dairy industry  will not change  because  It Is told to do so. History  clearly  
illustrates  this fact and it is for this reason  that the IGA feels that It would be futile to 
suggest  how the industry  should  rationalise  or restructure.  This is not to say that change  
is not needed  I
The IGA urges  the Minister  to proceed  as soon as possible  with the proposed  study  of 
costs in the industry.  It is only when armed  with facts that an informed  debate  can take 
place and that the reality of the situation  becomes  clear. Somebody  must drive the 
debate  forward. DAF may not be able to fill this role but it can exercise  its authority  to 
get things  started  and also suggest  a suitable  candidate  for this role.
The dependence  of commodities  and the role of the Irish Dairy Board (IDB) in the 
marketing  of Irish products  needs  to be looked  at. Any study  of the industry  must  include  
an analysis  of the IDB. There  are many  factors  that will impinge  on the future  viability  
of Irish dairy farmers,  and it would be Irresponsible  not to try and influence  the industry  
in whatever  manner  possible.  Any factors  that may impede  restructuring  of the industry  
should  be removed.  For example,  quota  administration  handled  by the co-ops  may be 
an Impediment  to change,  there may be others  and any study  undertaken  must  consider  
all the factors.
102
Environment
At the outset,  the IGA recognises  that need to maintain  and enhance  the 
environment,  and that farmers  can no longer  engage  in practices  that are 
leading  to deterioration  in water  quality.
There is a whole range of issues  we thaf could be discussed,  buf remarks  
will be confined  to the Implementation  of Nitrates  Directive  91/676  EEC.
The 3 areas  of water  quality  under  this Directive  are:
Surface  fresh waters,  lakes/rivers
Ground  waters
Estuaries  and coastal  waters.
1. Basis  for Restrictions
Nitrate  vulnerable  zones are about to be declared  in Ireland. In general  terms, when  
expressed  as a percentage  of the land area of the country,  these  are relatively  small in 
area.
However  recent  suggestions  by the EPA and or the Department  of the Environment  on 
what constitutes  eutrophic  in estuarine  waters  is extremely  serious. In fresh water,  
50mg  of nitrates/I  Is fhe level of N, above  which  there are problems.  In estuarine  waters  
it is understood  that this level is only 11 mg/I. If this is adopted,  it is thought  that up 30% 
of the country  could be declared  to be in a nitrate  vulnerable  zone. The basis for this 
nitrogen  level needs  to be subjected  to rigorous  scientific  debate.
2. Organic  Nitrogen
The Directive  states  that levels  of organic  N should  not exceed  210 kg N/ha (which  is 
based on 85 kg organic  N produced  per cow). However  if fhe nitrate problem  is not 
solved  in four years  the current  thinking  is that the level of organic  N be reduced  from 
210 to 170 kg organic  N/ha. This would cause stocking  rates to be reduced  to two 
cows/ha.  Intensive  farmers  would  suffer  severely  under  this ruling. At 210 kg N/ha  Thia 
Hennessy,  (Teagasc.  19 Sandymount  Ave.) has suggested  that 14% of farmers  would  
be adversely  affected,  while if 170kg became  the norm some 31% of dairy farmers 
would  be adversely  affected.
However,  the Directive  appears  to give considerable  leeway  to individual  countries  to 
modify  this figure, if necessary.  It is suggested  that Ireland  has an excellent  case for 
having  organic  N levels  significantly  higher  than the 170kg/ha.  i.e.;
There  is a long growing  season  in Ireland,
Grass  is a crop with excellent  capacity  for nitrogen  uptake.
There  are no significant  quantities  of land lying fallow  in winter.
In view of the very strict ruling applied  to what is termed  estuarine  pollution,  every  effort  
must be made to raise the 170kg N/ha level, and keep it at 210 kg N /ha. Just how 
definite  the 170kg  N/ha is should  be explored  by DAF.
3. Unfairness
There  is considerable  'unfairness'  in this Directive,  in that both the polluter  and the non­
polluter  pay. All in the catchment  suffer, even those who are doing things right. 
Furthermore  those  'good'  farmers  do not get compensation.  There  is a case  to be made  
for those  people  that are doing  things  right be exempt  from the ruling,  or at least, allowed  
to keep to the 210kg  N/ha.
103
4. Organic  N
All the above  organic  N recommendations  are based on the cow producing  85 kg of 
organic  N per year. There  is a danger  that this could be altered,  which  would  make  the 
situation  even worse. For example  if the 85 kg N/cow  were increased  to 120 kg N/cow,  
the stocking  rate at 210 kg N/ha would be reduced  to 1.75 cows/ha.  At 170 kg organic  
N the stocking  rate would be reduced  to 1.4 cows/ha.  This would be a disaster  for 
commercial  dairy farming.
5. Blunt Instrument
All these measures  imply that reducing  the stocking  rates will automatically  lead to 
reductions  in nitrates  in water. Is this necessarily  true? At best, it is a blunt instrument.  
Issues  like I), spreading  of slurry at incorrect  rates, in the wrong place and at wrong  
time; ii). control  of farmyard  hygiene;  ill), spreading  too much nitrogen  at the wrong  time 
of year, are all equally,  if not more important.  Tackling  these may rectify  the problem  
quicker  and do less damage  to the dairy industry.
Summary
Is there a sound  scientific  basis for the N levels used to determine  estuarine  pollution?  
The 170 kg of organic  N/ha after 4 years  will cause  significant  hardship  for Irish farmers.  
Can this be changed?  Why should  good farmers  be forced  to reduce  stock numbers  
without  compensation?  Every  effort must be made  to maintain  the 85 kg of organic  N 
per cow, regardless  of the type of cow.
Surely,  there must be other, less drastic  ways, of solving  this nitrate  problem  in water?
Research
It is fundamental  that Irish agriculture  continues  to have the benefit  of up todate,  profit  
led, independent  and well-financed  research.  Agriculture  is one of the most important  
export  industries  and employers  in Ireland. Therefore  it is vital that all sectors  within  
agriculture  benefit  from research  and development  - farmers,  researchers  and the 
manufacturing/processing  industries.
The IGA emphasize  the importance  of up to date independent  research  and 
development  in soil, grass  varieties  and grassiand  production.  As grass  is our cheapest  
natural  resource  it is critical  that all is done  to keep its benefits  to the farmer  to the fore. 
In the recent past, other well funded  crop production  systems,  e.g. maize, corn and 
silage systems  are being promoted  and funded  by their supplying  industries  and are 
gaining  in popularity  with somewhat  questionable  long term benefits.  These  crops  need  
well funded  on going research  into methods  of establishment  and agronomy,  whereas  
grass  regenerates  providing  a natural  feed for all our animal  production  systems.  Grass  
and grassland  production  needs the same level of research  and funding as the 
aforementioned  crops, but it is vitally important  that this research  remains  independent  
of industrial  funding.
There is an urgent  need for new science  and research  graduates.  Acting  on this will 
allow  Ireland  to retain  its competitive  advantage  as a provider  of cheap  cleanly  produced  
food for its many export  markets. Our “green ” image of food production  needs  to be 
enhanced.
104
Education
It is important  to acknowledge  recent  changes  in agricultural  education  and to allow  for 
these  changes  to take effect. However,  it is equally  important  that agricultural  education  
should  be developed  and funded  to the same  extent  as other  educational  sectors,  ie CIT, 
Regional  Colleges  and Universities.  In most colleges,  agricultural  training and 
education  has been the poor relation  with inadequate  facilities.  There  is an urgent  need  
to have all facilities  updated  to allow  an atmosphere  of importance  and popularity,  which  
will be to the benefit  of the student  and the industry  in general.
Information  technology
Information  technology  (IT) is in its infancy  in termis  of practical  application  for farmers.  
However  the farming  community  will have to embrace  this technology  and use it to 
minimise  bureaucracy  and the paper  work involved  in day-to-day  farming.  Farmers  will 
adopt, provided  systems  are simple  and in turn lead to an easier  management  system.  
It is also critical  that farmers  can access  relevant  information  from the DAF to enable  
them to process  headage,  forestry,  arable  aid and area based  payments  more readily.
105
Milk pricing  revisited:  equity,  transparency  and producer  incentives
Michael  Wallace^,  James  Breent ’ and Seamus  Crosse'^
^Department  of Agribusiness,  Extension  and Rural Development,  University  College
Dublin,  Belfleld,  Dublin  4
'^Teagasc,  Rural  Economy  Research  Centre,  19 Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin  4
Teagasc,  Dairy  Production  Department,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,
Co. Cork
Introduction
Milk pricing  is at the axis of the relationship  between  milk processor  and milk supplier.  
Pricing  schemes  have developed  over time reflecting  an evolving  value relationship  
between  milk processor  and producer  in response  to a changing  market  environment.  
The demand  for milk at farm level is derived  indirectly  from the market  demand  for 
numerous  processed  dairy products. Milk payment  schemes  provide  the means by 
which  the price paid for milk at the farm gate is related  to the market  returns  that can be 
obtained  from that milk when processed  into final product.  The value  of milk to the dairy  
processing  industry  is a function  of its composition  and the aggregate  profit of the 
product  mix manufactured  from the milk. The producer ’s revenue  from supplying  milk is 
a function  of the value  of milk to the processing  industry  and the payment  scheme  used 
to reward  producers  (Garrick  and Lopez-Villalobos,  1999).
The primary  objective  of a milk pricing  system  is that the price paid (received)  for milk 
reflects  as accurately  as possible  the amount  and value  of products  made  from it as well 
as the transport  and processing  costs incurred.  With the exception  of liquid milk, the 
value of milk is directly  dependent  on its solids content  rather than volume. The 
justification  for payment  based  on constituent  composition  is therefore  inversely  related  
to the importance  of the liquid market. In the Republic  of Ireland  the liquid market  is 
comparatively  small, absorbing  less than 10 percent  of total supplies  and there is an 
overwhelming  case for a payment  system  that encourages  and adequately  rewards  
compositional  quality.
This paper  examines  some issues  in component  milk pricing. Comparisons  are drawn  
with pricing  schemes  in major milk producing  countries.  A procedure  for estimating  
market  values  of milk components  is discussed  along with the implications  of some  
results obtained. A process  of relating price to value with progressive  multiple  
component  pricing  policies  is identified  as the way forward.
Criteria  for Evaiuating  Milk Payment  Schemes
A milk pricing  system  can be judged  according  to its transparency,  the extent  to which it 
is equitable  to producers  and the incentive  structure  it provides  to encourage  desirable  
changes  in milk composition.
Equity  in Milk Pricing  Schemes
The pricing  system  should  be fair to the producer  by ensuring  that the price paid for milk 
reflects  as accurately  as possible  the market  returns  that can be obtained  from that milk 
in terms  of processed  product.  As noted by Keane  (1989, p.4) “the basic principle  for a 
payment  scheme  is that those suppliers  with above  average  solids levels in their milk 
will generate  a higher  return  from the marketplace  and, in strict equity  terms,  should  be
106
entitled to a higher price per gallon/litre. ’’ In these terms a payment  scheme  is 
inequitable  if it results  in some producers  being paid more than the true value of milk 
according  to its composition  \«hile other producers  are under-paid  for milk of better  
composition.  In addition,  while producers  are confined  by the milk quota system  in 
terms of both volume  and butterfat  other milk solids are not penalised  in this way. 
Producers  should receive  fair market  value for non-fat  milk solids allowing  them to 
increase  returns  through  improvements  in milk composition  (especially  milk protein)  
over time.
Transparency
A milk pricing  system  should  be transparent  in the sense  that milk suppliers  can easily  
understand  how their milk price has been determined.  This should  permit  producers  to 
assess  whether  or not they are receiving  fair market  value  for milk according  to its solids  
composition.  The system  should  clearly  indicate  to producers  the relative  values  of 
individual  milk components  within  the overall  milk price. Improving  transparency  in milk 
pricing has implications  for the manner in which producer  milk statements  are 
constructed  (see Keane, 2000). Moreover,  producers  need to be assured  of the 
reliability  of the milk sampling/testing  process  for determining  constituent  yields  and they 
must be satisfied  that fair and accepted  procedures  are used in determining  values  for 
constituents  in the milk price.
Incentives
The milk pricing  system  has a pivotal  role in signalling  market  values  of individual  milk 
components  to the producer.  The incentive  structure  provided  by the pricing  scheme  
should promote  desirable  changes  in milk composition  and provide  opportunities  for 
producers  to enhance  profitability  through  the production  of more valuable  milk. While  
in the past butter-fat  was the most important  constituent  to the processor,  changes  in the 
market  environment  such as increased  consumption  of low fat products  and cheese  
have meant  that the value of protein  has risen relative  to that for fat. Similarly  the 
expansion  in the 'food ingredients ’ sector has increased  demand  for milk protein  
(casein)  and to some extent lactose. It is important  that the pricing system  should  
adequately  reflect  changing  market  requirements  and thereby  signal  these  to producers.
Milk Pricing  Practice  in Ireland
Current  milk pricing  schemes  operated  by Irish dairies  are essentially  'differential-based' 
systems.  Dairies  determine  a base price for a reference  milk composition  (e.g. 3.6% fat 
and 3.3% protein)  and a differential  adjustment  (addition  or deduction)  in price per gallon  
is made  for each 0.1% in fat and protein  that the individual  farmer's  milk differs  from the 
base composition.  The basic milk pricing  equations  is:
Price/gallon  = BP -r [(F% - FR%) x FD] + [{P% - PR%) x PD] (eq. 1)
Where :
BP is the base price per gallon;
F% is the fat content  of the milk;
FR% is the base/reference  fat 
requirement;
FD is the fat differential  or incentive  paid 
for fat
107P% is the protein  content  of the milk;
PR% is the base/reference  protein  
requirement;
PD is the protein  differential  or incentive  
paid for protein
107
While  there is consistency  in the general  pricing  system  employed  by Irish dairies  there  
is considerable  variation  between  dairies  in the component  differentials  (i.e. PD and FD) 
in the pricing  equation.  Of twenty  dairies  listed in a recent  milk price comparison  (Rea,  
2001 ) the average  value for butterfat  was 1.12 pence per 0.1% per gallon, however  
among  the dairies  this ranged  from 0.80 pence  to 1.46 pence  (Table  1). In the case of 
protein  values,  there was even greater  variation,  with the highest  being double  the 
lowest. The average  value for protein  across  the sample  of twenty  dairies  was 1.74 
pence  per 0.1% per gallon. The average  ratio of protein  to fat value was about  60:40,  
however  the highest  ratio was almost  70:30  while  the lowest  placed  equal  values  on fat 
and protein (see Table 1). Moreover,  for many of the dairies  fat and protein  values  
combined  only added  to a proportion  of the total milk price and a further  constant  was 
added  to give the total price. The magnitude  of this constant  varied  considerably  (Table  
1) between  dairies  with five having  a constant  amounting  to more than 15 per cent of 
the milk price paid while 10 of the dairies  had a constant  of less than 5 per cent.
Table 1. Key aspects  of pricing  schemes  for dairies  in the Irish Farmers'  Journal,  milk 
price league  (September  2001)
Minimum Average Maximum
Fat (pence  per 0.1%) 0.80 1.12 1.46
Protein  (pence  per 0.1%) 1.00 1.74 2.04
Ratio protein  value:  fat value 50:50 61:39 69:31
Constant  (% of price) -4.0 8.8 33.3
International  Comparisons
To gain perspective  on current  pricing  policies  operated  by Irish dairies  it is useful to 
draw comparisons  with milk pricing  systems  in other  countries.  Milk pricing  in Denmark,  
the Netherlands  and New Zealand  are considered  in the following  sections.
Denmark
Under  the Danish  system  milk price is comprised  of a number  of components:  a value  
for fat, a value  for protein,  a fixed deduction  for milk treatment,  a fixed deduction  for milk 
collection,  seasonal  price differentiation,  premia  and deductions  (Keane,  2000), This 
pricing  system  follows  a model milk payments  scheme  produced  by the Danish  Dairy  
Board. In determining  fat and protein  values  standard  product  manufacturing  costs are 
deducted  from intervention  product  revenues  for butter  and BMP. Milk treatment  costs  
and collection  costs are then deducted  as a volume  related  charge. In total this volume  
related  charge  under the Danish  system  has amounted  to around  6 pence  per gallon  
(Keane,  2000). The basic  price  ex-farm  derived  using  this formula  is usually  much  lower  
than the actual price paid to farmers  as substantial  supplementary  payments  on the 
basis of the financial  performance  of the co-op are a normal  feature  of Danish milk 
pricing.
The Netherlands
Payment  for milk in the Netherlands  is based  on an A+B-C  system. Under  this system  
the Dutch include  high valuations  for fat and protein  with a fixed deduction  for milk 
handling  and other costs. There  are a number  of additional  premiums  including  quality  
premium,  tank milk premium,  quantity  premium,  winter  milk premium/summer  milk levy, 
supplementary  payments  at end of year and other payments/retentions  (Keane,  2000).
108
The negative  ‘C component  of the Dutch milk pricing  equation  comprises  a penalty  to 
discourage  added  water  plus a fixed charge  to cover  administration  and transport costs.  
Keane  (2000) explained  that this volume  penalty  In the Dutch system  varies between  
processors  ranging  from about 10 percent  to 20 percent  of the net milk price. Fat and 
protein valuations  are policy decisions  of the individual  processing  companies.  
Typically,  the value of protein is derived  from the price of gouda cheese net of 
processing  costs (Keane, 2000). Similar to the Danish system, supplementary 
payments  based  on company  performance  are an Important  part of the final price paid 
to producers.
New  Zealand
The New Zealand  system  for payment  of milk is essentially  kgs of fat multiplied  by cents  
per kg plus kgs of protein  multiplied  by cents per kg. The protein  to fat value ratio is 
approximately  70:30. The New Zealand  Dairy Board  (now incorporated  within Fonterra  
Co-operative  Group) calculates  a single ('pooled')  valuation  for milk constituents 
(butterfat  and protein)  based on expected  returns  from selling many different  dairy  
products  to different  international  markets  net of standard  processing  costs. This Is 
referred  to as the Basic Price and is reviewed  quarterly.  ‘Standard  cost models'  are 
used to establish  the processing  costs  associated  with the manufacture  of virtually  every  
product  produced.  The model calculations  are based on processing  milk through 
efficient  New Zealand  plants (Bates, 1998). With reference  to the Basic Price, dairy  
companies  set a preliminary  price, called  Advance  Rates  and this is adjusted  quarterly 
where  necessary.  In addition,  producers  may receive  supplementary  payments  based  
on co-op  performance  (Keane,  2000).
Issues  Emerging  from International  Comparisons
As shown in Table 1, there is considerable  variation  in fat and protein differentials  
applied  by Irish dairy  processors.  Some  of this variation  can be explained  by differences  
in product  mix among  companies  but even allowing  for this the range  appears  extreme.  
Moreover,  it remains  unclear  how Irish processors  determine  their values  for fat and 
protein. This issue appears  more transparent  in the milk pricing  systems  for the other  
countries  examined.  In these  countries,  there  was a high level of consistency  in the milk 
pricing  policies  employed  with no evidence  of the variation  in fat and protein  values 
found among Irish processors.  This may reflect a greater degree of Industry  
coordination  with a central  agency  providing  milk pricing  guidelines  based on market  
information.  In Denmark,  for example,  the Danish  Dairy  Board  provides  a guideline  milk 
payments  system  that is almost  universally  adopted  by the industry.
A proportion  of Irish dairies  include  a significant  positive  constant  in their milk pricing  
schemes.  This contrasts  sharply  with the payment  schemes  operated  in the other  
countries  where  a negative  term in the pricing  equation  recognises  the cost of handling  
and removing  water  in product  manufacture.  For example,  the Danish  volume  charge  
is approximately  7 percent  of the basic  price  while  in the Netherlands  the volume  penalty  
equates  to around  15 percent  of the base price. Given  the small proportion  of Irish milk 
sold as fluid, the payment  of a positive  constant  for volume is hard to justify.  
Furthermore,  the inclusion  of a positive  constant  in Irish payment  schemes  is an 
undesirable  feature  as It reduces  the value  placed  on milk solids  and thereby diminishes 
the incentive  for improvement  in fat and protein  content.
109
Principles  of Multiple  Component  Pricing
Milk is a flexible  raw material  as its components  can be combined  in different  proportions  
to produce  many different  dairy products.  Multiple  component  pricing  (MCP)  of milk is 
defined  as the pricing  of milk directly  on the basis  of more  than one component:  such as 
fat and protein  or fat, protein,  lactose  and carrier  (volume).  The primary  objective  of 
MCP is that the price paid or received  for milk reflects  as accurately  as possible  the 
amount  and value of products  that can be made  from it (Emmons,  et al., 1990a). This 
is of particular  relevance  given the variation  in milk composition  both seasonally  and 
between  producers  and the fact that yields of products  such as butter; skimmed  milk 
powder  (SMP) and cheese  are directly  dependant  on the solids composition  of milk 
supplied  to the processor.  In the strictest  sense, the economic  value of the solids  
components  of milk should  be based  on the value (price)  of the products  in which  they 
are used, less processing  and marketing  costs and costs  of other  ingredients  (Hillers,  et 
al.. 1980).
The task of estimating  component  values  based  on their values  within  the marketable  
dairy products  is a difficult  one. Component  values  vary according  to the product  mix 
into which  the milk is processed.  Different  milk products  contain  different  proportions  of 
milk components  and have varying  market  prices  and processing  costs. For example,  
milk protein  is likely to have a higher  economic  value when manufactured  into a more  
profitable  product  like cheese  than into a less profitable  one such as SMP. A MCP  
system  involves  the processor  paying  directly  for milk components  as reflected  in end 
products  of visible  market  value (i.e. butter, cheese,  etc). The value, or cost, of each 
component  must be closely  related  to its value, or cost, to the processor.  While milk 
solids constituents  have positive  values, the value of water (volume)  is generally  
negative  as it must be transported,  handled  and removed  in processing.  The cost of 
processing  milk, up to the packaging  line, increases  with increased  volume. A MCP 
system  should  ensure  that the dairy  firm pays only what the milk is worth  in terms  of the 
amount  and value  of products  produced.  Conversely,  it should  ensure  that  the producer  
receives  full and fair reward  for milk supplied  according  to its composition  and the 
market  return it produces  as processed  product. Consequently,  the milk price under  
MCP should  reflect  the values  (or costs) of all the key constituents  in the milk supplied,
i.e.:
• Value  of butterfat
• + Value  of protein
• + Value  of other  solids  (lactose  and minerals)
• - Cost of handling/removing  fluid carrier  (water)
This comprehensive  MCP model  could  be referred  to as a ‘plus/plus/plus/minus'  scheme  
accurately  assigning  the positive  values  of milk solids  as well as the cost associated  with 
the fluid carrier,  water.
MCP in an Irish Context
While Irish dairies have for many years priced milk on the basis of fat and protein  
components,  the industry  has stopped  short of implementing  a comprehensive  MCP  
system.  The main deviations  in current  Irish milk pricing  from the MCP model  described  
previously  are:
i) The inclusion  of a positive  constant  for volume  in many  of the pricing  policies.  This
fails to recognise  that volume  actually  is a cost to the processor.
ii) The omission  of solids  other  than fat and protein  from the pricing  schemes.  Even
110
though  fat and protein  constitute  the most valuable  milk components  to ignore  other  
solids  in payment  schemes  can result  in the milk price failing  to reflect  fully the true 
processed  value of that milk. For example,  lactose  is an important  component  in 
WMP  and SMP and that value should  be reflected  in the milk price.
iii) Operation  of differentials  as opposed  to more transparent  direct valuation  of 
individual  components  (i.e. cents per kg times number  of kgs supplied).  Use of a 
base price per gallon,  albeit with quality  adjustments,  tends  to place the focus on 
price per unit volume. This may confuse  producer  incentives  by reducing  the 
perceived  importance  of milk solids. In practice  it would be more transparent  to 
establish  unit values  for each component  and to price milk directly  on the basis of 
the number  of units of each component  supplied.
In the remainder  of this paper some implications  of a comprehensive  MCP  
(plus/plus/plus/minus)  system  are considered  for the Irish dairy industry.  Comparisons  
are drawn with the existing  differential  payment  (DP) schemes  currently  operated  by 
Irish dairies.
Methodology
Operation  of a MCP system  requires  the development  of a reliable  approach  for the 
valuation  of milk components  that can obtain  the confidence  of milk producers.  A wide 
range of approaches  have been identified  in the milk pricing literature  ranging  from 
partial  budgeting  or costing  models  (Caskie,  1992; Brog, 1969; 1970; Hillers  eta!., 1980;  
Garrick  and Lopez-Villalobos,  1999),  through  to more sophisticated  methods  employing  
differential  calculus  (Ladd and Dunn, 1979) and linear programming  (Bangstra  et at, 
1988; Breen,  2001). Much of the difficulty  in deriving  component  values  arises  due to 
the multi-product  nature  of many  dairy processors.  Often  a product  mix is manufactured  
comprising  various  dairy products  that contain  fat, protein  and lactose  in many  different  
combinations.  In this study a linear programming  approach  was chosen,  as the 
technique  lends itself more readily  to decision-making  in a multi-product  context.
A representative  linear  programming  model  of a dairy-processing  firm was constructed  
according  to the general  structure  presented  in Figure 1. The model maximised  an 
objective  of the processor's  net revenue  across  a multi-period  planning  horizon  that 
comprised  12 time periods,  each period  representing  one month  of the year. The use 
of a multi-period  framework  enabled  the model  to incorporate  the effects  of the seasonal  
pattern  of milk supplies  within  the Irish dairy sector. The model  included  a portfolio  of 
products  reflecting  the predominant  product  mix of the Irish dairy industry. These  
products  included  fluid milk, butter, casein,  whole milk powder  (WMP),  skimmed  milk 
powder  (SMP),  Cheddar  cheese,  dried lactose  and whey powder.
Figure  1. Schematic  Diagram  of the Modelling  Framework
111
The decision  variables  of the model  \were the levels of each dairy product  produced  in 
each month of the quota year. The firm’s production  decisions  were assumed  to be 
influenced  by its expectations  for product  prices,  market  demand,  raw milk supplies  as 
well as production  costs for different  product  lines. Specifically,  the quantities  of 
individual  products  that could be produced  In a given month  were limited  by a series  of 
technical  constraints  comprising:
• Monthly  market  demand  for each product  line according  to the firm's market  share  
and supply  commitments;
• Processing  plant capacity  for each product  line, e.g. drier plant  capacity  in the case 
of milk powders.
• Monthly  milk supplies  from farmers  In the processor ’s milk pool reflecting  aggregate  
milk quota  and seasonal  supply  pattern  of the producers.
• Solids  composition  of the milk supplied  to the processor,  which  directly  influences  
the volume  of products  that can be produced.
Manufacturing  costs in the model  were categorised  as either  ‘fixed ’ or ‘variable. ’ Fixed  
costs  were assumed  to remain  constant  in total for a given  volume  of milk regardless  of 
the quantity  of product  manufactured.  These  costs included  milk collection,  reception  of 
milk at the processing  plant, administration  and general  overhead  costs. Variable  costs  
were directly related to the quantity  of product  manufactured.  These costs were  
obtained  on a product-by-product  basis and included  direct labour,  fuel/power,  added  
ingredients,  packaging,  product  storage  and effluent  disposal.
Solution  of the model produced  two main categories  of results. Firstly, the optimum  
product  mix that maximised  the market  returns  from dairy product  manufacture  subject 
to the constraints  listed  above. Secondly,  the shadow  prices  or marginal  values  for three  
principal  milk solids:  fat, protein  and lactose.  These  marginal  values,  calculated  in terms  
of Irish pounds  per kg of each milk component,  represent  the imputed  value to the 
processor  in terms  of the net revenue  obtained  from the last kg of each milk component  
supplied.  The component  marginal  values  estimated  by the model  form the basis of a 
MCP  equation,  which  expresses  the value  of milk as a function  of its solids  composition.  
Under  the system,  producer  payment  for a given volume  of milk would be determined  
by the equation:
PR = (VFx YF) + (VPx YP) + (VL x YL) +/- (AP x Vol) - (CVx Vol) {eq.2)
Where:
PR = Producer  revenue  (Milk cheque)  
VF = Marginal  value of fat (£/kg)
YF = Fat yield in milk supplied  (kg)
VP = Marginal  value of protein  (£/kg)  
YP = Protein  yield In milk supplied  (kg)YL = Lactose  yield In milk supplied  (kg) 
VL = Marginal  value of lactose  (£/kg)
AP = Additional  payments,  i.e. quality  
and seasonal  bonuses/deductions
(E/gal)
CV = Fixed costs per unit volume  (£/gal)
Using the marginal  values of the individual  milk components  multiplied  by the 
corresponding  component  yield in the milk supplied,  it is possible  to ascertain  the 
marginal  value  of a gallon  of milk (MVGM)  of given composition  to the processor.  The 
MVGM  plus or minus  supplementary  payments  (e.g. quality  bonus/deduction,  seasonal  
incentives)  and minus  a volume  related  deduction  for collection,  assembly  and overhead  
costs would represent  the final milk price per gallon  that would be paid to a producer  
under  the MCP system.
112
Model  Results
Marginal  values  of milk components  were estimated  under  six product  mix scenarios.  
These  comprised  a number  of 'specialist'  processing  channel  options  and an 'average  
product  mix ’ scenario  reflecting  the approximate  actual proportions  of each product  
produced  by the Irish dairy industry  as a whole. The 'specialist'  scenarios  comprised  
discrete  processing  channels  for fluid milk, cheese,  casein,  SMP/butter  and WMP and 
were used to estimate  component  values  according  to each of these specific  product  
lines. In each of the five specialist  scenarios  the focus was on the production  of the 
primary  product  with secondary  products  produced  as by-products  from the remaining  
milk components.  For example,  in the specialist  fluid milk scenario  the focus  was on the 
production  of fluid milk, however  some butter  was also produced  from surplus  butterfat  
after standardisation  of the milk. Model  estimates  of values  per kg for fat, protein  and 
lactose,  under  each scenario,  are presented  in Table 2. Since  the results  were based  
on product  price and cost data for quota year 1999/00  all figures  are given in Irish 
pounds. Through  the MCP equation  (Eq. 2) the component  values were used to 
calculate  the marginal  value to the processor  of a gallon of milk according  to its 
composition.  This Marginal  Value per Gallon  of Milk (MVGM)  is shown  in Table 2 for a 
milk of composition  3.6 percent  fat, 3.3 percent  protein  and 4.6 percent  lactose.
Table  2. Milk component  values  and marginal  value  per gallon  for milk of 3.6% fat, 3.3%  
protein  and 4.6% lactose  by processing  Channel.
Fat
(e/kg)Protein
(e/kg)Lactose
(e/kg)MVGM  (p/gal)
3.6% F; 3.3% P; 4.6% L
Average  mix 2.48 3.25 . 0.41 100.83
Fluid channel 2.53 4.74 0.68 130.50
Cheese 2.63 4.27 0.41 119.11
Casein 2.47 4.27 0.41 116.41
SMP/Butter 2.48 1.56 1.56 99.48
WMP 1.84 1.84 1.84 99.05
The highest  return for milk was produced  under the fluid milk scenario  with lowest  
returns  under  the milk powders  scenarios.  Under  the 'average  product  mix ’ scenario  the 
MVGM  for a composition  of 3.6 percent  fat, 3.3 percent  protein  and 4.6 percent  lactose  
was almost  101 pence  per gallon. This compared  to an actual average  base price for 
all dairies  in the Irish Farmers  Journal  Milk Price League  of 99.9 pence  per gallon  in the 
same  period. In converting  the MVGM  to a net producer  price a volume  charge  in pence  
per gallon is deducted  to cover cost of milk collection,  assembly,  administration  and 
general  overheads.  It was estimated  that this charge  would be approximately  6 pence  
per gallon of which 3.4 pence related  to the cost of milk collection/assembly  (Breen,  
2001). However,  it is noted that current  collection  charges  of Irish processors  average  
less than 1 pence  gallon  reflecting  the fact that the true cost of handling  milk volume  has 
not been levied  on suppliers.
There was a high degree  of consistency  in the value for fat under the scenarios  
reflecting  the fact that in most cases its value was determined  by the production  of 
butter. The value  of protein  was more  variable  according  to whether  it was used in milk 
powders  or for more profitable  products  such as cheese  and casein. The lactose  
component  had a small value under most processing  channels  reflecting  its modest  
value as a residual  product. However,  in the case of milk powders  its value  was much  
more significant  reflecting  its role as a major  component  of SMP and WMP.
113
The protein  to fat value ratios estimated  by the model ranged  from 57:43 under  the 
'average  product  mix' scenario  through  to 63:37  for casein  and cheese  scenarios,  39:61  
for the SMP/Butter  scenario  and 50:50  in the case of the WMP  scenario.  This concurred  
\with actual  protein:fat  value ratios  of processors,  which  ranged  from 43:57  to 69:31 with 
an average  for all dairies  of 60:40  over  the same  period. Clearly,  component  values  vary 
according  to the product  mix produced  from the milk and this would  suggest  that it is not 
possible  to obtain  one set of component  values  that accurately  represents  the true value  
of milk for all product  channels.  Consequently,  the best strategy  might involve  the use 
of a 'blended'  formula  where  a weighted  average  of component  values  is used according  
to the proportion  of milk allocated  to each product  channel.
Incentive  for Improved  Composition
An important  aspect  of a milk-pricing  scheme  is that it should provide  incentive  for 
desirable  improvements  in milk composition.  Milk with higher  solids concentration  is 
more  valuable  to the processor  and it is important  that this increased  value is accurately  
reflected  in the milk price. Results  are presented  in Table  3 for the increase  in milk price 
(value) due to a 0.2% increase  in milk solids per gallon. For comparative  purposes  
actual  price incentives  provided  by dairies  are shown  in the bottom  half of Table  3 based  
on Milk Price League  data for the same  time period. The degree  of responsiveness  of 
current  pricing  schemes  is inversely  related  to the magnitude  of a constant  term in the 
payment  structure.  Consequently,  the average  figures  are presented  for dairies  grouped  
according  to the proportion  of milk price accounted  for by a constant  term in their 
payment  schemes.
Under  the MCP model  the increase  in milk value  due to the improved  composition  was 
5.7 pence per gallon under the 'average  product  mix' scenario. Under  the cheese  
scenario  the improved  composition  added  6.8 pence  per gallon  to the milk value  while  
under  the SMP/butter  scenario  the improved  composition  yielded  an extra  5.2 pence  per 
gallon. In the case of the actual pricing  systems  operated  by dairies  in the same  time 
period  the average  price reward  for the improved  composition  was lowest  (4.4 pence  per 
gallon)  for dairies  with a positive  constant  of more  than 15 percent  of their milk price. On 
the other hand, the price adjustment  for dairies  with a positive  constant  of less than 5 
percent  was in line with the MCP results  for an average  product  mix but below  the MCP 
results  by 1 pence  per gallon  in the case of the cheese  scenario.
Table  3. Producer  price incentive  for improved  solids  composition
Reward  for Improved  Composition  
Increase  of 0.2% in Fat, 0.2% in Protein  and 
0.2% in Lactose  (pence/gallon)
Multiple  Component  Pricing  Scenarios
Average  Mix +5.7
Fluid +7.4
Cheese +6.8
Casein +6.7
SMP/Butter -^5.2 WMP +5.2
Current  Differential  Pricing  Systems:
With constant  > 15% -1- 4.4
With constant  5 - 15% +5.3
With constant  < 5% +5.7
114
Volume  versus  Composition
In the case of dairies  with a large positive  constant  in their pricing  equations,  increased  
volume is rewarded  over improvements  in solids concentration.  This issue was 
examined  using  the MCP model. Two deliveries  of milk were evaluated  both containing 
exactly the same quantities  (kgs) of each milk component,  however,  one of the 
deliveries  involved  a volume  of 1,100 gallons  while the other had a volume  of 1,000  
gallons  (see Table 4).
Table  4. Volume  and composition  of two milk deliveries
DELIVERY  A
1,100 gal @ 3.6% F 3.3% P, 
4.6% LDELIVERY  B
1,000  gal @ 3.96%  F 3.63%  P, 
5.06%  L
Milk (kg) 5,127.50 4,661.37
Fat (kg) 184.59 184.59
Protein  (kg) 169.21 169.21
Lactose  (kg) 235.87 235.87
In this example  the value  of both milk pools  in terms  of processed  product  should  be the 
same  as they contain  the same amount  of milk solids  and therefore  will yield the same  
quantities  of product.  Moreover,  the delivery  with lower  solids  concentration  will actually 
have higher  costs in terms  of transportation  and fluid removal.  As indicated  in Table 5, 
the MCP system  correctly  identified  the processed  value of both milk deliveries  as 
exactly  the same. In contrast,  the differential  payment  systems  operated  by processors 
actually  paid more for the volume  increase  than they paid for the increase  in solids  
concentration.  This inefficiency  in the differential-based  systems  varied with the 
prominence  of a constant  term within the pricing  policy. For dairies  in the Milk Price  
League  with a constant  component  of more than 15 percent,  the amount  paid for the 
higher  volume  of milk was on average  about  £23 more than for the delivery  of milk with 
higher solids concentration.  This difference  occurred  despite the fact that both 
deliveries  would yield the same amount  of processed  product  and the added  volume 
would  entail more handling  costs.
Table  5. Efficiency  of milk pricing  systems
DELIVERY  A
1,100 gal @ 3.6% F, 
3.3% P, 4.6% L 
(£)DELIVERY  B
1,000 gallons  @ 3.96%
F, 3.63% P, 5.06%  L
(£)Difference
(£)
Current  Differential  Pricing  Systems:
With constant  > 15% 1,096.99 1,073.56 23.43
With constant  5 - 15% 1,108.07 1,097.32 10.75
With constant  < 5% 1,096.41 1,093.70 2.71
True Value  of Milk (MCP):
Baseline 1,109.09 1,109.09 0.00
Cheese 1,310.22 1,310.22 0.00
Casein 1,280.56 1,280.56 0.00
SMP 1,094.31 1,094.31 0.00
WMP 1,089.57 1,089.57 0.00
115
Control  over unit costs  of processed  product
The single largest  cost to the dairy processing  sector is the milk that is used in the 
production  of its products.  Hence,  from a processor  point of view, an important  benefit  
of MCP is more accurate  control  of unit costs  of milk per kg of final product.  A paper  by 
Emmons  et al. (1990b)  has shown  that milk differing  by as little as 0.1 per cent in fat, 
protein  or lactose  could have important  effects  on the costs of milk per unit of product.  
These differences  in milk costs can in turn have a major effect on profitability  of the 
processing  plant. Variation  in cost of milk per kg of final product  arises  where  the pricing  
formula  does not accurately  reflect differences  in product  yield as milk composition 
varies. Thus some milk may be over-valued  in terms of the product  yield that can be 
obtained  from them, while  other milk compositions  may be under-valued.  In Table  6 fhe 
value of two milks differing  by 0.1% in milk solids are examined  according  to the 
processing  channel  of the milk. Milk 'A comprised  1,000  gallons  with composition  of 3.6 
percent  fat, 3.3 percent  protein and 4.6 percent  lactose. Milk 'B' comprisec.  1,000  
gallons  with composition  of 3.5 percent  fat, 3.2 percent  protein  and 4.5 percent  lactose.  
If manufactured  into cheese,  Milk 'A' produced  net revenue  of £1,185  for the 1,000  
gallons.  Milk B' produced  a lower  product  yield due to its lower  solids  concentration  and 
generated  net revenue  of £1,151. Hence,  the difference  in the true value of the two 
milks for cheese  production  was £34.
Under  the DP formulas  employed  by processors  the difference  in value (price)  between  
the two milks was generally  less than the true difference  in the value of the milks  
estimated  by the MCP model. For example,  processors  with a constant  of more  than 15 
per cent of their milk price would pay only £22.60  less for the milk with poorer  solids  
composition  even though  the actual  reduction  in the net revenue  produced  by that milk 
was £34 in the case of the cheese  processing  channel  and £26 in the case of the 
SMP/Butter  channel  (Table  6). Effectively,  the pricing  formula  used by these  dairies  did 
not fully reflect differences  in product  yield for different  milk compositions.  This 
inefficiency  in the pricing  system  resulted  in the cost of milk per unit of final product  
varying  with compositional  differences  in milk supplied. In the case of dairies  with a 
lower constant  value in their milk price the ability of the pricing formula  to estimate  
changes  in milk value  was better  but differences  remained  for products  such as cheese  
and casein. Under  a comprehensive  MCP system  the price paid to producers  should  
accurately  reflect  the yield of products  obtained;  and the cost of milk per unit of product  
should  remain  constant  as composition  varies  (Emmons,  et al., 1990b). This is a major  
benefit  to processors  in ensuring  greater  control  over their largest  input cost of raw milk.
Table 6. True values  of two milk compositions  compared  with value under  differential  
pricing  schemes  employed  by dairies
MILK  A MILK B Difference
Value  of 1,000 Value  of 1,000
gallons  @ 3.6% F, gallons  @ 3.5%F,
3.3% P, 4.6% L 3.2%P,  4.5% L
(E) (E) (E)
True Value  of Milk (MCP model):
Cheese 1,185.12 1,151.07 -34.05
Casein 1,158.96 1,125.67 -33.29
SM P/Butter 992.31 966.17 -26.15
Differential  Pricing  Systems:
With constant  > 15% 997.27 974.67 -22.60
With constant  5 - 15% 1,007.34 980 74 -26.60
With constant  < 5% 996.74 968.34 -28 40
116
Conclusions
Three  fundamental  principles  have been outlined  by the International  Dairy Federation  
as guidelines  in relation  to milk payments  systems.  A payment  scheme:
• should  be fair and equitable  to suppliers;
• should  promote  the production  of high quality  milk;
• should  be consistent  with developments  in milk sampling  and testing  (IDF, 1979).
Comparison  with milk payment  schemes  in Denmark,  the Netherlands  and New Zealand  
identified  that Irish milk pricing  policies  are much more variable  in terms  of valuation  of 
milk constituents.  In addition,  the role of a positive  constant  for volume  in many Irish 
pricing  schemes  contrasts  sharply  with practice  in the other countries  where  a volume 
charge  is included  in the pricing  equation  to reflect  the costs associated  with handling  
the water  component  in milk.
A representative  processor  model  was used to estimate  component  values  and the true 
value of milks according  to composition  and net returns  from processed  product. The 
component  values  were found to vary by product  mix especially  in the case of milk 
protein. However,  the average  protein:fat  value ratio was approximately  60:40,  closely 
in line with the average  protein:fat  value ratio of Irish dairies  over the same  period.
Using the estimated  component  values,  a producer  milk price was derived  using a 
'plus/plus/plus/minus'  pricing equation  according  to the amounts  of each milk 
component  consigned.  For milk of base composition  it was found that the milk price  
estimated  by this equation  (under  the ‘average  product  mix' scenario)  compared  very 
favourably  with actual average  base price paid by Irish dairies  over the same period.  
The comprehensive  MCP model was found to be superior  to the differential-based 
systems  operated  by Irish dairies  in a number  of respects:
• MCP can provide  benefits  in terms of equity/fairness  by more accurately  pricing  
milk according  to its composition  and the yield and value of products  that can be 
made from milk supplied.  Essentially,  the system  can ensure  that producers  are 
more accurately  rewarded  for their milk according  to its composition  and the return  
that milk produces  in the market  place. A comprehensive  MCP system  would 
prevent  some  producers  being  over-paid  for milk with poor solids  composition  while 
others  are under-paid  for milk of good solids  composition.
• By visually  assigning  market-based  values  to solids components  as well as the 
costs associated  with handling  volume,  the transparency  of the pricing  system  is 
improved.  Producer  milk price is determined  directly  from the component  values 
and the quantities  of components  consigned.  The supplier  should be able to 
compare  component  values assigned  by different  dairies and thereby  make  
assessments  regarding  processor  performance  in the use of that milk. This can 
benefit  the dairy industry  as a whole  by ensuring  that milk is directed  to those  uses 
where  it has greatest  value.
MCP should  result in price incentives  for improved  composition  becoming  more finely 
tuned to developments  in market  returns  for dairy products.  In most cases  the price  
differentials  for an improvement/decrease  in milk solids  composition  were higher  under 
MCP  than under  the existing  pricing  systems.  Moreover,  the system  can help to ensure  
incentive  compatibility  between  processor  and supplier. Since  the value of milk to the 
processor  is a function  of solids composition  it is logical  that suppliers  should  be paid 
directly  on the basis  of solids  also. Payment  for milk in this manner  should  help to align 
the objectives  of the milk supplier  and the processor  by focusing  both parties  on the 
value  of milk in terms  of solids  composition  rather  than volume.
117
From a processor  point of view, the MCP model was found to have an advantage  in 
reducing  variation  in the cost of milk per unit of final product. The MCP system  is 
product  yield focussed  so the price paid by the processor  should  reflect  accurately  the 
processed  value of that milk according  to solids  composition.
However,  it would be wrong  to suggest  that current  pricing  policies  of Irish dairies  are 
universally  inefficient  relative  to the MCP model. Performance  of the differential-based  
systems  of about half of the Irish dairies was very good in rewarding  composition  
according  to product  yield. However,  for about one quarter  of the dairies  there were  
important  deficiencies  in terms of rewarding  improvements  in milk solids composition.  
The main reason  for this was the inclusion  of a positive  constant  in the milk pricing  
formula. In some cases this constant  was over 30 percent  of the milk price. The 
inclusion  of a positive  constant  reduces  the responsiveness  of the pricing  system  to 
changes  in composition,  as price differentials  for milk components  are therefore  lower.  
For dairies  with a constant  of below  5 percent  of the milk price, efficiency  in rewarding  
milk composition  was generally  much better  but the concept  of a negative  constant  to 
reflect  the cost of handling  volume  (water)  remains  an issue  that the Irish dairy industry  
must now consider.  A movement  in this direction  would  bring milk payment  schemes  of 
Irish processors  into line with their key competitors  and would provide  the basis for a 
pricing  formula  that accurately  reflects  the true value of milk to the processor.  
Nevertheless,  modification  of current differential-based  systems  may not be the 
complete  solution  to the challenges  facing the industry  into the future. The pricing  
system  may have to change  further  if it is to accurately  reward  producers,  convey  the 
right market  information  to producers  and be equitable  amongst  producers.  To best fulfil 
these criteria  it seems  difficult  to avoid  the conclusion  that a MCP system  based  on the 
individual  component  value of the constituents  consigned  must be adopted.
References
Bangstra,  B.A., Berger,  P.J,, Freeman,  A.E., Deiter, R.E. and La Grange,  W.S. (1988).  
Economic  value of milk components  for fluid milk, cheese,  butter, and nonfat  dry milk 
and response  to selection.  Journal of Dairy  Science,  71: 1 ;^89-1 798.
Bates, S.A.E. (1998). Issues arising  from the milk pricing mechanisms  of the New 
Zealand  dairy sector. Farm  Management,  10 (2, Summer):  55-62.
Breen, J.P. (2001). A new direction  for the payment  of milk: technological  and  
seasonality  considerations  in multiple  component  pricing  of milk for a diversifying  dairy  
industry. M.Agr.Sc  Thesis, Department  of Agribusiness,  Extension  and Rural  
Development,  University  College  Dublin.
Brog, R. (1969). Quantitative  analysis  of seven  selected  milk-pricing  systems.  Journal  
of Dairy  Science,  52: 1485-1489.
Brog, R. (1970). Economic  incentives  for cheese  processors  using a protein-fat  milk 
pricing  system. Journal of Dairy  Science,  54: 1006-1013.
Caskie, P. (1992). Effects of recent changes  in the Northern  Ireland MMB milk 
compositional  payments  scheme.  Proceedings  of the Agricultural Economics  Society  of 
Ireland,  1992/93.  ,pp.42-59.
IDF (1979). Memorandum  on milk composition  payment  schemes,  C. Doc. 7. Brussels:  
International  Dairy Federation.
Emmons,  D.B., Tulloch,  D, and Ernstrom,  C.A. (1990a).  Product  -yield pricing  system:
1. Technological  considerations  in multiple  component  pricing  of milk. Journal of Dairy  
Science,  73: 1712-1723.
118
Emmons,  D.B.. Tulloch,  D., Ernstrom,  C.A., Morisset,  M. and Barbano,  D. {1990b).  
Product  - yield pricing  system:  2. Plant considerations  in multiple  component  pricing  of 
milk. Journal of Dairy  Science,  73. 1724-1733.
Garrick,  D.J. and Lopez-Villalobos,  N. (1999). Potential  for economic  benefits  to the 
producer  from altering  the composition  of milk. Invited  paper  at a Meeting  of the British  
Society  of Animal  Science,  Belfast,  16-17  September,  1999.
Hillers, J.K., Nielsen,  V.H., Freeman,  A.E., Dommerholt,  J, and Deiter, R.E. (1980).  
Value  of fat and protein  in producer  milk price. Journal of Dairy  Science,  63; 322-327.  
Keane, M. (1989, December).  Component  pricing  of milk: principles  and practice.  
Agribusiness  Discussion  Paper No. 8, Department  of Food Economics,  University  
College  Cork.
Keane,  M. (2000,  August). Milk payment  issues:  payment  schemes  and transparency  
in statements.  Discussion  Paper, Department  of Food Economics,  University  College  
Cork.
Ladd, G.W. and Dunn, J.R. (1979). Estimating  value of milk components  to a dairy  
manufacturer.  Journal of Dairy Science,  62: 1705-1712.
Rea, J. (2001). September  Milk Price League. Irish Farmers ’ Journal,  53, No. 47 
(November  24), p.20.
119
How I intend  to grow  my beef enterprise  - a farmers  perspective
Michael  Doran
Johnstown,  Duncormick,  Co. Wexford
Introduction
Beef farming  has seen many changes  over the past 10 years. The introduction  of 
suckler quotas has seen suckler cow numbers  double. However,  according  to 
Department  of Agriculture  statistics,  the overall  quality  of beef being produced  in Ireland  
is disimproving.  What can be done to reverse  this trend, or how can quality beef 
producers  access  niche markets  and better  prices  for their stock? The future  of the beef 
industry  in Ireland  has to lie in co-operation  and partnership  from the farm gate, through  
the factory, onto the supermarket  shelf and finally into the shopping  basket  of the 
Consumer.
For a vibrant  and sustainable  beef industry  the co-operation  between  the retailer  and the 
consumer  must allow the beef producer  to obtain a respectable  Income and so 
encourage  a continuous  injection  of fresh young blood - a good recipe for a healthy  
industry.
This paper  outlines  the farm development  plan of the author.
Farm Details
Hectares  owned 84.0
Hectares  leased 11.5
Total 95.5
ha ha
Grass 66.5 Tillage 29
Grazing 51.5 Winter  Wheat 4
Silage  (1 cut) 15.0 Spring  Wheat 7
Spring  Barley 12
Set-a-side 2
Maize 4
Education
On completion  of the Leaving  Certificate  a year was spent in Rockwell  Agricultural  
College,  the foundation  for a career  in agriculture.  A FAS welding  course,  to improve  
basic welding  skills, followed  this in 1996. Since completing  this course,  a lot of time 
has been spent improving  efficiency  on the farm. The Teagasc  Advanced  Certificate  in 
Drystock  Management  was completed  in 2000. This focused  on the production  of 
quality  beef and on the performance  and profitability  of the enterprises.  A profit monitor  
was completed  for the first time while participating.  As part of this exercise,  a beef study  
tour to Belgium  and France  was included  with a second  trip to Spain  the following  year. 
On completion  of the certificate  a discussion  group  was formed,  which is proving  to be 
very successful.  The discussion  group  has been named  the “U3 Wanderers ” - with the 
goal of trying  to produce  a U3 carcass.
120
As a young  person  why choose  a career in agriculture?
You are your own boss - you decide  when and how to do a job 
It provides  you with freedom  - no commuting,  no traffic  
New challenges  appear  - you decide  how best to tackle  them  
Fresh blood - new entrants  have different  ideas and ways of doing a job 
Rewarding
Suckler  Herd
The beef enterprise  is based  on 80 suckler  cows, 20 of which are autumn  calving.  This 
has been increased  from 45 cows  five years  ago. The breed  of cow has also changed 
from the traditional  black whitehead  to mainly  1/2 and fl bred Limousin  cows. A small  
number  of Blonde  cows have also been tried, however,  the majority  are too narrow  and 
have led to calving  difficulties.
The aim is to use a Simmental  bull (purchased  at 3 years  old) to breed  all replacements.  
At present  the Simmental  is running  with 16, 1/2 and 1/2 bred Limousin  cows. It is hoped  
that this breed  will bring extra milk, growth,  size and most Importantly  wider  pelvic  bones  
to allow ease of calving.
The spring  calving  cows are mostly  In calf to a Charolais  bull purchased  in 2001. The 
autumn  calvers  (which  calve outdoors)  and the in-calf  heifers  are in calf to the Limousin  
bull for ease of calving. Hopefully  the Charolais  bull will bring increased  weight  to 
carcases  at slaughter. Table 1 outlines  the breeding  values of the Charolais  and 
Limousin  stock bulls.
Table 1. Stock  bull breeding  values
CharolaisBLUP  Figures
Limousin
Muscle 118 117
Skeletal 101 107
Functionality 111 81
Reliability  (%) 31 45
Beef Merit (Tully) 123
Beef finishing
Heifers  are finished  at 20 to 21 months  of age for a local butcher,  or for Pettits  
supermarkets.  Bullocks  are finished  at 28 to 29 months  of age so as to maximise  the 
carcase  weight  of the fl bred or greater,  continental  carcases.  Animals  are left to grow 
as long as possible  before  finishing.  As the farm is operating  at a physical  stocking  rate 
of 2.8 L.U.^a,  extensification  is not a runner. Allowing  animals  to remain  on the farm 
longer  also avoids  the need to purchase  extra  store cattle  to replace  the beef cattle  and 
so avoids  the risks involved  with price fluctuations  and the high cost of store cattle.  
Prior to November  2000 when age was not an issue, all animals  were pushed  as close  
to a 400 kg carcase  as possible,  for which  a premium  of 2p/lb was paid. However,  now 
it is the age of an animal  that determines  the date of sale - surely  not a true means  of 
determining  the finish or quality  of a carcase? In the past 12 months  the average 
carcase  weight  was 344 and the percentage  that graded  LI3 or 4L and R3 and 4L was 
88 .
121
Developments
Since  starting  to farm in 1994, a major  development  programme  has been undertaken.  
Slatted  accommodation  for 85 beef cattle and a slatted  cubicle  house  for cows were 
built. This also included  a feed passage  for weanlings.  However,  the purchase  of a 
computer  and a Kingswood  Herd Package  in 1997 was probably  the best investment  on 
the farm. This allowed  fhe herd register  to be automatically  updated  and ensured  that 
all cattle  were entered  for the 10 and 22-month  premium  at 0.6 of a LU, which allowed  
for extra premiums  to be claimed  in the calendar  year. This in turn permitted  for extra  
weanlings  to be purchased  annually  and so pushed  output  up further.
With the increase  in stock numbers,  a post driver was made in 1999 and paddock  
fencing  for all animals  was installed  to allow  for rotational  grazing.  This has ensured  the 
continuous  supply  of good quality  grass  all year round,  which increases  performance  at 
grass. Control  of stock is also easier,  which is very important  nowadays  as labour  on 
farms  is at a minimum.  Paddocks  also allow action  to be taken  earlier  if grass  supply  is 
running  ahead  or below  demand.
To help maintain  the improvement  in cattle performance  throughout  the winter, and to 
allow for an increased  use of homegrown  feed, a diet feeder  was purchased  in March  
2002. Prior to 2002, homegrown  barley  was the cereal fed on the farm. This was 
ground  through  a small hammer  mill on the farm. However,  the labour  involved  in filling  
the mill, grinding  and then bagging  out the meal takes time, and leaves  for very dusty  
working  conditions.  In 2001, 20 tonnes  of alkalage  was tried as an alternative  feed with 
good results. In 2002, with the poorer  first cut silage  quality  and maize,  which  will have 
a lower  starch  content  than normal,  it was felt that alkalage  would  only increase  the fibre 
content  of the diet, which is already  high. Instead,  70 tonnes  of grain was crimped;  45 
tonnes  of which  was winter  wheat  and 25 tonnes  was spring  barley.
Grass  silage,  maize  and crimped  grain will form the diet for weanlings,  store cattle and 
finishing  beef cattle during  the winter  of 2002 .
At present,  a straw-bedded  shed for 40 cattle is being constructed,  to allow the beef 
cattle on slats to be finished  on sfraw. It will also allow  the shed to be used for cows at 
calving.
Grassland
Over the last 10 years, 30 ha have been reseeded.  An additional  5 ha was reseeded  
after  the 2002 harvest.  After  seeing  and hearing  of good results  during  discussion  group  
visits  to other  farms,  a Sinclair  Magill grass seed mix was used. The aim over the next 
five years will be to re-seed  a further  20 ha. The method  of reseeding  used is to grow  
three crops of corn and then reseed  post harvest. This gives very good yields of corn 
and allows  extra wheat  to be grown. Another  very important  aspect  to this approach  is 
that it allows  weeds  to be controlled,  the biggest  problem  being docks.
Profit  Monitor
Completion  of the Teagasc  Drystock  Profit Monitor  helps to focus on costs and the 
direction  the farm is heading.  Having  completed  the profit monitor  for four years  further 
financial  targets  can be set. Table  2 shows  a summary  of both the 1999  and 2001 profit  
monitors  for the beef enterprise  on the farm. It also compares  the 2001 analysis  with an 
analysis  of 10 beef farms in the South East collected  by Teagasc  for the year 2001.
122
Table  2 Beef profit monitor  per hectare  analysis
M. Doran
1999M. Doran
2001Teagasc  10 Farm  
Average  2001
Output  kg/ha 687 738 658
Output  excl. premia 938 977 793
Output  incl. premia 1318 1542 1463
Variable  costs 461 548 481
Gross  Margin  incl. premia 857 994 982
Fixed costs 555 497 503
Total costs 1016 1045 983
Net profit €302 €497 €479
Compared  to the 1999 analysis  and the 10-farm  average,  the output  of beef produced  
per ha was higher  in 2001. This is reflected  in the higher  output  (incl. premia)  in terms 
of €/ha. Variable  costs per ha have risen since 1999 but the higher  output,  due in part 
to increased  costs, off sets this to give a higher  gross margin  per ha in 2001. The 
variable  costs have also risen due to an increase  in prices of most farm inputs  since  
1999.
Fixed costs have fallen since 1999 and compare  favorably  to the 10-farm  average.  
Overall  the beef enterprise  profit per ha has risen since 1999. A large part of this is due 
to increased  premia  per ha. This is a reflection  of the industry,  with an increasing  
proportion  of profit coming  from direct  payments.
The aim now is to try and increase  the amount  of subsidy  retained  as profit  to 100%. To 
achieve  this, it is hoped  to increase  output  by a further  25 kg/ha, and reduce  variable 
costs by €35/ha  (targeting  vetinerary  and fertiliser  costs). Fixed costs also have room  
to be reduced,  especially  depreciation  as capital  investment  in expensive  buildings  is on 
the decrease.
Future  developments
Tillage
It is planned  to reduce  the area under tillage. Instead,  sheep numbers  are to be 
increased  to 150 ewes. The sheep  form an important  part of the overall  production  from 
the farm. Sheep  can graze after the cattle without  affecting  the performance  of either.  
Sheep  can also be out-wintered  for part of the winter  on stubbles  and so no additional 
housing  is required.  The increased  sheep  numbers  should  help increase  profitability.
Suckler  cows
Suckler  cow numbers  are also to increase  to 100. It is hoped  to calve  one third of these 
in the autumn  (to ease management)  and allow a year round  supply  of beef to be sold. 
This is very important  if we are to maintain  any share  of the European  beef market. It 
will eliminate  purchasing  extra  weanlings  and the disease  risks associated  with them. At 
present,  the cost of the better  quality  weanlings  also makes  it impossible  to purchase  
such an animal. It is also hoped  to improve  the quality  of the suckler  cows by breeding  
all of the replacements  on the farm. Cows  of an 'R' grade  should  also help increase  the 
chances  of producing  a U' grade  carcase.
123
A.I.
A.I. could also play an important  role in the improvement  of the quality of cattle  
produced.  However,  currently  the success  rate and the lack of a synchronization  and 
A.I. program  by A.I. stations  limits its use. If synchronization  and A.I. programmes  were  
to be provided  at a realistic  fee for the top quality  A.I. bulls in the country,  a huge  
improvement  in A.I. usage  would be seen. Subsequently  the quality  of beef produced  
could be improved.
Mid term review
Any good business  has need of a 5 to 10 year plan - ‘if you fail to plan you plan to fail'. 
Under Agenda  2000 the E.U. commission  for agriculture  entered into a 6-year  
agreement.  This was the foundation  for planning  in agriculture.  At the moment  it is very 
difficult  to proceed  with development  plans with such uncertainty.  However,  if the 
present  reform proposals  were to form a discussion  document  for the industry  to 
address  where  EU.agricultural  policy is to go post 2006, I would agree to look at the 
proposals.  If however,  the commission  is to break an agreement  already  in place mid 
term, then how can the commission  be trusted to introduce  another long-term  
agreement?  We have seen no study  of the consequences  of such a proposal.  My belief  
is that the quality  of beef being produced  will disimprove  under  the proposals,  as the 
number  of suckler  cows  will likely reduce,  as the cost of carrying  such animals  could not 
be justified.
Conclusions
Beef farming has a lot of potential,  especially  the development  of partnership  
arrangements  with factories  for farmers  producing  quality  beef suitable  for the European  
market. This market  is returning  some of the top prices  for beef on the world market.  
The only way for Ireland  to compete  on the world market  for beef is to target these  
markets. The limits in our scale and the costs of production,  combined  with 
environmental  and animal  welfare  regulations,  mean we will never  be able compete  on 
the world market  alone.
We need to maximize  the percentage  of our animals  suitable  for the EU market. I hope  
to do so with a fully enclosed  herd, with all animals ’ slaughtered  from the farm on which  
they were born. Improvements  in breeding  take time, however,  the rewards  when  
reached  are worth  the effort it takes,  and a lot of pride can be taken  from the fact that I 
had an input into them. Too much focus is being placed  on claiming  subsidies  and not 
enough  on the production  of quality  beef today in Ireland. If we as farmers  focus on 
what we do Inside the farm gate we can see an immediate  improvement  in the 
percentage  of our animals  that can access  these  top priced EU markets  and hopefully  
this will result In an improvement  in our profitability.
124
Outwintering  Pads as an accommodation  System  for beef cattle
Padraig  French  and Marie  Clare Hickey  
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath
Introduction
During  the last two years, outwintering  pads (OWP's)  have been evaluated  as a beef 
cattle  accommodation  system  at Grange  Research  Centre. The results  to date indicate  
that relative  to traditional  slatted floor accommodation,  OWP's  can have a positive  
impact on some animal productivity  indices. However  the system produces  large  
volumes  of effluent  with a high pollution  potential,  which must be properly  managed  to 
achieve  environmental  sustainability.
Construction  of an OWP
The OWP is constructed  by placing  a layer  of woodchips  on top of an artificially  drained  
surface,  which is lined underneath  to prevent  downward  movement  of effluent  into the 
groundwater.  Compacted  clay has been used successfully  as a liner at Grange  for two 
years. This was done by removing  approximately  0.6 m of subsoil  and replacing  it in 0.2 
m layers,  and compacting  each layer using a 20-ton  track digger. However,  the soil type 
at Grange  is a clay loam with a high (60-70%)  clay and silt content.  This facilitated  the 
construction  of the impermeable  barrier. However,  in other circumstances  an artificial  
liner may be necessary.  By placing  the liner beneath  30 cm of subsoil,  between  two 
layers  of sand or geotextiles,  it will be protected  from possible  damage.  On top of the 
liner the subsoil  was ridged  with ridges  being 3.5 m apart and 0.2 m high. Along the 
trough  between  each ridge a slotted  80 mm ducting  pipe was placed  beneath  200 kg 
/m^ of round stone (approx.  5 cm in diameter).  The stone was covered  with 50 kg of 
woodchips  /m2, which was a mixture  of timber  and bark, known  in the sawmills  as butt 
reduced  chip or post plant chips.
Animal  performance
The first experiment  to evaluate  the OWP ’s as a full time accommodation  system  for 
finishing  continental  x Friesian  steers  was carried  out during  the winter  of 2000/2001.  
One hundred  and twenty  six cattle  were  assigned  to one of seven  treatment  groups:  one 
group  was kept indoors  on a slatted  floor shed at 3 m^ space  allowance  per animal.  The 
other six groups were accommodated  outdoors  on OWP's and allowed  a space  
allowance  of 6, 12 or 18 m^/head.  Shelter  was provided  for 3 of the outdoor  groups  
using a 2 m high nation  windbreaker.  The other three groups  had no shelter  on what 
was an exposed  site, during  a winter  that was both wetter  and colder  than normal. All 
animals  were offered  silage  ad-libitum  and were supplemented  with 5 kg concentrates 
per head daily. The experiment  extended  from November  4 to April 4, after which all 
animals  were slaughtered  and carcass  data obtained.
Animal  performance  results  are shown  in Table 1. There was no significant  effect of 
stocking  density  or provision  of shelter  on growth  rate, carcass  traits or feed efficiency  
among  the animals  on the OWP. Cattle accommodated  on the OWP ’s had higher  
liveweight  and carcass  gains,  and better  feed conversion  efficiency  and lower  fat scores  
than those in a slatted  floor shed. During  the winter  of 2001/2002  selected  treatments
125
from the above experiment  were repeated  in a second experiment.  The relative  
advantage  in animal  growth  rate and feed efficiency  on the OWP  was confirmed.
Animal  welfare
Measures  of climatic  conditions  and animal behaviour,  immune  function,  cleanliness,  
hair length  and hoof condition  were conducted  to determine  if outwintering  compromised  
the well being of animals.  When  indoor  and outdoor  environments  were compared  over 
the experimental  period  the ambient  air temperature  was lower  outside  (3.5 versus  5.0 
°C), while relative  humidity  was higher  indoors  (90.6 versus  86.0 %). Wind speed  was 
reduced  by the provision  of shelter  and daily rainfall averaged  2.2 mm during the 
experimental  period,  with a recorded  minimum  and maximum  daily  fall of 0 and 28.4 mm 
respectively.  The climatic  energy  demand  (CED) refers  to the amount  of heat energy  
required  to sustain  normal  body  temperature.  There  was no measurable  effect  of shelter  
on the CED of animals  outwintered.  The CED for animals  outdoors  was higher  than for 
animals  accommodated  indoors  on slats (70.3, 71.1 or 59.2 W/m^ for animals  on 
sheltered  OWP ’s, exposed  OWP's  or indoors  on slats respectively).  On no occasion  
during  the winter  did the CED exceed  the calculated  heat of production  (internal  heat 
energy  released  from the digestion  of feed) for any group  of animals.  This would  imply  
that the animal  out-wintered  did not use feed solely  to maintain  body temperature.  
Among  cattle on OWP's  there was no effect of shelter  on mean hair length, however  
housed  animals  had a shorter  mean hair length than those accommodated  outdoors  
(1.11 versus  1.36 cm). There  was no effect  of outdoor  shelter  at any space  allowance  
on animal cleanliness.  Each incremental  decrease  in space allowance  on OWP's  
increased  the recorded  mean  dirt score  over the experimental  period  (3.9, 3.3, and 2.7 
for 6, 12 18 m2/head  outdoors  and 2.8 indoors  respectively).  There was no effect of 
space  allowance,  shelter  or housing  on time spent lying and eating,  blood cell profiles  
or on the measured  indices  of immune  function. There was no significant  effect of 
shelter,  space allowance  or housing  on the development  of interdigital  dermatitis  or 
cracks  on animal  hooves. Indoor  animals  were more susceptible  to white line disease  
of the lateral  front  claw and had a greater  severity  of under-run  on front and hind hooves.  
At the lowest  stocking  density  on the OWP ’s, a layer of faecal  material  gathered  behind  
the feed face and was associated  with the infrequent  removal  of surface  wood chips.  
Animals  confined  on 18 m^/head  therefore  had greater  incidence  of medial  and lateral  
claw erosion  on the hind hoof, as their feet were submerged  in this material  around  
feeding  time. If clean underfoot  areas  were maintained  by more regular  removal  of the 
faecal layer this condition  should  be minimised.  Therefore  there was no physiological  
or behavioural  evidence  to suggest  that the animals  used required  an artificial  shelter  
belt outdoors  or that animals  were distressed  by out-wintering,  though  transient  acute  
stresses  were not evaluated. Animal behaviour  studies showed no effect of 
accommodation  environment  on aggression.  The animals  accommodated  indoors  had 
a lower number  of lying bouts, which has previously  been associated  with animal  
discomfort  or unease  with underfoot  conditions.  This was supported  by a greater  
number  of lying hesitations  amongst  animals  accommodated  on the slats rather  than on 
the OWP, again indicative  of an animals  nervousness  and fear of slipping  or hurting  
themselves  while attempting  to lie down. The under-foot  conditions  provided  by OWP's  
therefore  allowed  the animals  more security  during  the standing/lying  actions.
126
Autumn  calving  sucklers
During the winter of 2001/2002,  the Grange  autumn calving herd, composed  of 
Charolais  X Limousin  cows,  with Belgian  Blue crossed  calves,  were assigned  to one of 
two housing  systems.  Half of the cows were accommodated  indoors  in a slatted  floor 
shed with the calves  having  access  to a straw-bedded  creep  area. The other  half of the 
cows were accommodated  outdoors  on the OWP at a stocking  rate of 22 m^/cow  and 
calf, with the calves  having  access  to a sheltered  creep  area. The cows  were  fed silage 
ad-libitum  and 2 kg concentrate  and the calves  were offered  creep concentrates  ad- 
libitum.
The reproductive  performance,  feed intake  and growth  rates of the cows  and calves  are 
shown  in Table  2. The cows  and calves  on the OWP's  had marginally  higher  feed intake  
and similar  liveweight  gain to their counterparts  in the slatted  floor sheds. However,  
after  turnout  to grass  the calves  that were outwintered  had higher  growth  rates  than their 
housed  counterparts.  The cows  on the OWP  had a shorter  calving  to conception  interval  
and a higher  proportion  were returned  in-calf  than for the cows accommodated  indoors.  
This difference  was mainly  due to low submission  rates indoors  because  of significantly 
reduced  reproductive  behavioral  activity.
Managing  the OWP
The OWP surfaces  were inspected  daily to quantify  surface  cleanliness,  and were  
scored  for the proportion  of clean and dirty areas. If there was less than 2.2 m^ of dry 
clean lying area available  per animal  then the OWP was cleaned  off. During  cleaning,  
the top 10 cm approximately  of wood chips were removed  with a fork loader  and the 
OWP was replenished  with clean chips. During  the experimental  period  of 2000/2001  
the space  allowance  treatments  of 6, 12 and 18 m^/head  required  cleaning  on 11, 52 
and 110 day intervals,  respectively.  All the experiments  to date have used the OWP  as 
a complete  accommodation  system  where  the animals  were fed and all the nutrients  
collected  on the OWP. However,  in practice  many  farmers  have existing  facilities  where 
animals  can be fed off the pad such as a slatted  floor shed or self-feeding  at a silage  pit. 
This will reduce  the nutrient  load on the OWP and the area required  per animal.  
Typically  these systems  are stocked  at 10-12 m^ /animal  without  any requirement  for 
cleaning  during  the winter.
Conclusion
The main objective  of this experiment  was to identify  any negative  effect  of outwintering 
animals  on OWP's  on animal  performance  and welfare. The animals  accommodated 
indoors  performed  as anticipated,  however  the outwintered  animals'  grew  faster  and had 
leaner  carcasses  and consumed  less energy  per kg carcass  growth  under  the prevailing  
test. The provision  of wind shelter  or increased  space allowance  on OWP's  had no 
significant  advantage  for animal  growth  or energy  efficiency.  There  was no physiological  
or behavioural  evidence  to suggest  that this type of animal required  wind shelter 
outdoors  or that out-wintering  distressed  animals. Transient  acute stresses  were not 
evaluated.  The under foot conditions  provided  on OWP ’s allow the animals  more  
security  during  the standing/lying  mechanism.  Increasing  the stocking  density  on the 
OWP's  increased  the frequency  of cleaning  the surface  area and the dirtiness  of the 
animals.  Relative  to indoor  slatted  accommodation,  animals  accommodated  on OWP ’s 
had a lower severity  of hoof under-run  and white line disease. Further  studies  are
127
required  to determine  the reason  for the increased  carcass  growth  and leanness  of the 
cattle  on the OWP ’s. This is a preliminary  report  and research  is still on-going.  A definite  
specification  for the construction  of an OWP  will need to be drafted  in association  with 
the EPAand  the Department  of Agriculture.
uoo$
■o0)
&c
'5 w
o ^ 
£2 o
00c 
w
O) 2I-
■is
-o
*0 - 
>^2 S O 
0 > 
.y ro 
0 2
0 a ^ 0
~C. ^
OJ D 
W O o £
.« 5 
S o
^ c-
0 '5
■5 ^ 
0
P 0
0 "O
0' .£ o ^c y0 Q 
E «I I
0 ^
. 01- Q.
0 -CS3
.2 E> t * - «
CO * 6 ^ ^O
CO„cococococococo
CO
oCO CO CO CO CO CO COz z z z z z z
CO CO CO CO CO CO COz z z z z z z
■ r C \ J C O O U -n
<'>cn<Mc30Csjo ‘^
T- CD ^ CO 
CO CD ® ai CO
O) CD COo
CO CJ CO
S CD D' O® 5N TO CD O
CCJ TOCO
CO o oCD CO ^ CO
CO
CD COTO C\j CO
^ 23 CO..t TO
TO CM CO
CD CD D' 'O' TO CO CDCD 
CM
CO CO TO CM CO
CO - ° iS:
^ ~ c^
o 05O IT) ^ ^ COO h- C\J (£)
CD ^ CO
T- CO CVJ
CD CJ) O) COP C\j ® CO T- CO CM cn
CD ^ 
CD COCD CO9 irj^ COCO CO 
cvi '•O
CO
>.0-o
0
CJ0
Q.
CO>>0•o
c'0O)0O ^ 
0 CD 
O ^ 
O) CD
0
CD
.5^ (/) 0 0000
OL.0O
Oco
'tro
Q_OO
O2
DO
030
0>
Oo■QCCD
C03Ox:
oo
■Oc
0
CLCD 
C
’c 0 0 $ 
O := 
c C 
O 3 
0 0 
<!> ^ > 2 0 CD“ o
£ S
■O c
§ 3 
0 »-
8 « 
»- 0 
O O
ij 0
S §
CD £ 
> Cl0 4-O C
C SE O’ 3 0 02 -Q0 3
0 C O 03
0 oi —
t "CJ 0
0 0
.im
C C 
< ~
0 i=
^ 0m ^ ^ S ^ OK g CO o o TO^ ^ o ^ CO CM
CM S CD §j ^
<D O CO ^ CMr- O1- O
CO CO
CD ^ ^ 0 
‘O
0 ' 
C C 
'o_ ^g- CD
2 £ O O) 
(1)
53 $C 0
■0 0o o0
0
00■o
O)
cg
8 0 
C V 8-^  
2 §
E o^ S’ 0 2 O 0-c -c .b
05's’ S' 
Q) ^ .2^
§ I I I I I
5 = 5 = $ 
CO « o000CO
128
Important  factors  in suckler  beef production  and influence  of 
calving  season  on income
Michael  Drennan
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre.  Dunsany.  Co. Meath.
Introduction
Suckler  beef production  is of major importance  in Ireland  with the cow herd of 1.13 
million  accounting  for 48% of the total cow herd. Incomes  from suckling  are low with 
cattle  premiums  making  a major  contribution.  Assuming  a continuation  of EU funding  in 
a modified  form oriented  towards  more extensive  production  the more important  factors  
influencing  economic  returns  in future  years  are (a) disease/health,  (b) beef quality  and 
(c) production  costs.
Disease/Health
Bovine  Viral Diarrhoea  (BVD) and Johne's  disease  are increasingly  becoming  major  
problems  in suckler  and dairy herds, and are the result of cattle importations.  In the 
absence  of national  eradication  programmes,  producers  should  aim to have their herds  
free of these diseases.  Respiratory  disease  (caused  mainly  by IBR, PI3 and RSV) is 
also a major  problem.  All of these  diseases  are likely to cause  more problems  in Ireland  
than elsewhere  because  of the very high level of cattle  trading. In addition  to testing  and 
possibly  vaccination  programmes,  clearly  defined  animal  management  programme  are 
necessary  to ensure  effective  control.
BVD
Possible  outcomes  of infection  include  abortion,  stillbirth,  foetal malformation,  weak or 
apparently  healthy  offspring.  The main source  of infection  is Persistently  Infected  (PI) 
animals  that excrete  large amounts  of infection  throughout  their lives. PI animals  arise 
from infection  before  100 days of pregnancy  when  the foetus  cannot  recognise  the virus 
as foreign  and therefore  does not eliminate  it. These PI animals  have the virus but 
develop  no antibodies  to the virus, and eventually  develop  mucosal  disease  (lesions  of 
the gastro-intestinal  tract and lymphoid  tissues)  and die. The severity  of the disease  in 
animals  infected  after birth varies but mortality  can be high. The disease  can be 
controlled  by avoiding  exposure  to infection  (caused  mainly  by Pi animals  which  may be 
recognised  due to intermittent  scouring,  poor health  and poor performance)  during  the 
first 3 months  of pregnancy.  Tests are available  and could be used to identify  PI 
animals.  When  eradicating  the disease,  suspect  PI animals  should  be isolated  from the 
main herd while awaiting  test results. When diagnosed,  PI animals  should be 
immediately  removed  from the herd. If a herd is free from the disease  serious  
consideration  should  be given to providing  replacements  from within the herd or from 
herds known  to be free.
Johne ’s Disease
Most cattle  are infected  with this bacterial  disease  early in life (usually  in the first month)  
through  milk or feed contaminated  with faeces.  Animals  generally  do not show signs of 
the disease  until 2 to 6 years of age when the number  of bacteria  excreted  rises 
dramatically.  At this stage symptoms  include  watery  diarrhoea,  rapid loss in body 
condition  and eventual  death. Sub-clinical  infection  results  in higher  rates of mastitis,
129
longer  calving  intervals  and infertility. If the herd is free of Johne ’s, then preferably  
provide  all replacements  from within the herd and any purchased  animals  should  be 
kept clear of the cow herd and replacements.  If the herd has the disease  then if 
possible,  replacements  should  be purchased  from a herd (or herds)  considered  free of 
Johne's.  These  should  be managed  separately  from the main herd for at least the first 
six months  of life. In the meantime  slurry control in addition  to animal isolation  is 
necessary.  Tests  for diagnoses  of the disease  have limitations.  Further  details  can be 
obtained  in a document  produced  recently  by the Department  of Agriculture  and Food.
Respiratory  Disease
Bovine  respiratory  disease  is an important  cause  of morbidity  and mortality,  particularly  
in suckled  calves  following  weaning.  Fewer  cases  of respiratory  disease  are recorded  
in home-reared  than purchased  animals. This is due to less exposure  to the various  
organisms  causing  the disease,  which arises due to mixing of animals  from different  
sources  and the additional  stress associated  with marketing.  The organisms  mainly  
responsible  include  Respiratory  Syncytial  Virus (RSV),  Infectious  Bovine  Rhinotracheitis  
(IBR) and Para-influenza  3 (PI 3). Vaccines  are available  and where  a problem  exists  
a control  programme  should  be planned  with your Veterinary  Surgeon.
Beef Quality
Beef carcass  quality  is important  because  of its effect on price. In this context  good  
quality carcasses  are those of good conformation  that are lean. In addition  to the 
various  cattle premiums  the main source  of income  from suckling  is the calf crop. It is 
therefore  important  that the animals  (or carcasses)  produced  from the suckler  herd are 
eligible  for the highest  priced markets  available.  The highest  priced markets  are in 
mainland  EU, for example  France where in 2001 steer carcasses  grading U3 for 
conformation  were priced at 96c/kg (320 v 224) more than 03 grade (Table 1). The 
corresponding  price difference  for bulls in Italy was 64c/kg  (279 v 215). In fact the price 
difference  between  03 and U3 was even greater  for heifers  in these two countries  
resulting  in a greater  price difference  per animal  than with steers and bulls despite  a 
lower carcass  weight. Therefore  with almost  90% of our beef exported  an increasing  
proportion  of which  is going  to the continental  EU market  it is important  that the animals  
produced  from the suckler  herd are suitable  for the highest  prices  in these  markets.
Table 1. Effect  of carcass  conformation  score  on beef prices  (c/kg)
Steers Grade Ireland N. Ireland UK France Italy Spain Netherlands
(Bulls) U3 239 272 276 320 (279) (249) (208)
R3 231 262 268 289 (255) (235) (186)
03 224 246 253 224 (215) (223) (190)
Fleifers U3 - - - 361 347 271 -
R3 233 263 266 300 321 266 153
03 226 247 243 214 196 242 148
Source:  Bord Bia for the year 2001
Breed is the main factor influencing  conformation  and leanness  and as continental  
breeds  are superior  for these  traits the breeding  programme  must be based on these  
breeds.
130
There  is considerable  variation  in muscularity  between  individual  bulls within  all breeds.  
At Grange,  young continental  cross-suckled  bulls have been used to study the 
relationship  between  live animal  muscularity  scores  (in addition  to ultrasound  scanning  
of the eye muscle)  and subsequent  carcass  traits. Good correlations  were obtained  
between  muscular  scores  at weaning  and before  slaughter  with carcass  conformation,  
meat percent  and killing-out  rate (Table 2). Therefore,  because  the heritability  for 
muscularity  is high, breeding  bulls that are superior  for this trait can be selected  at an 
early age.
Table 2. *Correlations  between  muscular  scores  at weaning  and at slaughter  with 
carcass  conformation,  meat percent  and killing-out  rate
Carcass
ConformationMeat Percent Killing-out  Rate
Time of scoring  
CorrelationWeaning Slaughter  
0.72 0.82Weaning
0.57Slaughter
0.65Weaning
0.66Slaughter
0.72
*The closer  to 1 the better  the correlation
Cost of Production
As incomes  are low, beef farmers  have always  been aware  of the need to keep costs  to 
a minimum. However,  there are always opportunities  for further cost reductions  
particularly  where EU payments  are associated  with more extensive  production.  
Examples  of possible  cost reductions  include:
• retaining  animals  to slaughter  reduces  trading  costs and incidence  of disease:
• improving  overall performance  resulting  in early disposal  reduces  borrowing  for 
cattle and possibly  housing  requirements;
• more extensive  production  (to qualify  for premia)  results  in a shorter  winter and 
therefore  lower  feed costs and less reseeding.
Some  features  of beef production
Before  discussing  systems,  a brief outline  of the present  position  regarding  the breeds  
used in suckling,  the calving pattern and seasonality  of cattle slaughterings  is 
considered  useful.
Breeds  used  in suckling
A desirable  feature in suckling  is the increased  use of continental  breeds. Data 
compiled  by Irish Cattle Breeding  Federation  (ICBF)  show  that continental  sire breeds  
accounted  for 85% (Charolais  accounted  for 44%) of the 2001 calf crop from the suckler 
herd (Table  3). Twelve  percent  of sires were early maturing  breeds  leaving  a further  3% 
which  were mainly  other  continental  breeds.  The dam breeds  of the 2001 calf crop were  
about  65% continental  breeds  and crosses  and 35% early maturing  breed crosses.
131
Table  3. Sire breed  and cow breed in the suckler  herd
Breed  of sire Breed  of dam
Charolais 44 20
Simmental 9 17
Limousin 24 18
Hereford 6 22
Aberdeen  Angus 6 13
Belgian  Blue 8 4
Other 3 6
Total 100 100
Source:  ICBF 2001 
Seasonality  of calvings
Calving  in the suckler  and dairy herd Is predominantly  in spring  with 70% of calving  in 
the 4 months  February  to April and 84% in the first 6 months  of the year (Table 4). 
During  the remaining  6 months  of the year the highest  proportion  of calvings  in the 
suckler  herd is in July (4.1%)  with none of the remaining  5 months  exceeding  3% of the 
total.
Table  4. Seasonal  distribution  of calf births (%)
Herd Jan Feb Mar Apr May  June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec
Suckler 5.3 9.8 22.2 22.9 15.5 7.8 4.1 2.8 2.4 2.2 2.3 2.7
Dairy 10.0 25.5 25.0 15.2 8.4 3.8 1.8 1.3 2.2 2.5 2.4 2.0
Total 7.6 17.5 23.6 19.1 12.0 5.9 3.0 2.0 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.3
Source:  ICBF 2001 
Seasonality  of Slaughterings
For orderly  marketing,  a relatively  even supply  of beef throughout the year Is desirable.  
However,  in contrast  with most other EU countries,  beef production  in Ireland,  because  
it is based  on grazed  grass  has a more pronounced  seasonality  in production,  with most 
slaughterings  in Autumn.  This poor distribution  of slaughterings  throughout  the year is 
particularly  evident  for steers with less variation  in heifer and cow slaughterings.  
Averaged  over a 7 year period  (1995  to 2001) the monthly  steer slaughterings  at meat  
export  premises  (Figure  1) was 75,740  with peak slaughterings  in October  (105,000)  
and November  (102,000)  and lowest output In June (43,000)  July (49,000)  and 
December  (47,000). In contrast,  monthly  heifer slaughterings  over the same 7-year  
period  averaged  42,370  per month  with a peak of 51,000  in November  and a minimum  
of 36,000  in April. The average  monthly  figure for cows was 30,000  with a peak of 
35,000  in November  and a minimum  of 23,000  in April.
132
Figure  1, Mean monthly  slaughterings  (‘000) of steers,  heifers  and cows over a seven  
year period  (1995  to 2001)
Suckling  Systems
Calving  season  is often considered  to have an important  bearing  on incomes  and time 
of disposal  of the progeny  for slaughter.  Spring  (average  calving  date March 15) and 
autumn  (average  calving  date November  1) calving  are compared  based on Grange 
data from the spring  calving  herd using Limousin  x Friesian  and Simmental  x (Limousin  
X Friesian)  cows. Sires of the larger  continental  breeds  (Charolais)  are used on mature  
cows and easy calving Limousin  sires on heifers. The Grange  system has been  
operated  on permanent  pasture  and would  thus be similar  to most lowland  suckler  beef 
units in the country.
Progeny  are taken to slaughter,  and a high level of animal  performance  (Grange  spring  
calving  figures)  is assumed  for both the spring  and autumn  calving  systems.  Economic  
evaluations  are carried  out using both semi-intensive  and REPS (Rural Environment  
Protection  Scheme  - eligible  for the low level of extensification)  systems. Studies  at 
Grange  have shown  that with good management  and similar  concentrate  inputs  similar  
performance  levels can be expected  from the REPS and the semi-intensive  systems.  
Details  of the comparisons  are as follows:
REPS Semi-Intensive
Spring Autumn Spring Autumn
Calving March  15 November  1 March  15 November  1
Sale: Heifer  (20 mths) November June November June
Steers  (23 Mths) February October February October
''ha/cow  unit 1.08 1.08 0.81 0.81
Nitrogen/ha  (kg) 90 90 225 225
Silage  (tonne/cow  unit) 13.4 14.5 13.4 14.5
Cone, (kg/cow  unit) 710 770 660 720
■'Cow  and progeny  to slaughter  and replacements
Both silage  and concentrate  requirements  per cow unit are somewhat  higher  for autumn  
than for spring  calving. As the autumn  calving  cow is lactating  throughout  the winter,  
silage  quality  would be more critical. Spring  calving  cows are fed silage  only in winter
133
(except  for first calvers  which  receive  1.5 kg of concenfrates  after calving)  while  autumn  
calvers  received  2 kg of concentrates  daily during  the breeding  season  (total 190 kg). 
Standard  daily concentrate  feeding  levels  for fhe spring  calving  progeny  are:
weanlings  1 kg (1.33 kg for REPS  as average  silage  quality  is lower);  
finishing  heifers  (2 months)  3 kg and finishing  steers  4 kg.
Daily concentrate  feeding  levels  for the autumn  born progeny  are; 
suckled  calf in winter  1 kg;
yearlings  1 kg (or 1.33) and finishing  sfeers  (2 monfhs)  4 kg.
Target  weights  for fhe sysfems  are shown  in Tables  5 and 6. In all systems  carcass  
weights  of steers and heifers  are 395 and 310 kg respectively.  Carcass  prices are 
€2.52/kg  for steers  and heifers  sold in spring/summer  and €2.35/kg  for fhose  disposed  
of in autumn/early  winter. Cull cow prices are €l.85/kg.  In the REPS syste.-us  the 
stocking  rate was reduced  to 1.08 ha per cow unit to have them eligible  for the lower  
level of extensification.  Interest  is charged  on the cow (valued  at €635) and half the 
variable  costs. Total fixed (overheads  plus depreciation)  costs  are charged  at €244  per 
cow. The additional  premia from REPS and extensification  in the REPS systems  
amount  to €206  per cow. There  is no charge  for labour  included  in the calculations.
Table  5. Animal  weights  (kg) for spring  calving
Steers Heifers
Weaning 316 288
Yearling 404 373
20 Months 570. 565
23 Months 700 -
Carcass 395 310
Table  6. Animal  weighfs  (kg) for aufumn  calving
Steers Heifers
Spring;  5 months  old 210 200
Autumn:  yearling 410 390
Spring:  17 months 500 480
Slaughter 700 565
Carcass 395 310
Receipts  per ha were quite similar  for fhe spring  and aufumn  calving  systems  but due to 
higher  winter  feed requirements,  costs  were higher  for the autumn  calving  system  (Table  
7). As a result  income  per ha was €27 (736 v 709) greater  for the spring  calving  REPS  
system and €21 (642 v 621) greater  for the semi-intensive  system than for the 
corresponding  autumn  calving  system.  Although  stocking  rate and beef outpuf  was one- 
third higher  for the semi-intensive  system,  income  was greater  for the REPS system  
indicating  the importance  of the extra premiums  (REPS  and extensification)  to income.  
It is noticeable  that in the absence  of all premia,  incomes  per ha ranged  from €26 to 
€99. Thus, at low cattle  prices  when  fixed costs  are charged  at a standard  rate per cow 
resulting  in an extra  €75 per ha for the intensive  system  compared  to REPS  there is no
134
effect  of stocking  density  on income  per ha. Totai costs per kg carcass  gain are higher 
for autumn  than for spring  caiving  (Tabie  8). Costs  per kg carcass  gain are marginaiiy 
greater  for the semi-intensive  than for the REPS  systems  as iand which is not charged 
repiaces  fertiiiser  and some  other costs. Piacing  a rentai charge  on iand wouid  have a 
major effect on incomes  particuiariy  in the REPS system  where  stocking  rate is iow. 
Totai premiums  per kg carcass  produced  are 1.67 and 1.17 for the REPS and semi-  
intensive  systems  respectiveiy.
Tabie  7. incomes  (€) per ha. from suckiing  systems
REPS  System Semi-intensive  System
Time of caiving Spring Autumn Spring Autumn
ha/cow  unit 1.08 1.08 0.81 0.81
1. Animai  saies 901 894 1201 1192
2. Premia 637 637 595 595
3. ^Totai  receipts 1538 1531 1796 1787
4. Variable  costs 501 520 748 760
5. Interest  and overhead  costs 301 302 405 406
6. Total costs (4-r5) 802 822 1153 1166
Gross  margin  (3-4) 1037 1011 1048 1027
Income  (3-6) 736 709 642 621
Income  (excluding  premia) 99 72 48 26
®REPS  system  eligible  for the lower  level of extensification  and receive  €l 17/ha  in 
REPS  payments
Table  8. Total costs and total premiums  per kg carcass  weight  gain
REPS  System Semi-intensive  System
Spring Autumn Spring Autumn
Costs (€) 2.10 2.15 2.27 2.29
Premiums  (€) 1.67 1.67 1.17 1.17
Aithough  not taken into account  in the economic  anaiysis,  housing  requirements  are 
greater  for the autumn  than for spring caiving  due to the high requirements  for the 
cow/caif  unit (about  6 m^) compared  to about  3 m^ for the cow aione  (space  vacated  by 
finishing  steers  assumed  to be adequate  for the young  spring born caif) using siatted  
accommodation.  Reproductive  performance  is aiso iikeiy to be better in the spring  
caiving  than in the autumn  caiving  system.  An examination  of the resuits  shows  that the 
factors  that have the greatest  effect on income  are cattie prices, animai  performance  
(fertiiity,  mortaiity  and daiiy weight  gains)  and cattie premium.
Summary
• it is important  to avoid diseases  such as BVD and Johne ’s in the herd.
• To be eiigibie  for highest  prices,  aim to produce  carcasses  of good conformation  
that are iean.
• Minimise  production  costs whiie improving  performance.
135
The suckler  herd is increasingly  based  on continental  breeds  and crosses  but there  
is scope  for improvements  in muscularity.
Calving  is predominantly  in spring  with 70% of calvings  in the 4 months  February  
to May,
Cattle slaughterings  (steers  in particular)  are unevenly  distributed  throughout  the 
year with over 100,000  (average  of 7 years 1995 to 2001) steers  slaughtered  in 
both October  and November,  which is double  that in June, July and December.  
Spring  calving  is more desirable  than autumn  calving  due to 
Higher  income;
Lower  cow, winter  feed costs;
Lower  housing  requirements;
Likely  better  reproductive  performance;
Better  distribution  of slaughterings  where  producing  2 year old steer beet. 
Delaying  sale of steers in spring calving would improve  slaughtering 
distribution  while a delay  with autumn  calving  would  increase  housing  costs.
References
Irish Cattle Breeding  Federation.  Irish Cattle Breeding  Statistics  2002, 24 pages.
136
Financial  returns  from cattle  systems
Tom Egan
Teagasc,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork
Introduction
The Teagasc  National  Farm Survey  for 2,000 puts average  Family Farm Income  on 
cattle  farms  at €7600  for cattle rearing  (mainly  suckiing)  systems  and €7750  for ‘Cattle  
Other' units. For farms over 50 hectares  the equivalent  figures are €21200  and 
€21500. The percentage  of profit arising  from direct payments  is 120 % for ‘cattle  
rearing'  and 124 % for 'cattle  other'  across  all farm sizes and drops  only slightly  to 114 
% and 109 % for farms of over 50 ha in the respective  production  systems. These  
figures  confirm  what is widely  accepted,  that cattle  farming  incomes  are (a) low, and (b) 
hugely  dependent  on direct  payments.
There  is however  a very wide range  of financial  performance  across  cattle farms even 
within  similar  systems  and size groupings.  Using  gross  margin  (output  including  premia  
less variable  costs) as a measure  of efficiency  illustrates  the point. Gross  margin  per 
hectare  on all cattle  farms  averaged  €564  per ha, but the bottom  25% produced  a gross  
margin  of only €250 per ha as against  a figure of almost  €900 per ha for the most  
efficient  quartile. Figures  from Teagasc  Demonstration  Farms  and Profit Monitor  data 
also indicate  a very significant  variation  in margins  within rather  than between  cattle  
systems.  Some  interesting  questions  arising  from these  various  sources  of information  
are:
• What  are the principal  contributing  factors  to higher  or lower  gross  margins  per unit 
area, and specifically  what role do Direct  Payments  play? In the current  premium  
system  what is the “ideal ” level of stocking  to maximise  profit in the various  
systems?
• What  are the principle  production  costs per hectare  or per kg of animal  liveweight  
on farms?
• Flow does the overall  margin  available  for production  of suckler  beef break down  
between  the weanling,  producer  and the grower/finisher?
• Flow would  the proposed  Mid-Term  Review  affect  cattle  farming  economics?
Factors  Contributing  to Higher  Gross  Margin  on Top Farms
Considering  the overall  importance  of direct payments  to cattle farming  incomes,  it is 
very surprising  to note that only 10 % to 15 % of the difference  in gross  margin  between  
top and bottom  farms in the NFS can be attributed  to premium  receipts. The biggest  
contributors  by far are technical  issues like animal performance  and quality, overall  
production  efficiency,  trading skills and cost control. Stocking  rate, controlled  by 
premium  regulations,  is less significant  than in pre-premium  days.
137
Table 1 Cattle  margins  - top vs bottom  farms
Single  suckling  (soil group  2)Bottom  25% Top 25% Advantage
Gross  margin  €/ha 292 797 505
Premia  €/ha 276 408 132
75% Of Advantage  to Top Producers  Derives  From  Technical  Performance
Mixed  production  (best soils) Bottom  25% Top 25% Advantage
Gross  Margin  €/ha 248 879 631
Premia  €/ha 254 317 63
90% Of Advantage  to Top Producers  Derives  From  Technical  Performance
Source:  Teagasc  National  Farm Survey  2,000
Ideal stocking  level?
Table 2 outlines  the total premium  receipts  in suckling  to beef and weanling  to beef 
systems  operating  to the upper (tighter)  limit of stocking  density  for basic premia,  low 
rate extensification  or high rate extensification.
The most noteworthy  points  in this table are;
1. The higher  levels  of premium  “take ” in trading  versus  breeding  systems  regardless  
of exfensification  level.
2. The effect on total "take ” of finishing  steers at 28 rather than 24 months  where  
extensification  is claimed.
3. High rate extensification  is very justifiable  in trading  systems  but possibly  less so 
on breeding  farms  where  land quality  is good.
Breeding  farms selling  weanlings  or stores  with premia  attached  can optimise  income  
without  claiming  maximum  premia  through  the increased  market  value of "unpunched ” 
or “single-punched ” cattle. This of course  means  that the purchaser  is actually  buying  
the premium  right along with the beef producing  potential  of the animal. Following  the 
same rationale  the higher  levels of premia  in trading  as opposed  to breeding  systems  
do not automatically  lead to higher  farm profits. It is an accepted  logic within Irish cattle  
farming  that premia  have to be purchased  and paid for with the qualifying  animal. It is 
impossible  to estimate  the cost of this entitlement  purchase  but a figure  of 50 % to 70 
% of the payment  is often mooted. A recent review of competitiveness  questions  
whether  this trading  of entitlements  has actually  imposed  a new cost on the industry  
(The Competitiveness  of Irish Agriculture,  Prof. G. Boyle,  2000).
Table  2. Premium  receipts  (€) on 40 ha at differing  extensification  rates
System No Extn €40 €80
Suckling  to Beef
Steers  @ 24 mts, Hfrs @ 20 Mts21,774 23,954 19,304
Suckling  to Beef
Steers  @ 28 mts, Hfrs @ 20 Mts21,774 20,445 18,052
Weanling  to Beef
Steers  @ 24 mts, Hfrs @ 20 Mts
No. of Heifers  in Brackets28,409
(55)30,659
(30)33,011
(6)
Weanling  to Beef
Steers  @ 28 mts, No Heifers 27,599 27,599 25,399
138
Production  costs  in cattle  farming
Cattle  production  costs  within  the NFS are considered  in terms  of variable  (direct)  costs  
and fixed costs. The principle  outcomes  are;
1. Costs  are high (as expected),  and account  for more fhan trading  output. For year 
2,000  on cattle rearing  farms of over 50 hectares,  direct  costs amounted  to €226  
per hectare  and fixed costs to €255.
2. Both direct  and fixed costs  account  for approximately  one-third  of total output  value  
including  direct  payments.
3. Feed is the principle  direct  cost and when  feed, fertiliser and contractor  charges  are 
combined  they account  for over 80% of direct  costs.
4. In fixed costs  the largest  single  item is machinery  coming  in at 28% with land rental  
also featuring  strongly  at 22% of total fixed costs.
Teagasc  demonstration  farms in 2000 had direct costs of €0.75  per kilo of liveweight  
produced,  and fixed costs  of just over €0.90. This equates  to approximately  €3.20  per 
kg of carscase.  The Boyle review  of competitiveness  in beef production  highlights  a 
deterioration  in our situation  vis a vis some  of our EU competitors  in recent  years. Our 
cash cost index is now above  the average  of a basket  of states  (UK, Germany,  France,  
Ireland)  at 113 %, whereas  in 1993 we stood  at just 82 %, Only the UK has a higher  cost 
structure  than Ireland,  whether  considered  as a percentage  of total output  or per unit 
production  (100 kg liveweight).
Comparison  between  Systems
NFS data show comparatively  little overall difference  in profitability  between  'cattle  
rearing ’ and 'cattle  other' systems.  A look at theoretical  output,  cost and profit figures  
for well managed  suckler  to weaning  and weanling  to beef units would  suggest  that in 
the quality suckler beef sector the breeder is currently  faring better than the 
feeder/finisher.  Applying  standard  costings  and outputs  to efficient  production  systems  
in each case allows  for the calculation  of an overall  profit  for producing  beef from a herd 
of 30 suckler  cows. Distributing  this profit evenly  on a per hectare  basis between  the 
breeding  and the finishing  farms  allows  for estimination  of an 'equitable'  weanling  value.  
Assuming  a beef price of €2.50  per kg this figure  works  out at approximately  €l .85 for 
males  and €l .45 for females  (Table  3). Actual  prices  in recent  years  have been well in 
excess  of these levels, particularly  for male weanlings.  This is again related  to the 
trading  of premium  entitlements  and the high value  placed  on them, rather  than the meat  
producing  potential  of the animal. This suggests  that the weanling  producer  has been  
winning  out in most years in the battle  for the limited  profit available.
Table  3a. Suckler  farm - 30 cows producing  weanlings  in autumn
Calves  reared  per 100 cows bulled 90
Weaning  (sale) weight  males  (kg) 300
Weaning  (sale) weight  females  (kg) 270
Replacement  rate (%) 15
Stocking  rate (ac/cow) 1.4
Ha employed 17
Premia Suckler  cow
Extensification Low rate
139
Table  3b. Feeder  farm bringing  progeny  to finish
Males Females
Start Weight  (kg)
Days on farm 
Sale date
Carcass  weight  (kg) 
Stocking  rate ha/head  
Ha employed  
Premia
Extensification300
570
March  Year 2 
380
0.6 (For Premia)  
8.5
2 SBP, slaughter 
Low Rate270
365
October  Year 1 
290 
0.30 
4
Slaughter,  heifer  top-up
Table  3c. Financial  - start to finish (30 cows - progeny  to beef) €
Farm Suckler
Cows WeanlingsFinisher  
Heifers  Yr 2Steers  Yr 2Total
Sales  @ €2.50 9425 13300 22725
Premia  2002 6705 2,095 2095 10895
Slaughter  Premia 355 1360 1115 2830
Extensification 1205 540 540 2285
Total premia 8265 7745 16010
Replacement -1525 -1525
Total output 37210
Variable  costs 6225 2,600 5250 14075
Fixed costs (€31 5/ha) 5335 3935 9270
Total costs 11560 11785 23345
Overall  profit 13,865 (€470/ha)
Table  3d. “Equitable"  price for weanlings
Beef Price  Weanling  sales required  Females
(equal  profit/ac)  (270 kg)Males  
(300 kg)
€2.50  /kg €12800 €390 €554
Effect  of mid-term  review
As understood  at the moment,  the proposed  mid-term  review  of Agenda  2000  would  de­
couple  direct  supports  from animal  production  and apply approximately  the same level 
of payment  for each farm on an area basis. It Is suggested  that there  will be some  level 
of farming  activity  required  in order  to draw down this premium  but it may be minimal.  
There are no direct market  support  changes  involved  in the review, so any price 
evolution  over time will be the result of supply  and demand  rather  than policy  change.  
Obviously  policy  in the area of world trade would have an impact  but that is outside  of 
the current  review. For the practising  cattle farmer  some of the effects  that could be 
expected  to follow  are:
• Total premium  take should  remain  constant,  although  the modulation  proposal  may 
result  in some  redistribution  over time.
• Farming  activity beyond  a minimal  level will be dependant  on trading returns,  
selling  price, buying  price and production  costs.
140
• In breeding  to finish systems,  equal premium  payments  and similar  market  pricing  
should  produce  similar  overall  financial  output. Whether  this will be the case will 
depend  on farmer  decision  making  regarding  cattle  numbers  and age at sale, which  
will be more discretionary  in a new regime.
• In trading  systems,  whether  buying  or selling  calves,  weanlings  or stores  there will 
be a new valuation  system,  which  should  logically  depend  solely  on the economic  
beef producing  potential  of the animal.
Same  systems  - new scenario
In Table 3 above,  at the ‘equitable ’ weanling  price, neither  the breeder  nor the finisher 
could produce  a profit in the absence  of direct  payments.  The actual  outcome  is that 97 
% of premia  would be retained  as profit on the weanling  unit and 76% on the finishing  
farm. So what happens  after de-coupling?  One line of logic  suggests  that both systems  
would  cease  to operate  since  neither  is profitable  outside  of premia,  which  would  be paid 
almost  independently  of production  in the new system.  This, though,  is not the full story.  
The profit margins  above  allow for fixed costs, most of which  would not disappear  with 
the livestock.  In the absence  of production,  therefore,  part of premium  receipts  would  
be absorbed  by existing  fixed costs. An alternative  logic proposes  that an enterprise  that 
leaves  a margin  over variable  costs and interest  payments  and contributes  to meeting  
fixed cost commitments  will improve  the profitability  of the overall  business.
Table  4 looks  at the same  two farming  operations  from this new perspective.  Attempting  
to allocate  the available  gross margin  over breeding  and finishing  farms on an area 
basis, the overall  result is a drop in the value of the output  from the breeder  farm and 
obviously  an improvement  in the situation  of the finisher.  This comes  about  because  the 
finisher  no longer  has to buy premium  entitlement  and, if he behaves  logically  will only 
purchase  cattle at a price that leaves  at least a margin  over direct costs and interest  
The magnitude  of the change  on these figures  is not huge, but as stated  earlier, real 
prices for young stock are considerably  higher  than the 'equitable'  figure calculated  
here. More realism  may or may not evolve  in a new situation.
A more interesting  facet is the change  in relative  values  of male and female  weanlings.  
The value of heifers  holds up well for two reasons,  (a) they were not reaping  high 
premium  payments  anyway  and (b) the production  costs associated  with them in this 
system  are low with most of the liveweight  gain achieved  on grass. Male weanling  
values  are seriously  reduced  for the opposite  reasons,  high dependence  on premia  and 
high finishing  costs in this spring  born two-year  old beef system.
Cattle production  systems  in Ireland  are closely  aligned  with the premium  regime  in 
force. Steers  are not finished  under  22 months  so that they qualify  for second  stage  
SBP. Equally,  turning  two year old cattle back to grass can impact negatively  on 
extensification  payments.  Removing  this straitjacket  will allow for more flexibility  and 
possibly  reduced  costs on farms. Trials in Grange  show  that high quality  suckler  beef 
can be produced  from grass in autumn  at 18 to 20 months.
The example  does illustrate  that high winter  feed costs  will be an even bigger  burden  in 
the proposed  new scenario.  Attempts  to reduce  the burden  such as finishing  more cattle  
in the autumn  or storing  animals  for finishing  on spring  grass will be facilitated  by the 
new payments  system.  One very immediate  result  could be the return  of seasonality  as 
a feature  of the Irish beef industry.  Certainly  long finishing  periods  indoors  on expensive  
diets will be difficult  to justify  without  the benefit  of headage  based premium  payments  
unless  there is an old-style  seasonal  price rise. This may be one of the first obvious  side 
effects  of the policy  review.
141
Table  4. Financial  - start to finish (30 cows - progeny  to beef) € 
Revised  for decoupled  payments
Suckler Finisher Total
Cows Heifers  Yr 2 Steers  Yr 2
Sales  @ €2.50 9425 13300 22725
Replacement
Total output-1525 -1525
21200
Costs
Total variable  costs 6225 2600 5250 14075
Overall  contribution (FC and Profit) 7125 {€240/ha)
Table  4a. ‘Equitable ’ price for weanlings 
Revised  for decoupled  payments
Beef Price  Weanling  Sales Required
(equal  contrib/ha)Females
(270 kg)Males
(300 kg)
€2.50  /kg €11,830 €451 €430
Conclusions
Profitability  in cattle systems  is low and highly premium  dependent.  There is a huge  
range from top to bottom  in terms of profit per unit area and this is related  greatly  to 
technical  performance  rather  than to superiority  at premium  optimisation.  Costs  are high 
and relative  to international  figures  have disimproved  in the last decade.  Feed cost, and 
in particular  winter-feed,  is the single  largest  cost element  in cattle  farming.  The current  
premium  system  does not always  predispose  to lowest  cost production  with its age and 
area restrictions  and regulations.
From the viewpoint  of an individual  farmer the proposed  review  of Agenda  2000 would  
have obvious  implications  for the trading  values of male animals  in particular,  with 
premium  eligibility  no longer  of importance.  If premium  payments  are to be largely  de­
coupled  from animals  high costs  will only be justifiable  on a trading  basis,  this could  well 
result  in a return  to highly  seasonal  beef supply  and price differentials.  Even assuming  
that average  prices  remain  generally  similar  to current  levels in the new situation,  there  
will be huge changes  at farm level in terms of flexibility  and scope for management  
decision  making.  Less stock  and more output  from grass  to reduce  direct  costs  or more  
animals  and higher  production  to pull down  fixed costs per unit output? Either  way, the 
emphasis  will be even more on costs.
142
NOTES
143
NOTES
144
