Irish Grassland 
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal  
1980
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol 15 1980
edited  by 
Sean Flanagan
Printed  by Lithographic  Universal,  Dargle  Vale, Bray
ICI FERTILISER  
PAYS
FOR ITSELF  
TIME  AND  
TIME  AGAIN
You can be confident  that 
having  invested  your 
money  in the right 
fertiliser  you will get results.
ICI put the right  balance  of 
Phosphate,  Potash  and Nitrogen  
into every  granule  in every  
bag you buy.
It's this consistency  which  helps  
give an even spread,and plenty  of good grass  for 
grazing  or silage.
Use ICI fertilisers  as part of 
your farming  system.
You'll  see the difference  in 
liveweight  gain or extra  
gallons  of milk.
So buy the fertiliser that pays 
for itself. Buy ICI.
W. Sheehan 
T. Nolan
B. Kilkenny  
W. Hartley  
M. G. Keane
P. O. Ryan
M. Ryan
C. J. Wilcox
S. J. Amies
B. Cunningham  
P. Mac CannaPage
15CONTENTS
Energy requirements  of pregnant  and 
lactating  ewes
Grazing  management  for mid-season  
lamb production
Sheep  production —components  of success 21
Sheep  and cattle on Wexford  farms  39
Factors  affecting  carcase  composition  in 
beef cattle  43
Beef carcase  classification  and market  
requirements  53
Use of grass varieties  in increasing  pro­
duction  of beef 61
A system  of low cost milk production  in 
the United  Kingdom  69
Economics  of low and high cost dairying  
systems  75
Brucellosis —strategy  for the farmer  79
Financing  the dairy industry  in the future 85
Abstracts  98
COUNCIL  1980/1981
President : J. Dardis  
Vice-President : P. Gleeson
Council  Members :
M. Barlow,  S. Brophy,  D. Browne,  D. Cashman,  M. Drennan,  D. Fay, 
V. Flynn,  J. Jennings,  J. Leeson,  P. MacCanna,  P. McFeely,  W. Murphy,  
J. O’Grady,  P. O’Keeffe,  M. Ward.
Hon. Secretary  / Treasurer  :
Dr. S. P. Flanagan,
Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam, Co. Galway.
3
tt’strue  what  they  say^ in Irdand  the  grass  egreen^
When  it comes  to the quality  of<lairy  pasture,  there ’s no 
other  country  in Europe  that  Irish  farmers  need  envy.  Irish 
pasture  land,  Irish  grass,  is ideal  for the production  of the milk 
from  which  the  world ’s best  dairy  products  are made.
As a result,  Irish  dairy  products  are  bought  and enjoyed  
the  world  over-many  of them  bearing  the world-famous  
Kerrygold  label.  They  accountfor  one-sixth  of  our  total  exports-  
an impressive  £600  million  plus-and  because  the import  
content  is low,  the economic  contribution  is huge.
But  ourworld-wide  marketis  steadily  increasingand  so 
we must  mairttain-and  increase-our  productivity  to match  that 
demand.
And  if we do, that  expansion  will  be matched  by sales;  
sales  of Irish  butter,  cream,  powders,  cheese  and other  dairy 
products.
So remember,  we have  the  land,  we have  the climate,  we 
have  the people.
Letis  make  the most  of them.B
miSH  DiVIRy  BQUtD
Energy  Requirements  of Pregnant  
and Lactating  Ewes
W. SHEEHAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Creagh,  Ballinrobe,  Co. Mayo.
The yield of lambs  from a breeding  flock is one of the principal  factors  
determining  the success  of a sheep  production  system.  The feeding  of the 
ewe during  the main phases  of its production  has an inevitable  bearing  
on her lambs.  The bodyweight  and nutritional  status  of the ewe at mating  
will have an important  bearing  on the number  of lambs  born to each ewe. 
The level of nutrition  during early pregnancy  may effect the level of 
embryo  mortality.  The later stages of pregnancy  are vitally influenced 
by maternal  nutrition  and the ewe becomes  progressively  more vulnerable  
to nutritional  stress  as pregnancy  proceeds.  Birthweights  of the lambs  and 
their subsequent  viability  are affected  by the level of nutrition  in the latter  
part of pregnancy.  High birthweights  as a result of good feeding  gives  
the lambs an initial weight  advantage  which,  other things being equal,  
will be maintained  till weaning.  Conditions  favouring  adequate  ewe 
nutrition  will also favour  milk yie’d and consequently  lamb growth  rates  
in early  life.
The critical requirements  of ewes during late pregnancy  and early  
lactation  are described  at some length in this paper. But firstly,  let us 
summarise  briefly the importance  of nutrition  prior to mating  and ifi 
early pregnancy.
Nutrition  prior  to mating
The practice  of improving  the nutrition  of the ewe prior to mating  is 
commonly  called ‘flushing ’. While the practice  has been widely  adopted  
in most of the sheep producing  countries,  surprisingly  little is known  of 
how its influence  is exerted.  Because  of the lack of a clear definition  of 
what constitutes  flushing  the methods  used by different  research  workers  
have varied greatly  and as a result the available  evidence  is somewhat  
conflicting.
Despite  the difficulty  in interpreting  the results  of the literature  there is 
no doubt  that, under certain conditions,  flushing  will result  in an increased  
lambing  rate due principally  to an increased  twinning  rate. There also 
appears  to be good agreement  that the observed  differences  in fertility  
are due to the increased  incidence  of multiple  ovulations  rather  than to a 
decrease  in the number  of barren  ewes. The effect  of ewe body condition  
at mating  on ovulation  rate is shown  in Table 1.
It is widely  accepted  that liveweight  per se of the ewe at mating  has an 
important  effect on fertility. Experiments  involving  different  planes  of 
nutrition  from weaning  to 3 weeks after mating have shown higher
Table I
Effect  of ewe body condition  at mating  on percentage  of ewes with 0-2 ovulations*
No. of ovulationsBody condition
Good Poor
0 0 12
1 50 88
2 50 0
*Gunn,  R. G., Doney,  J. M. and Russel,  A. J. F. J. agric. Sci., Camb.  79, 19-25,  
1972.
twinning  rates of approximately  6% for each 4.5 kg increase  in liveweight 
of the ewe. However,  claims  have also been made for a specific  flushing 
effect. In ewes of the same liveweight  at mating,  those which  are gaining  
weight  will have more twins  than those maintaining  weight  which  in turn 
will have more twins  than those losing  weight. More recently,  however,  
experiments  have shown  that ovulation  rate was not depressed  by poor  
nutrition  prior to mating.
In summary  there is good evidence  to suggest that high levels of 
fertility  are obtained  from ewes in which  the level of nutrient  intake is 
high,  from ewes gaining  in weight  if originally  in moderate  body  condition  
and from ewes in good condition  at mating  even though  they may be 
losing  weight.
Nutrition  in early pregnancy
Experimental  evidence  indicates  that most embryo  deaths  occur in the 
first 3-4 weeks  of pregnancy.  TTiis is the period  in which  the developing  
embryo  becomes  attached  to the wall of the uterus by the developing  
placenta.  Both high and low levels  of nutrition  immediately  after mating  
have been shown  to cause embryonic  mortality.  The apparent  disparity  
between  research  findings  may possibly  be due to the levels of nutrition  
imposed.  Plane  of nutrition  can mean  different  things  to different  people. 
It would appear,  therefore,  that in the absence  of precise  experimental  
data the level of feeding  should  not be altered  greatly  during  the first 3-4 
weeks  after mating.
The growth  rate of the foetus  proceeds  slowly  during  early pregnancy  
and by the end of the third month  the weight  of the uterus  and its con­
tents is only about one quarter  of the ultimate  uterine  weight before  
parturition.  Consequently  nutrient  demands  during  this period are not 
critical  but severe underfeeding  is to be avoided  since it can adversely  
affect lamb development  even when nutrition  is adequate  in late preg­
nancy. A modest  loss in liveweight  of about  6-7% in fat ewes during  this
♦Thompson,  W. and Aitken,  S. C. (1959.  Sheep Bur. Anim.  Nutr. Aberdeen.  Tech.
Commun.  No. 20.
p)eriod  will have no detrimental  effect  on ewe performance.  Furthermore,  
It is well reco^ised  that, if the feed intake  of fat ewes is for any reason  
suddenly  restricted  in late pregnancy,  these animals  are more susceptible  
to disorders  such as pregnancy  toxaemia  than ewes in a leaner body  
condition.
Nutrition  in late pregnancy
Approximately  75% of foetal  growth  occurs  during  the final 6-8 weeks  
of pregnancy  as shown  in Table  2. This results  in a considerable  increase  
in the ewes ’ requirements  for nutrients  and particularly  for energy.
Table 2
Mean  liveweight  increase  (kg) of ewes during  pregnancy*
Ewes with singles Ewes with twins
Total
L.W.G.Gain  of 
Gravid  UterusTotal
L.W.G.Gain  of 
Gravid  Uterus
Mating  to 28 days 0.77 0.09 2.82 0.14
Mating  to 56 days 3.10 0.19 5.86 1.64
Mating  to 84 days — — 9.04 4.18
Mating  to 112 days 10.14 4.27 15.32 8.86
Mating  to 140 days 16.36 11.36 22.00 20.23
♦Wallace,  L. R. .J. agric .Sci., Camb.  38, 93-153,  1948.
In the pregnant  ewe the foetus  obtains  its energy  from maternal  glucose 
mainly  from propionic  acid from ingested  nutrients.  The foetal demand  
for glucose  is high and if the proportion  of dietary  energy  available  as 
glucose  is insufficient  to meet this demand  then in order to maintain  
glucose  levels the ewe begins  to draw on her own body reserves.  The 
degree  to which  she does this depends  on (1) nutrient  intake,  (2) the stage 
of pregnancy  and (3) the weight  of foetus(es)  she is carrying.  Inadequacy  
of feed during  late pregnancy  adversely  affects lamb birthweights  and 
chances  of survival  and may lead to losses of ewes. The reaction  to 
undernutrition  during  late pregnancy  may result  in two situations.  Firstly  
the growth  rate of the foetus(es)  may be reduced.  This wou'd  appear  to 
be the most comon  reaction  resulting  in poor lamb birthweights,  reduced  
Vigour  and high mortality.  The second  reaction  may be that foetal  growth  
rate continues  at the expense  of maternal  tissue and thus exposing  the 
ewe to pregnancy  toxaemia.
Various  estimates  of requirements  of ewes in late pregnancy  are avail ­
able. For example,  it is estimated  that to prevent  loss of maternal  weight  
during  late pregnancy  a ewe wou'd need to consume  2-3 times as much  
feed as a non-pregnant  animal. In feeding  practice,  in order  to achieve 
such intakes  it would  be necessary  to supplement  the basic roughage  diet
with liberal quantities  of cereals. While cereal prices remain  at their  
present  levels this will result in a considerable  addition  to production  
costs and will therefore  affect  the profitability  of the enterprise.
Ideally  the ewe shou'd  gain sufficient  weight  during  late pregnancy  to 
allow optimum  development  of the reproductive  tract and of the udder  
without  loss of weight  in other tissues. While this condition  may be of 
great importance  in systems  such as those based on accelerated  rates of 
reproduction,  the aim of a more practical  production  system  might  be to 
allow ewes to mobilize  some of their own body reserves  to meet any 
deficit  in her intake. Provided  the resulting  loss in maternal  weight  is not 
too severe it will be quickly  recovered  on spring pasture  during  the 
subsequent  lactation.
We have recently  concluded  a series of studies  at Creagh  to examine  
the effects of a range of energy levels during late pregnancy  on the 
reproductive  performance  of the ewe, the aim being to determine  the 
minimum  amount  of food required  by the ewe during  late pregnancy  
consistent  with good reproductive  performance.  In view of the fact that 
roughages  make up the greater  proportion  of the ewes ’ diet during  preg­
nancy  and because  of the increasing  use of silage  as a feed for sheep,  an 
exjjeriment  was also carried  out to study the adequacy  of silages of 
varying  digestibilities  in terms  of meeting  ewe requirements.  In a further  
experiment  we studied  the effects  of energy  supplementation  of silage in 
late pregnancy  on ewe performance.
For the purpose  of this paper I have selected  one experiment  to 
illustrate  our findings  on the energy  requirements  of twin bearing  eweS  
in late pregnancy.  The energy levels studied  together  with the birth ­
weights  of the lambs and the bodyweight  changes  of the ewes are given  
in Table 3.
Table 3
Mean  daily nutrient  intakes  during  late pregnancy  and iamb birthweights  and 
ewe bodyweight  changes
Treatment
Low Medium High
Dry matter  (g) 608 1004 1256
Metabolisable  energy  (Mj) 6.5 9.8 11.9
Birthweight  (kg) 4.0 4.6 4.4
Ewes :
Liveweight  gain 1.3 10.5 12.8
Net bodyweight  change -10.2 -3.7 -0.8
In these experiments  we used a pelleted  roughage-concentrate  diet. The 
results  show that lamb birthweights  were highest  on the medium  energy 
level of 9.8 MJ ME (0.42 MJ/kg  W*’ ’^’). Rather  curiously  there was no 
significant  difference  in birthweights  between  the extreme  low and high
levels of nergy. While this might suggest  that the energy  requirements  
may be closer  to the lower  level this is clearly  not so when lamb  mortality  
(31, 12 and 10% of the Low, Medium  and High energy  levels respec ­
tively)  and ewe bodyweight  changes  are considered.
In farming  practice  and particularly  in the extensive  situation  it is 
difficult  to judge whether  the level of feeding  is excessive  or inadequate.  
Ewe bodyweight  changes,  despite  the limitation  of not knowing  the num ­
ber of foetuses  the ewe is carrying,  will serve as a useful guide to 
nutritional  adequacy.  In a review  of the literature  on the effect  of plane  
of nutrition  during  pregnancy  on reproduction,  Thompson  and Aitken*  
adopted  absolute  gain or loss of bodyweight  of the ewe as the major  
criterion  of plane of nutrition.  They concluded  that weight  increases  less 
than the weight of the products  of conception  are still adequate  for 
satisfactory  reproductive  performance.  They suggested  that a liveweight 
gain of 6.4 kg during  the final 8 weeks  of pregnancy  is sufficient  for a ewe 
carrying  singles. These weight  changes  apply to ewes of about 60 kg. 
The results  of our studies  (Table  3) show than an ME intake  of 9.8 MJ 
would  satisfy  these criteria.  The net bodyweight  loss associated  with this 
level of gain was low (4 kg) while the birthweights  of twin lambs  were 
excellent.
A major  question  in translating  the estimated  energy  requirements  into 
feeding  practice  is the extent  to which the intakes  of a roughage,  such 
as silage,  satisfy  these requirements.  A summary  of the results  showing 
the in vivo digestibility  and intakes  of four different  silages  together  with 
the calculated  energy  intakes  of twin bearing  ewes are given in Table 4. 
The birthweights  of single  and twin lambs  are also included.
Table 4
Mean  daily dry matter  intakes  (g/kg WO-75)  of silages  by ewes and the birthweights
of single  and twin Iambs
DMD  %Intake Birthweights  (kg)
Single  bearing Twin  bearing Singles Twins
58 52.1 (0.45)* 45.6 (0.40) 4.2 3.2
68 36.9 (0.38) 41.2 (0.42) 4.4 3.7
63 39.9 (0.40) 30.9 (0.31) 4.8 3.1
52 42.7 (0.33) 43.8 (0.35) 4.3 3.5
♦ MJ ME/kg  WO-75
The results  show clearly  that silage intakes  were variable  and were not 
related  to digestibility.  The results  also show that silage as a sole feed 
in late pregnancy  does not in most instances  meet the estimated  energy  
requirements  of twin bearing  ewes. It is also clear that, in terms of actual
* Thompson,  W. and Aitken,  S. C. (1959).  Sheep  Bur. Anim.  Nutr. Aberdeen,  Tech.  
Commun.  No. 20.
9
energy  intakes,  the digestibility  of the silage  is of major  importance.  This 
IS very obvious  if one compares  the intakes  and qualities  of the first two 
silages  m Table  4. A further  consideration  in regard  to silage feeding  is 
the tendency  for silage intakes  to decrease  with advancing  pregnancy  
when  the energy  requirements of the ewe are increasing.  Thus  a computed  
mean intake  over the final 6-8 weeks  of pregnancy  can be misleading.  It 
is for this reason that supplements  are fed with roughages  during  late 
pregnancy.
The effects  of supplementing  silage (D.M.D.  % 58) with barley on 
birthweights  and growth  rates of twin lambs  is shown  in Table 5. These 
results  show a significant  response  in birthweights  to supplementing  with 
13.5 kg rolled barley  in late pregnancy.  Increasing  the barley  level to 27 
kg did not further  improve  performance.
Table 5
Birthweights  and growth  rates of twin lambs  to 8 weeks  of age (kg)
Birthweight Weight  at 8 weeks
Silage ad libitum 3.2 16.8
Silage ad libitum + 4.0 18.4
13.5 kg rolled barley
Silage ad libitum + 3.9 18.0
27 kg rolled barley
Nutrition  in lactation
Any consideration  of nutritional  adequacy  in late pregnancy  cannot  be 
limited  to ewe bodyweight  changes  and lamb birthweights.  The subse ­
quent  rearing  ability  of the ewe and growth  rate of the lambs  in relation  
to birthweights  must be considered.  This is of paramount  importance  in 
relation  to twin lambs  when it could well be argued  that economies  of 
nutrition  in late pregnancy  may impair  their subsequent  growth  rates. 
There is no doubt that the level of nutrition  in late pregnancy  and the 
body condition  of the ewe at lambing  will act as a buffer  between  nutrient  
intake  and nutrient  requirements  of ewes during  lactation.  It is also true 
that provided  nutrition  during  pregnancy  is adequate  in terms  of lamb  
birthweights,  milk yields  and lamb growth  rates will depend  on the level 
of nutrition  during  lactation.  In the extensive  situation  there should  be 
sufficient  feed available  to the lactating  ewe, nevertheless,  in the context  
of twin bearing  ewes the first 2 to 3 weeks  are of particular  impiortance  
since it coincides  with pieaking  lactation  of the ewe and the critical  piost-  
natal period  for lamb survival.
The effects  of nutrition  in this critical  post-lambing  pieriod  were studied  
by continuing  the pregnancy  energy  levels for 2 weeks in lactation.  It 
must  be noted  that these levels  are much  lower  than recommended  energy 
levels  for lactation.  The lowest  level (6.5 MJ) is less than that estimated
10
Table 6
Mean  lamb birthweights  and performance  to 6 weeks  of age G(g)
Liveweight
Birthweight 2 weeks 6 weeks 0-6 weeks
Low 4.0 6.9 14.8 0.26
Medium 4.6 8.3 15.2 0.25
High 4.4 8.6 14.9 0.25
for maintenance  of a dry non-pregnant  ewe of similar  bodyweight  to 
those in the present  experiment.
The effects  of these levels  on lamb growth  are shown  in Table  6. Lamb  
growth  rates were directly  related  to energy  intake and to milk yields  
which  were 1.03, 1.48 and 1.99 kg per head per day on the Low,  Medium  
and High energy  levels respectively.  The ewes were then fed ad libitum  
and the results  show that lamb growth  rates were the reverse  of those in 
early lactation.  Milk yields averaged  2.0, 2.2 and 2.6 kg on the Low,  
Medium  and High treatments.  These results  indicate  that despite  low 
levels of energy in late pregnancy  and early lactation  that ewes will 
respond  to increased  nutrition  at a point in time before  they would  have  
attained  normal  milk yields.
Table 7
Ewe bodyweight  changes  (kg) in early lactation
Low Medium High
Post lambing
0-2 weeks -8.40 -6.95 -1.48
0-6 weeks 1.35 1.37 2.14
The rate of mobilisation  of body reserves  in early lactation  is shown  in 
Table 7. Ewe weight  loss during  the period of restricted  feeding  was 
directly  related  to energy  intakes. When  fed cd libitum  the ewes on the 
high energy  treatment  gained  less weight  than those on the lower  levels.  
The remarkable  recovery  of liveweight  during  early lactation  is due to 
the rapid expansion  of appetite  of ewes which fed ad lib (Fig. 1).
The results  in terms  of lamb  growth  rates and ewe bodyweight  changes  
further  support  the conclusions  that an energy  intake  of 9.8 MJ ME/day  
or 0.42 MJ/kg is adequate  for the pregnant  ewe even in situations  
of moderate  undernourishment  in early lactation.
While  this experiment  does not pinpoint  the actual  energy  requirements  
of twin bearing  ewes during  lactation,  from other work carried  out on
11
O)
v
a
"c
i
Q
DQ2-■ Low
1 ■ I I I
2 3 4 5
Week of lactation
Fig. 1: Voluntary  feed intake of ewes in early lactation.  
Table 8
ME allowance  (MJ/day)  required  by twin bearing  ewes in late pregnancy  
and early lactation
Ewe liveweight  
(kg)Late pregnancy Early lactation
50 7.89 15.78
60 9.05 18.10
70 10.16 20.32
80 11.23 22.46
lactation  requirements  it was concluded  that the energy  levels must be 
close to twice the estimated  pregnancy  levels.
A comparison  of the energy  requirements  of twin bearing  ewes in late 
pregnancy  and early lactation  is given in Table 8.
The approximate  estimated  theoretical  quantities  of various  feeds 
needed  to meet these requirements  for a 60 kg ewe are given in Table  9. 
The requirements  for silage  and hay are based on a digestibility  value of 
65 for both roughages.  The ME requirements  for dried grass,  swedes  and 
barley are calculated  from published  estimates  of their energy  concen ­
trations.  It must be emphasized  that, while these quantities  of feeds will
12
satisfy  the energy  requirements  of the ewe in late pregnancy,  protein  and 
minerals  may be deficient  particularly  in the case of swedes  and barley.  
It is also evident  that silage  intakes  during  late pregnancy  would  not meet  
ewe requirements  and it is therefore  necessary  to supplement  with con­
centrates.
Table 9
The quantities  required  of various  feeds required  by twin bearing  ewes during  late 
pregnancy  and early lactation
Feed (kg as fed) Late pregnancy Early lactation
Silage 5.85 11.70
Hay 1.23 2.46
Dried grass 1.00 2.00
Swedes 6.36 12.72
Barley 0.82 1.64
Cheveley  Johnston  & Company
Agricultural  Consultants  & Land Agents
Farm Reports  and Feasibility  Studies  
Management  Accounts  and Enterprise  Costings  
Farm and Estate  Management  
Staff Selection
Budgetary  Control  and Cash Flow Forecasts  
Land and Stock  Valuations —Farm Sales  and Purchases
26/27 WELLINGTON  ROAD,  CORK  
(Cork  501109)
13
Where  
there ’s growth  
—there ’s 
Grcissland  
I^rtilizers
Grassland  
covers  Ireland.}
Grasslan
f.it..  Mi
Grassland  Fertilizers  Ltd. The Pound Road, Slane Tel. (041) 24124"  & 24160
14
Grazing  Management  for Mid-Season  
Lamb  Production
T. NOLAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Creagh,  Ballinrobe,  Co. Mayo.
Mid-season  Iamb production  in Ireland  is associated  with lambing  ewes  
at a date when pasture  growth  is expected  to meet the nutritional  needs 
of the flock. With the exception  of tillage areas,  over 95% of the total 
annual  food supply  consists  of grazed  or conserved  herbage.  Due to the 
economic  necessity  to intensify  mid-season  lamb production  from pasture  
the most important  immediate  objective  is to ensure  good pasture  pro­
duction  and its efficient  use through  the application  of high stocking  rate.
More specifically  the aim is to achieve  an integrated  efficient  balance  
between  pasture  production  and utilisation  and sheep husbandry  and 
management  practices  which will secure sustained  acceptable  levels of 
individual  sheep  performance,  output  per unit area and economic  return.  
Institute  research  has developed  and tested relatively  simple integrated  
whole package  systems  which are practically  workable  and require  com­
paratively  low cost and labour  inputs.
Research  has shown  that on developed  lowland  permanent  grassland,  
using moderate  fertiliser  inputs  (about  77 lb N per acre per annum)  and 
concentrate  feed to ewes in late pregnancy  (40 lb per ewe) an all year 
stocking  rate of six ewes per acre for mid-season  fat lamb production  is 
possible.  Adequate  fencing  and good husbandry  are essential  for the 
suecessful  management  of these systems.  In this paper,  firstly the basic  
requirements  for intensive  mid-season  lamb production  from grassland  
are emphasised,  secondly  the more important  grassland  and sheep 
components  are outlined,  and thirdly  the integration  of these components  
in the whole system  are examined.
The basis
Planning  and general  organisation  are the basic requirements  for suc­
cess. This includes  the choice  of a particular  system,  an understanding  
of the target individual  sheep  and per unit area outputs  required,  and a 
suitab'e  husbandry  and management  programme.  Existing  weaknesses  
must be corrected.  Handling  and wintering  facilities  should  be provided  
to facilitate  efficient  production  and ease of operation.  The inclusion  of 
a programme  for disease  prevention  and control  should  be an essential  
feature  of the plan.
Grazing  management  is an important  component  because  it influences 
the efficiency  with which  a given  quantity  of food is apportioned  through ­
out the year in order  to meet the nutritional  requirements  of the flock.  An 
understanding  of the following  three fundamental  factors  is essential :
Firstly,  the rate of pasture  growth  varies  at different  periods  of the year 
and therefore,  for a given all year stocking  rate in the context  of inten ­
ts
sification,  the supply  of food can be expected  to be greater  than or less 
than flock requirement  according  to season. Secondly,  the food require ­
ment of the flock varies  in association  with the different  ewe and lamb  
physiological  states  throughout  the year and do not match  the pattern  of 
food supply  from pasture.  Thirdly,  the patterns  of food requirement  by 
ewes and lambs in the same flock are not the same throughout  the year 
and this can be exploited  to improve  grazing  management  efficiency.
Number  of paddocks
A 6-paddock  rotational  grazing  layout is considered  adequate  for a 
flock size of up to 200 ewes. Rotational  grazing  is recommended  as it 
facilitates  a better  appreciation  of how the food supply  and demand  ratio  
is progressing.  This in turn provides  confidence  and gives the operator  
a better opportunity  to sub-divide  flocks when necessary  as well as an 
improved  ability  to apportion  available  herbage.
Date  of lambing
The effects  on lamb  growth  rate of turning  out ewes to pasture  at three  
different  dates  in Spring,  each at three stocking  rates,  are shown  in Table
1. These results  indicate  that the stocking  rate could be increased  by
Table 1
Effects  of date of Spring  grazing  and of stocking  rate on lamb growth  
rate to 12 weeks
Date to pasture Stocking  rate 
(ewes  + lambs/acre)Lamb  growth  rate 
(Ib/lamb/day)
March  20 3.25 ± 4.3 0.78
4.00 ± 5.3 0.71
4.75 + 6.3 0.68
April 9 4.00 ± 5.3 0.74
4.75 ± 6.3 0.76
5.50 ± 7.3 0.62
April 29 4.75 ± 6.3 0.72
5.50 ± 7.3 0.71
6.25 ± 8.3 0.66
about 18% at each of the later dates without  reducing  lamb daily live- 
weight  gain below about  0.71 lb. There  appears  to be little justification  
for commencing  lambing  earlier than the 10th March or delaying  it 
beyond  the 20th March  where the stocking  rate is at or greater  than 5 
ewes per acre.
If an earlier  lambing  date is chosen  either the stocking  rate must be 
reduced  or extra feed must be brought  into the system  to maintain  in­
dividual  lamb growth rate. Reducing  the stocking  rate can only be
16
effective  in situations  where  the sheep  enterprise  is integrated  with some 
other  enterprise  to avoid  poor utilisation  later on in the season.
Thus the correct  choice of lambing  date is an important  factor in 
attempting to achieve  a suitable  fit between  pasture  food supply  and flock  
food requirement  in the context  of a low cost grassland  based  system.
Lambing  to weaning
During  this period  the aim is to obtain  a mean  daily lamb growth  rate 
of about  0.7 lb. This level of performance  corresponds  to a mean daily  
growth  rate of about  0.6 lb from birth to drafting  or mid-August.  Table  
2 shows  the effects  of five all year stocking  rates on lamb  growth  rate and
Table 2
Effects  of stocking  rate on lamb growth  rate and outputs  of Iamb meat and
wool per acre
Stocking  rate 
(ewes/acre/annum)*Lamb  growth  rate 
(Ib/day)Lamb  meat output  
(Ib/acre)Wool  output  
(Ib/acre)
3 0.61 145 23
4 0.61 181 28
5 0.59 228 36
6 0.57 269 39
8 0.38 — 147
* Mean growth  rate to slaughter  or mid-August.
Proportion  of lambs finished  varied  from 3 to 25%.
the outputs  of lamb meat and wool per acre. The important  point in 
relation  to grazing  management  from lambing  to weaning  is that when  
the stocking  rate approaches  the level required  to achieve  high output  
and efficient  use of herbage  the total area must be allocated  to grazing.
There is little information  to indicate  the correct  speed of rotation,  
pasture  height  and severity  of defoliation  which give best results  during  
this period. The present  state of knowledge  suggests  that height  of herb ­
age has no effect  on lamb growth  rate provided  there is ample  availability.  
It also indicates  that dry matter  intake begins  to fall when the post 
grazing  pasture  dry matter  residues  is less than about 1000 lb per acre 
or when the amount  of herbage  available  is lower than 3 times their  
daily intake. In at least one study  a slower  rotation  which  is associated  
with a longer  rest period  and higher  herbage  gave better results. These  
results  as well as more recent  findings  at Creagh  (which  were not direct  
comparisons)  indicate  that both ewe intake and milk production  are 
higher  when pasture  is high. As pasture  height  and density  affect  the size 
of bite and rate of biting,  sheep are forced to increase  their time spent  
grazing  when pasture  availability  is lower  to maintain  their intake.
There is a need for much more information  on all of these pasture  
characteristics  and associated  sheep responses  under Irish conditions
17
before a definitive  grazing  management  programme  can be advocated.  
The main points  are that after lambing  the aim is to provide  an adequate  
supply  of food to meet the greatly  increased  nutritional  requirements  of 
the ewe and to realise  that lamb  growth  rate during  the first 10 weeks  or 
so of life is closely  related  to the milk yield of the ewe.
A 2-year  experiment  at Creagh  compared  lamb weaning  ages of 8, 12 
and 16 weeks  at a standard  high stocking  rate of 7 ewes + 9 lambs  per 
acre. The results  showed  that during  the period April 12th to August  
16th the daily growth  rate (0.68 lb) of lambs  weaned  at 12 weeks  of age 
was greater  than in those weaned  at 8 (0.60 lb) or 16 (0.62 lb) weeks  of 
age. The earlier  weaning  ages resulted  in a greater  amount  of total her­
bage being available  for winter  feed conservation  (Table  3).
Table 3
Conservation  (fresh  cwt/acre)
Age at weaning June 19 Oct. 5 Total
8 57 107 164
12 23' 129 152
16 20' 85 105
' Amounts  of herbage  available  but not cut.
There is no advantage  in retaining  ewes and lambs  together  beyond 
the stage at which  ewe milk yield is so small as to have no effect  on lamb  
growth  rate. It appears  from this study that after about 12 weeks  the 
ewes are competing  with the lambs for available  feed. It will now be 
shown that the benefits  of weaning  at the correct  age cannot  be fully 
realised  unless  the post weaning  management  is correct.
Post weaning  management  and winter  feed
During  this period  the aims are to obtain  adequate  winter  feed for the 
ewes and to secure  continued  good growth  rate in lambs. Ewes  should  be 
stocked  at 15 to 18 per acre from weaning  to flushing  (i.e. 1st July to the 
20th September).  This means  that ^ of the farm is grazed  by weaned 
ewes. Experience  has shown  that ewes will lose about 7 lb liveweight 
under these conditions.  Whether  this is mainly  due to a change  in gut 
fill or body condition  is not clear. The imfxjrtant  considerations  are that 
this tightening  up of ewes which are not pregnant  or lactating  gives an 
opportunity  to obtain  adequate  winter  feed and to finish  remaining lambs.
It was stated  earlier  that at the higher  stocking  rates the total area must  
be allocated  to grazing  from lambing  to weaning.  After  weaning  half of 
the farm should  be closed  for early September  cut silage. About  11 cwt 
of silage por ewe is required.  Under the intensive  grassland  plan the 
conservation  date must be postponed  to about  early September  and the
18
question  of whether  hay or silage is better does not arise due to the 
obvious  risks associated  with hay at this late date.
Table  4 shows  the results  of a 2-year  experiment  which  compared  post 
weaning  stocking  rates of 12. 18 and 24 lambs  per acre. The results  are 
intended  to give guidelines  as to which stocking  rate would be chosen 
depending  on the amount  of liveweight  gain required  to achieve  the final 
target  liveweight  which  will be referred  to later in the section  dealing  with
Table 4
Effect  of stocking  rate on growth  rate in weaned  lambs
Stocking  rate♦Total  liveweight  gain per lamb  (lb)
(lambs  per acre) 1970 1971
12 19.5 13.1
18 16.8 10.0
24 10.5 6.5
* From  July 15th to August  31st in1970 and from July 5th to August  25th in 1971.
drafting  of lambs. It is recommended  that, in the whole system  context,  
the \veaned  lambs  be allowed  access  to the silage area up to the time of 
drafting  or mid-August.  At 6 ewes per acre and a weaning  percentage  of 
150 the lamb stocking  will be approximately  7 lambs or 5^ lambs  per 
acre depending  on whether  50% or 60% of them have been drafted  by 
weaning  time.
These  relatively  low lamb  stocking  rates  will ensure  that not alone  have 
the lambs  a plentiful  food supply  but also they will have an opportunity  
to exercise  their preferences  for preferred  plant species  or portions  of 
plants  or geographic locations  all of which  tend to contribute  to improved  
intake  and liveweight  gain.
Draftii^  of Iambs ’
Part of planning  a system  is concerned  with setting  target liveweight 
and degree  of finish at which lambs  will be drafted.  It is important  to 
adhere  to these targets  as closely  as possible  as every draft reduces  the 
stocking  rate thereby  giving  a better  opportunity  to finish  the remaining  
lambs. Where  the objective  is to produce  a 40 lb carcass,  for example.  
It should be remembered  that a liveweight  of approximately  85 lb is 
required  up to weaning  whereas  95 lb is required  later on due to a drop  
m killing  out percentage  from approximately  47% to 42%. This aspect  
is so important  that one should  not wait for even a slightly  greater  num ­
ber to be finished  before  drafting  the few which  are ready.
In an intensive  mid-season  fat lamb system  it is recommended  that all 
lambs  remaining  in mid-August  be drafted  out whatever  their liveweight. 
otherwise  they may seriously  affect the amount  of winter  feed obtained!
19
The temptation  to hold on to some ewe lambs  for breeding  must also be 
resisted  as this practice  belongs  to a ewe replacement  system.
Flushing
The post weaning  management  described  showed  that ^ of the farm is 
grazed by weaned  ewes, \ of the farm is fertilised  for silage and that 
lambs  are grazed  on f of the farm. This allows  ^ of the farm to be rested  
from mid-August  (i.e. after the lambs  are drafted)  which  will give a good 
start to flushing  about  3 weeks  before  mating  date. The regrowth  on the 
silage area will then give an adequate  supply of herbage  to continue  
flushing.  The j of the farm grazed  by weaned  ewes from early July to 
late September  is then rested to provide  a good start to grazing  in the 
following  spring.
Winter  management
This is the period  for which  there is the most clear-cup  management  
practice,  i.e. remove  sheep altogether  into wnter quarters  and rest the 
pasture.  The general  recommendations  to achieve  a good spring  pasture  
growth  is to rest the pasture  from not later than the third week of Nov­
ember,  apply P and K an apply 45 lb of N about 6 weeks before  spring  
grazing.
Conclusion
I hope that this paper  has shown  how the more important  sheep and 
grassland  management  practices  should  be integrated  to satisfy  the basic 
objective  of ensuring  an adequate  supply  of nutrients  which  will sustain  
the desired  outputs  per sheep and per acre. Clearly  the selection  of the 
correct  stocking  rate, lambing  date and lamb age at weaning  is important  
to achieve  the target  levels  of production.  These aspects  must be integ ­
rated with suitable  grazing  management,  conservation  and ewe wintering  
practices  in the context  of an efficient  whole system.
Further  research  is required  but at the present  time it is considered  that 
the adoption  of practices  outlined  here could at least double  the output  
from the grassland  area presently  devoted  to sheep  in Ireland.
20
Sheep  Produetion  — Components  
of Success
B. KILKENNY
Meat and Livestock  Commission,  United  Kinftdom.
The Meat and Livestock  Commission  in Britain  has been operating  a 
commercial  flock recording  scheme  since 1969. This paper  draws  on the 
results  from these recorded  flocks and concentrates  in particular  on the 
variation  in performance  levels —both physical  and financial—achieved,  
and attempts  to explain  some of the variation  in terms of management  
practices.
But firstly  let us review  the profitability  of sheep  production  in Britain  
over recent  years.
Gross  margins  unadjusted  for inflation  showed  a dramatic  increase  in 
the 1970 ’s, nearly  doubling  between  1970 and 1975, and again between  
1975 and 1978. This increase  was due almost  entirely  to lamb price 
increases  keeping  well ahead  of cost increases.  Physical  performance  per 
ewe hardly  changed,  but there was some increase  in stocking  rates. How ­
ever, when the gross margins  are adjusted  for inflation  the real value of 
the increased  gross  margin  was very small,  the averages  for 1976-78  being  
about the same as those between  1971 and 1973. The average  gross 
margins  in 1979 are likely to be slightly  lower than 1978 in real terms,  
and to be slightly  higher  again in 1980, but generally  not very digerent  to 
the last three-year  average.
One reason  for the increase  in lamb prices  not being fully reflected  in 
increased  margins  is the increase  in flock replacement  costs which has 
occurred  over the period. As lamb prices  have increased  so have the cost 
of replacements,  a’most in parallel.
Another  factor has been the increase  in fixed costs. It is always  
problematical  to allocate  fixed costs on an enterprise  basis but it is 
important  to do so if the real costs of production  are to be determined.  
In a sample  of MLC recorded  lowland  flocks  for 1977 and 1979, fixed  
costs accounted  for 60 per cent of total costs; they increased  by 24 per 
cent between  1977 and 1979.
Clearly  then there has been no ‘bonanza ’ period for British sheep 
producers  over recent  years,  the superficial  large increases  in lamb  prices  
has largely  been a reflection  of inflation  or has been absorbed  by higher  
costs. Nevertheless  sheep have probably  fared better than any other  
livestock  enterprise  over this time period,  and margins  have undoubtedly  
been higher  in real terms  in the 70’s than they were in the 60’s.
One of the clearest  messages  to emerge  from recording  is that good 
performance  always  pays best whatever  the general  cost/price  situation.  
Table 1 shows  the relationships  between  performance  and gross margins
21
Table 1
Relationship  between  performance  and gross margins
Extra  gross margin for extra  ;
0.1 lambs 0.1 ewes/hectare
reared/ewe stocking  rate
£/ewe £/hectare
1978 -1-2.17 + 2.01
1977 + 1.90 + 1.79
1976 + 2.15 + 5.14
1974 + 1.26 + 2.03
1972 + 1.02 + 2.15
(Average  lowland  and upland  flocks)
over a number  of years. The benefits  of improved  performance  have 
always  been substantial.  The general  cost/price  situation  within  which 
flockmasters  have to operate  their flocks  cannot  be changed  in the short ­
term —if it is not satisfactory  in the long-term  producers  will go out of 
sheep  production.  The best buffer  against  the general  cost/price  situation  
is good performance.  Improvement  of physical  performance  is important  
in both lowland  and hill flocks;  the difference  lies in the level of perform ­
ance at which improvement  is aimed.
Improving  performance
So far reference  has only been made  to average  results,  but in practice  
there is tremendous  variation  between  flocks  in both physical  and financial 
performance  (Table  2).
Table 2
Recorded  lowland  flock performance  levels  (5-year  average)
Range*
From  To All flocks
Number  of lambs  born per ewe lambed  
Number  of barren  ewes as % ewes to ram 
Number  of ewe deaths  as % ewes to ram 
Number  of lambs dead or died at birth  
as % of all births
Number  of lambs died subsequent  to birth  
as % of lambs survived  birth  
(♦ 95 % of range)1.0 1.91 1.41
0 20.0 8.4
0 17.2 4.2
1.0 34.5 8.0
1.0 14.1 5.5
22
Table 3 shows the difference  between  the average  and the top third  
flocks  (based  on gross  margin  per hectare).  The latter  provide  a basis  for 
setting  tough but realistic  targets  for lamb production.  The top third  
flocks sell more lambs at higher  than average  prices,  have lower costs 
despite  this higher  output  and achieve  better  ewe performance  with above  
average  stocking  rates.
Table 3
Difference  in performance  between  top third flocks  and average  (%) 1978
Lowland Upland  flocks
Lamb sales + 15.8 + 13.5
Output + 19.0 + 15.1
Concentrate  costs - 1.3 + 4.7
Lambs  born alive per 100 ewes to ram + 9.9 + 10.2
Lambs  reared  per 100 ewes to ram + 12.9 + 12.4
Overall  stocking  rate (ewes per hectare) + 19.8 + 20.9
The results  of MLC  fixed cost surveys  of sheep  production  shows  that 
there is a very close relationship  between  gross and net margins,  so that 
good physical  performance  does relate  to higher  profitability  too (Fig. 1).
CROSS MARGIN 
I/HA
60 75 90 ^ 105 120
ME'I' MARGIN C/1IA
Fig. 1—Relationship  between  gross margins  and net profitability.
23
The components  of success  in the breeding  flocks  are then :
* More lambs  reared
* Lower  costs
* Higher  stocking  rates
* Higher  lamb values
The contribution  of these to higher  gross margins  is shown  in Table  4.
Table 4
Components  of top third gross margins ______________
% contribution  to top third superiority  in
Gross  margin  per ewe Gross  margin  per hectare
Lowland  flocks
Lambs  reared 71
Lamb value 21
Flock replacement  cost 3
Feed and forage  costs 5
Stocking  rate
100
Upland  flocks
Lambs  reared 71
Lamb value 26
Flock replacement  costs 5
Feed and forage  costs -2
Stocking  rate
10033
10
2
2
53
100
41 
15
3
-1
42
100
The two major  physical  factors  affecting  gross  margins  are the number  
of lambs  reared  and the stocking  rate. The effect  of different combinations  
of stocking  rate and the number  of lambs  reared  per ewe are shown  in 
Table 5. Four categories  of flock were considered  ;
Above  average  stocking  rate — above  average  lambs  reared
— below  average  lambs  reared
Below  average  stocking  rate — above  average  lambs  reared
— below  average  lambs  reared
The highest  gross margin  per ewe occurred  in the high lambing  per­
formance.  low stocking  rate group  of flocks. Not surprisingly,  the lowest 
was for the low lambing  performance,  low stocking  rate group. 1 he 
highest  average  gross margin  per hectare  was the high stocking  rate, high 
lambing  performance  group.  The high lambing  performanre,  low stocking 
rate group gave the next highest  gross margin  above the low lambing  
performance,  high stocking  rate group. The differences  ’".S^ss  mar^ns  
per hectare  between  the four groups  were similarly  variable  for both
24
Table 5
The effect  of the number  of lambs  reared  and stocking  rate on gross  margins  
(Ave. of 1977 and 1978)
No. lambs  reared  per ewe 
High  Low
No. lambs reared per ewe 1.49 1.26
Overall  stocking  rate (ewes/hectare) I2.I 12.5 STOCKING
Concentrates  (kg/ewe) 60 55 RATE
Lamb price (£/lamb) 23.6 24.1 HIGH
Lamb sales (£/ewe) 35.2 30.4 A
Flock replacement  cost (£/ewe) 5.4 4.6 —
Total feed and forage  costs (£/ewe) 10.3 9.6 12.3
Gross margin  per ewe (£) 20.4 17.9 —
Gross  margin  per hectare  (£) 245.2 222.9
No. of lambs reared  per ewe 1.57 1.31
Overall  stocking  rate (ewes/hectare) 9.2 8.7
Concentrates  (kg/ewe) 51 50 LOW
Lamb price (£/lamb) 24.6 24.9 A
Lamb sales (£/ewe) 38.6 32.6 —
Flock replacement  cost (£/ewe) 5.3 4.2 8.9
Total feed and forage  costs (£/ewe) 9.0 8.7 —
Gross  margin  per ewe (£) 25.5 21.0
Gross  margin  per hectare  (£) 237.3 183.3
gross margin  per ewe and per hectare. Lamb  prices were lower in the 
high stocking  rate group.
The components  of success  are the same whatever  the type of flock — 
up'and,  lowland,  grass finishing,  forage  finishing,  store lambs  or hoggets.  
Changing  the system  of production  might be the right management  de­
cision in individual  farm situations  to better suit the whole farm plan.  
But, having  changed  the system,  the need to achieve  good performance  
will still be as strong  as ever; the change  might  however  allow this to be 
more readily  achieved.  Average  results  for contrasting  production  systems 
are very similar  (Table  6).
Table 6
Gross  margins  for different  sheep  systems —5-year  average  1974-78  (adjusted
for inflation)
Early lambing  
flocksGrass lamb  
flocksForage  lamb  
flocksHogget
production
Gross margin
per ewe (£) 17.7 19.6 20.5 21.1
Gross margin
per hectare  (£) 221.3 205.8 203.0 200.5
25
Lambs  reared
The number  of lambs  eventually  reared  is the combination  of a number  
of factors,  all of which have a major  effect on the rearing  percentage.  
These are the number  of empty ewes, number  of ewes dying before 
lambing,  number  of lambs born, the number  of lambs bom dead or 
dying at or around  birth, and finally  the number  of live lambs which 
subsequently  die.
Results  from MLC flocks show that although  the number  of lambs  
born per ewe lambed  is the biggest  single source of variation  in the 
number  of lambs reared,  each of the separate  wastage  factors  has a 
significant  effect. Individual  flocks may have a problem  with a single  
factor  but it is more often  the case that a low level of performance  in one 
factor  is associated  with an equally  poor performance  in several  others.  
Whilst  differences  between  breeds  and crosses  account  for some of the 
variation  between  flocks  in these vital performance  factors,  differences  in 
the management  and feeding  of the ewes are more important  and it is to 
these that individual  producers  must direct  their main attention.
Table 7
Commercial  ewe performance  in average  and top third flocks  (6-year  average)
Per 100ewes to ram
Some major Management* Lambed Total Reared Live lambs
crosses level lambs born per
born ewe lambed
Dorset  Horn Average 92 147 132 1.51
crosses top third 95 168 140 1.58
Greyface Average 93 174 153 1.75
top third 96 198 168 1.86
Mash  am Average 92 172 152 1.77
top third 95 196 167 1.87
Mule Average 93 176 154 1.76
top third 96 201 168 1.89
Scotch Average 92 171 150 1.73
Halfbred top third 95 195 165 1.88
Suffolk  X Average 93 173 152 1.72
Masham top third 96 197 162 1.82
Suffolk  X Average 93 169 151 1.71
Mule top third 96 193 161 1.83
Suffolk  X Average 91 163 143 1.66
Scotch  Halfbred  top third 94 186 155 1.78
(* Top third —-performance  in flocks  in the top third on grass margins  per hectare).
Table 7 summarises  the performance  of several  types  of British  cross ­
bred ewes in commercial  flocks and highlights  the disparities  in ewe
26
performance  between  the average  flocks  and those achieving  the top third  
gross margins  per hectare. The range in average  performance  between  
different  ewe types of similar  bodyweight  is smaller  than the variation  in 
performance  of individual  breed types in flocks  of different  management  
levels. There are naturally  exceptions  to this generalisation.  The Finish  
Landrace  produces  many  more lambs  than would  be deduced  for its size. 
The impact  of the Finish  Landrace  in crossing  in Britain  has been very 
marginal— it contributes  an insignificant  quantity  of genes into the final 
meat lamb. Thus, for most situations  in Britain  the generalisation  that, 
taking  account  of body size, lamb rearing  percentage  differences  between  
crosses  are relatively  small,  holds  good. Producers  should  concern  them ­
selves  with choosing  a type of ewe to suit individual  farm and marketing  
requirements  rather  than stock them according  to body size. Differences 
in output  per hectare  at the same level of management  will generally  be 
small.
Inadequate  or inappropriate  feeding  is often a major contributor  to 
losses  at each stage,  but health/disease  aspects  are also important.  What ­
ever the reason  for losses,  it is important  to keep some simple  records  of 
numbers  so that the reasons  for a low lamb rearing  percentage  can be 
ascertained.
Body  condition  scoring
A considerable  research  effort over the last 10 years has provided  a 
much clearer  insight  into the feed requirements  of the ewe at different  
times of the year. The problem  in practice  is the application  of this 
information  in the flock situation  where  there are ewes of varying  body  
size, with different  requirements  and with a spread  of lambing  dates.  The 
methodical  evaluation  of the body condition  of ewes using a scoring 
system  is a useful  indicator  of the nutritional  status  of a flock and allows  
more precise  feeding  practices  to be applied.
It has been clearly  demonstrated  by MLC and others  that there is a 
close relationship  between  body condition  and performance —lambing  
percentages,  and spread  of lambing  (Table  8). The scoring  system  is based
Table 8
Relation.ship  between  flock condition  score and flock performance
Percentage  of ewes in flock at different  
condition  scores
Breed  or
cross
Scotch1 li 2 21 3 4 41Flock No. of 
average lambs Spread  
body per 100 of 
-condition  ewes to lambing  
score ram (days)
Flalfbred 1* 000 12.1 25.5 50.4 6.0 6.0 0 3.3 174 44
flocks 2** 0.54.0 33.5 30.5 17.5 12.0 2.000 2.2 128 69
Masham 1* 00.5 3.6 6.534.7 26.2 20.0 7.6 1.0 3.4 169 39
flocks 2** 0.5 3.5 18.7 29.9 30.4 15.1 1.900 2.1 126 67
* Flock 1—good condition  at mating  
** Flock 2—poor condition  at mating
27
on a standardised  handling  technique  and the allocation  of a score in the 
range from 1 (very thin) to 5 (very fat). Target  scores  have been estab ­
lished for ewes at different  stages  of production  and in different  environ ­
mental  situations.  Target  scores for lowland  flocks  at different  times in 
the production  year are shown  in Table 9. Most flocks  (Table  8) contain
Table 9
Target  body condition  scores  for lowland  ewes
6 weeks  pre-mating 2i
Mating 3-31
Mid-pregnancy 21
Lambing 2-21
Weaning 2
a significant  group  of ewes which do not achieve  the appropriate  target  
scores  and which benefit  from specific  management.  If ewes are in the 
right body condition  and the results  are still low then a more detailed  
investigation  as to the reasons  will be necessary.  Again, some basic 
physical  records  will help with this type of evaluation.
In many  flock situations  better  lamb  survival  is a more urgent  problem  
than the increase  of litter size. The results  of a lamb loss investigation  in 
a sample  of MLC lowland  flocks are shown  in Table 10. Clearly  most
Table 10
Lamb deaths  in lowland  flocks
Proportion  of lambs  dying at different  ages (%) :
0-7 days 8-30 days 30-1- days 1
64 12 3
Causes  oflamb deaths (%) ; M ismothering/starvation 41
Physical  damage 3
E Coli scour/septicaemia 15
Pneumonia 2
Abcess/peritonitis/navel  ill 4
Miscellaneous 16
No cause found 2021
lamb losses occur within the first seven days of life and starvation  and 
rnismothering  are the biggest  single cause of loss. This again reflects  
directly  on management,  proper  lambing  facilities,  skilled  supervision  and 
the strategic  tube feeding  of colostrum  all make major  contributions  to 
lamb survival.  Improved  control  of microbic  and parasitic  disease  has 
greatly  reduced  wastage  but improvements  in the timing  of prophylactic
28
and therapeutic  programmes  could reduce  losses  further. Medicines  and 
veterinary  costs comprise  on average  almost  10 per cent of the variable  
costs per ewe, but there are flocks  in which  these costs are considerably  
higher  without  any complementary  increase  in the gross  margins  per ewe.
Sale value  of Iambs
The value of the slaughtered  lamb and consequently  the gross output  
per ewe is affected  by the date of sale, due to seasonal  variation  in prices. 
The ratio between  feed and forage  costs and lamb sales differs  between 
systems  of production  and is most sensitive  in the early lamb production  
systems  (2.7 ; 1) with their higher  feed and forage  costs (average  3.8 : 1 
in hogget  systems,  see Table 13). Quick  growth  to slaughter  weight  is an 
important  factor  in determining  the returns  from the production  of early  
out-of-season  lambs  and lambs  off grass.  Growth  rate is of less importance  
in late lamb and hogget  production  off forage  crops where  the final car­
case weight obtained  is relatively  more important.  Growth  rate is in­
fluenced  by breed and also by stocking  rate. It is important  that a 
decision  on the optimum  system  of production  is made on an individual  
farm basis. Then,  breeds  and stocking  rates can be adapted  to best meet 
the objectives.
Market  requirements  for lamb differ markedly,  but the two major  
variables  are weight  and fatness.  Differential  prices  between  top third  and 
average  producers  have increased  markedly  over recent  years and now 
account  for about 12 per cent of the superiority  in gross margin  per 
hectare  or the top third (Table  4). Regional  and time of sale differences 
between  the average  and top third units do not account  for all of this 
large difference  which reflects  real differences  in marketing  skills of the 
top third producers.
Carcase  weights  for different  types of lambs  can be predicted  within  a 
reasonable  degree  of accuracy  from their parent  bodyweight  (Table 11).
Table 11
Predicting  lamb carcase  weight  (kg)
Breed weight  of ram (Suffolk)
Breed weight  of ewe (Clun Forest)91
73
Slaughter  weight  of lamb  
Carcase  weight164 -F
41
20.5
Liveweight  can also give a guide to the average  fatness  of batches  of 
lambs within a breed type. Lambs  slaughtered  at the average  for the 
parent  breeds  will typically  fall into fat class 3 on the MLC  scale. Lambs  
slaughtered  about 10 per cent above or below the average  slaughter  
weight  of a particular  breed or cross will classify  as 4 or 2 for fatness.
29
These can only be guides;  they can be refined  further  by, for example,  
slaughtering  wether  lambs  5 per cent above and ewe lambs 10 per cent 
below  the average  liveweight  derived  from the adult body weights  of the 
parents  in order  to achieve  the same level of fatness.
The only precise  way of assessing  the market  requirement  and sending 
back the information  to the producer  is some form of carcase  classifica­
tion system. Having  established  a system  it must then be transformed  
into a method  that farmers  can use on the farm to predict  from the live 
animal  the likely  carcase  classification  of the dead lamb. Such a system  
depiends  on the handling  and methodical  scoring  of lambs  for subcutan ­
eous fatness.
Practice  in handling  is essential  to assess  accurately  the fatness  level of 
individual  lambs  before  slaughter  and, until experience  is acquired,  the 
carcases  should  be examined  after weighing  and classification.  If a visit 
to the abattoir  is not possible,  then carcase  classification  results  will show  
the level of accuracy  attained  in the selection  of lambs.
Some 14 per cent (1 in 7) of British  lamb carcases  fall into fat classes 
4 & 5. This means  that such lambs  are overfat  in terms  of most whole ­
salers ’ requirements.  At least nine per cent of the weight  of fat class 4 
carcases  and 13 per cent of the weight  of fat class 5 carcases  are likely 
to be trimmed  before retail sale. Additionally,  not all of the excessive  
fat can be assessed  from a fat trim percentage  alone; the extent  of un- 
trimmable  fat in joints is just as important  because  of its influence  on 
consumer  satisfaction.  It is apparent  from the rapid  decline  in sheepmeat  
consumption  in Britain  over the last decade  (from 11 kg per head/year  
in the early 1960 ’s to 7 kg/head/year  currently)  that the quality  of the 
product,  compared  with other meats,  is unable  to satisfy  demand.  Pro­
ducers should not consider  that the high lamb prices created  by the 
Continental  market  reflect  general  consumer  satisfaction  in their product.  
A major  challenge  facing the British  sheep industry  as a whole is the 
reduction  of fatness  in lambs. Lamb  will find it increasingly  difficult  to 
compete  with other  meats  if this problem  is not overcome.
Where  wholesalers  are paying  different  prices for lambs of different 
fatness,  it is important  for the flock owner  to assess  carefully  the advan ­
tage of increasing  weight  against  the penalty  which may be incurred  
through  the carcase  being  too fat.
Costs
Reference  has already  been made  to the fact that in the MLC surveys, 
fixed costs account  for 60 per cent of total costs. Labour  is the highest 
single item of costs accounting  for nearly  40 per cent of fixed costs. A 
high proportion  of the labour  figure  in this specific  survey  in both lowland  
and upland  flocks  was accounted  for by family  labour  costs. Fixed  costs  
by their very nature  are more a reflection  of the whole  farming  situation  
rather  than specific  to a single enterprise,  but clearly  the level of labour  
costs are uneconomically  high in some situations.
30
Table 12
Production  variable  costs —% of total
Lowland
Average Top thirdUpland
Average Top third
Flock replacements 33 30 29 25
Concentrates 28 30 26 29
Forage  costs 28 28 31 32
Vet and medicine 8 8 9 9
Others 4 4 5 6
100 100 100 100
Table 12 shows the proportion  of variable  costs accounted  for by 
different  items in both lowland  and upland  farms. The contribution  to 
total variable  costs is similar  in lowland  and upland flocks, and for 
average  and top third flocks  within  each category.  Between  them replace ­
ments, concentrate  and forage costs account  for about 85 per cent of 
total variable  costs.
Flock  replacement  costs
On the variable  cost side there are opportunities  for useful reductions  
in most sheep  flocks  and the first to be considered  is the flock replacement  
cost. Flock replacement  costs account  for about a third of the direct  
costs of production.  The factors  which control  the cost of maintaining  
the breeding  stock are the number  of replacements  required  annually  and 
their purchase  price in relation  to the price received  for culled  breeding  
stock. The number  of replacements  required  is determined  by the normal  
length of breeding  life of ewes and their mortality  rate. In practice,  
replacement  and selling  policies  are flexible,  varying  with circumstances  
particularly  with market  prices. The length  of breeding  life in the flock  
can be increased  by breeding  from ewe lambs  and by reducing  the rate 
of premature  culling. The true extent of premature  culling may be 
partially  masked  by economic  opportunism  in disposing  of cast ewes in 
a favourable  market.  Careful  attention  to the health and feeding  of the 
flock could allow a high proportion  of the ewes in many  flocks  to pro­
duce an extra lamb crop, providing  the over-age  ewes do not suffer an 
abnormally  high death rate or cause the value of the cull ewes to drop  
too markedly.  The practice  of mating  ewe lambs  reduces  flock  costs since  
the average  breeding  life is normally  increased  and it also increases  the 
number  of lambs  available  for sale. A more planned  approach  to replace ­
ment policies  could undoubtedly  bring about important  economies  in 
many  flocks.
Feed and forage  costs
Feed and forage costs account  for over half of the direct costs of 
production.  There is a wide range in feed and forage costs between
31
recorded  flocks in similar  systems  of sheep production.  Results  from 
recorded  flocks  show that there is no direct  correlation  between  the value 
of feed inputs  and the gross  output. The more efficient  ffocks  have lower 
feed costs  than average,  largely  because  less concentrates  are used. In the 
top third ffocks the feeding  of concentrates  is more precisely  related  to 
the ffocks ’ requirements  by ensuring  compact  lambing  groups  for feeding 
^ Table 13. As the fertility  .level of the flock rises it becomes  increasingly  
important  to adjust the feeding  levels to the requirement  of the ewe at 
key stages of production.  This is an area where practical  methods  of 
applying  technical  knowledge  on the nutritional  requirement  of the ewe 
can be improved  and will yield much benefit.
Table 13
Feed inputs  and production  for different  sheep  systems
Lowland —Spring  lambing  flocksEarly
lambing
flocksUpland
flocks
Grass lambs Forage  Iambs  
Ave. Topi Ave. Topi Ave. Top iAve. Topi
Spread  of lambing  (days) 63 42 64 41 51 36 59 40
Concentrates/ewe  (kg) 52 51 60 56 94 96 33 35
Grass requirements/  
head (ha) 0.09 0.08 0.10 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.12 0.10
Lambs  reared/ewe 1.40 1.60 1.38 1.53 1.35 1.50 1.25 1.45
Return  of lamb sales to 
feed and forage costs 3.8;1 4.5:1 3.2:1 3.9:1 2.7:1 3.1:1 4.7:1 5.3:1
Table 13 shows  how sensitive  the early lambing  systems  are to changes  
in feed and lamb prices. The average  ratio of lamb sales to feed and 
forage  costs over the last five years has been only 2.7 : 1, this compares  
with about  3.5 : 1 in other  lowland  systems  and 4.7 : 1 in upland  systems.  
Even^  in the top third early lambing  flocks  the ratio has only averaged
Stocking  rate
Despite  the very close relationship  between  stocking  rate and gross  
margin  referred  to earlier  the overall  usage of fertiliser  nitrogen  is low in 
sheep production  in relation  to the economic  response  that can be ex­
pected,  particularly  in the case of permanent  pasture.  Less than 10 per 
cent of recorded  flocks  on permanent  pasture  receive  more than 150 kg N 
per hectare,  for flocks  on leys less than 15 per cent fall into this category  
(Table 14).
32
Table 14
Distribution  of fertiliser  nitrogen  usage  in recorded  lowland  flocks
Fertiliser  N usage (kg/ha)Per cent of recorded  flocks 
Permanent  pasture  Leys
0 20 5
1 - 50 24 13
50- 100 32 54
100-150 15 16
150-200 7 7
200 plus 2 5
Average  N usage per ha (kg) 62 90
The distribution  of gross margins  per hectare  in lowland  flocks by 
stocking  rate and fertiliser  N levels is shown  in Table 15. Between  the 
top third and the average  there is about a 30 per cent difference  in fer­
tiliser  N usage and a 20 per cent difference  in stocking  rate. Between  the 
average  and the bottom  third a 30 per cent difference  in fertiliser  N usage 
is associated  with a 30 per cent difference  in stocking  rate.
Table 15
Distribution  of gross margins  per hectare  by overall  stocking  rate—lowland  flocks  
(average  of 1977 and 1978)
Stocking  rate ewes/ha Below  6 6-8 8-10 10-12 12-14 14-16 Over 16
Gross  margin/ha  (£) 154.2 170.2 205.2  247.6 291.2 321.9 338.4
Distribution  of gross margins  per hectare  by fertiliser
N usage per grass hectare
Fertiliser  N kg/ha Below  30 30-60  60-90 90-120 120-150 150-1-
Gross  margin  per ha (£) 210.5 218.5 234.6 236.5 277.4 313.38
Results  from recorded  flocks also show that there is a close average  
relationship  between  fertiliser  N usage and utilised  output  (expressed  as 
LU(jD, livestock  unit grazing  days*). This is shown in Fig. 2. This 
relationship  is best explained  by a curve which flattens  off appreciably  
above  200 kg N/hectare,  well below  the jxjint at which  grass production  
in relation  to fertiliser  N usage ceases  to be linear. This suggests  that 
sheep producers  find it difficult  to make the most efficient  utilisation  of 
grass growth  at high fertiliser  N levels. Associated  with this average
• 1 LUGD  = Amount  of grass consumed  in 24 hours by a 500 kg cow yielding  
3640 litres.
33
FIGURE  2. RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  FERTILISER  N LEVELS  S LVGD ’a/HECTARE
relationship  there is considerable  variation  in stocking  rate at each level 
of fertiliser  N usage. Differences  between  farms due to factors  such as 
weather,  location  and soil do not account  for a substantial  proportion  of 
the variation  which  reflects  wide differences  in the efficiency  of utilisation  
of the grass produced.
Guide-line  stocking  rates have been produced  by MLC. These are 
based on estimates  of grass production  for different  quality  sites (based 
on the National  Grassland  Manuring  Trial, GM20),  and the nutritional  
allowances  for ewes of different  body size and prolificacy.  Examples  of 
these guide-line  stocking  rates are shown  in Table 16. They have been 
expressed  on the basis of weight  of ewes and lambs because  of the wide  
range of body size and fertility  that exists between  different  breeds  and 
crosses  of ewes. In commercial  practice  there is only a limited  relation ­
ship between  size of ewe and stocking  rates; the theoretical  advantages  
of small ewes in relation  to lower maintenance  requirements  are by no 
means  fully taken into account.  Total ewe and lamb weights  per hectare  
can be converted  into stocking  rates for different  types of ewe according  
to the breed weights,  fertility  and predicted  lamb slaughter  weights.  These 
guide-lines  form a reliable  basis for planning.  They will require  modi ­
fication  in individual  farm situations  but unless  grass production  and flock  
requirements  are approximately  in balance  any further  refinement  of 
grassland  management  is of limited  value.
A closer  look at the relationship  between  gross margin  per hectare  and 
stocking  rate reveals  a distinct  fall in gross margin  per ewe despite  the
34
Table 16
Example  guides  to stocking  rates at different  levels  of fertiliser  N and different
quality  sites
Kg N/ha Poor Average Good
0-75 Ewe  weight/ha  (kg) 650 750 850
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 500 600 700
Total 1150 1350 1550
75-150  Ewe  weight/ha  (kg) 750 900 1050
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 650 750 850
Total 1400 1650 1900
150-225  Ewe weight/ha  (kg) 900 1050 1200
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 750 850 1000
Total 1650 1900 2200
225-300  Ewe weight/ha  (kg) N/A 1200 1350
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 950 1100
Total 2150 2450
higher  gross  margin  per hectare.  This is almost  entirely  due to a reduction
in the number  of lambs reared  per ewe and reduced  value of the lambs
reared —lower  weights  and fewer  finished  off grass (Table  17). If the level
Table 17
Analysis  of recorded  flock results  by overall  stocking  rate
Stocking  rate (ewes/ha)  6-8 8-10 10-12 12-14 14-16 Over 16
Gross  margin  per ha (£) 170.2  205.2  247.6 291.2 321.9 338.4
Gross margin  per ewe (£) 23.9 22.8 22.2 21.6 20.7 19.7
Lamb sales per ewe (£- 36.3 34.9 33.8 33.1 31.8 30.2
Lamb value (£) 25.2 24.4 23.8 23.6 22.7 21.7
Lambs  reared  per ewe 1.44 1.43 1.42 1.40 1.40 1.39
Costs per ewe 15.5 15.8 14.7 14.7 14.2 13.8
(inc. replacement  cost)
of ewe performance  (number  and value of lambs reared)  achieved  at 
moderate  stocking  rates (6-8 ewes per hectare)  were achieved  by the 
intensively  stocked  flocks  (16-17  ewes per hectare)  then this would  have 
a major  effect on the gross  margins  per hectare.  Alternatively,  the highest
35
gross margins  per hectare  could be achieved  with fewer  ewes per hectare  
if lamb performaice  was maintained —over the last three years 14 ewes  
per hectare  would have given the same gross margin  per hectare  as 17 
ewes per hectare  if lamb performance  was equivalent  to that in the lower  
stocking  rate flocks. This is of increasing  importance  as the value of 
breeding  stock and consequent  working  capital  requirements  continue  to 
increase.  The lower stocking  rate situation  in the example  just given 
would  produce  the same gross  margin  with an 18 per cent lower  require ­
ment for working  capital  per hectare.  The gross margin  expressed  as a 
percentage  of the working  capital  would  have been 45 instead  of 37. The 
main reasons  for the lower  individual  lamb performance  levels  are herb ­
age shortage  during  the second half of the grazing  season with com­
petition  from ewes and lambs and parasitism.  Management  practices  
required  to overcome  this involve  the integration  of grazing  with conser ­
vation areas, choice of lambing  date, early maturing  ram breed,  mid­
season  forage crops, use of a lower sheep stocking  rate by bringing-in  
cattle, preferential  grazing  for ewes with multiples,  choice of weaning  
date and judicious  use of supplementary  feed. The appropriate  package  
of management  practices  needs  to be carefully  tailored  to the individual  
farm situation.
Parasitic  worms  are a major  problem  in many situations,  the sensible  
use of anthelmintics  can reduce  worm  infection  but the most  effective  way 
of reducing  worms  in lambs  is to graze ewes and lambs  on clean  land ie, 
pastures  which have been free from lambs or ewe hoggs during the 
previous  12 months.  The problem  is how to find clean  grazing  when  and 
where it is required.  MLC records  show that many producers  spend a 
considerable  amount  of money  on worm drugs but often they are used 
inappropriately  and are not built into a grazing  strategy.  To operate  a 
clean grazing  system  it is essential  to plan ahead  to ensure  that sheep  do 
not graze  the same land between  breeding  and weaning  two years running.  
The grazing  history  of the pasture  is essential  information  for the planning  
of a cattle programme.  The clean  grazing  approach  in its entirety  cannot  
be applied  on farms  where  cattle  are not also kept other  than in the case 
of one-year  leys.
36
There ’s ,
great  grou/th
inanAIBsavtm  acmtu
Like  fertile  land,  an AIB 
Savings  Account  yields  
rich dividends.
In fact  you can earn  a good  
return  on your  deposits  
which  gives  you that  extra  
spending  power  when  you 
need  it
An AIB  Savings  Account  
Think  of it simply  as good  
husbandry.
And  start  saving  with  
Allied  Irish  Banks.
Allied  Irish  Banks
Banking  for  a betterfuture
37
NO OTHER  PAPER  
gives the Farmer  so much  
as THE
farmers
journal
Week after week over 100,000  farmers  read through  the pages 
of the Journal.  They find it full of up-to-the-minute  
facts,  features,  prices  and market  trends. It employs  the 
finest feature  writers,  leading  farming  experts,  skilled 
vets and legal and income  tax brains  to give Irish farmers  
a first-class  Newspaper.
Nowadays,  no wise farmer  would  be without  it . . . that’s why 
more and more you’ll hear the Journal  quoted  in farming  
circles. If you are not a reader  you ’re missing  a lot.
ONLY  2Sp EVERY  THURSDAY
38
Sheep  and Cattle  on Wexford  Farms
W. HARTLEY
A.C.O.T.,  Enniscarthy,  Co. Wexford.
Whilst  the emphasis  in this paper  is on sheep  production  it is appropriate  
that cattle should also be included  because  there are no farms in Co. 
Wexford  with sheep  only, and 97% of farms  have cattle  as an enterprise.  
Of the farms that have a sheep enterprise,  all have tillage crops and 
practically  all have a cattle enterprise.  It is against  this background  that 
we examine  the sheep  industry  in the county,  which  has much  in common  
with other lowland  sheep  production  areas in the south east.
Sheep  production  is an enterprise  on approximately  35% of the 5,500  
farms in the county. The sheep industry  in Co. Wexford  competes  with 
alternative  enterprises  in a thriving  agricultural  industry.  The soil has a 
wide use range and hence farmers  have options  in choosing  profitable  
enterprises.
About  30% of the total area of the county  is devoted  to tillage. In 
those areas which carry the greatest  number  of ewes about 45% of the 
land is tilled.  Sheep  enterprises  have competed  favourably  for profitability  
with other enterprises.  About  60% of the 3,100 farmers  in the Farm  
Modernisation  Scheme  are categorised  as Development  and Commercial.
In Co. Wexford,  tillage has been complementary  to sheep enterprises  
such as early lamb production,  mid-season  lamb production  and particu ­
larly the finishing  of store lambs over the winter  which was the most  
eommon  sheep enterprise  until recently.  Thus, there is a tradition  of 
sheep farming,  combined  with tillage and cattle, on dry tillage soils of 
the county.
Ewe numbers  and breeds
The number  of breeding  ewes in the county  did not fluctuate  markedly  
in the 1970 ’s, when lowland  ewe numbers  in the country  as a whole 
decreased  very significantly.  The fact that ewe numbers  were maintained  
in the county  was due to :
(a) A tradition  of sheep  farming.
(b) The enterprise  dovetailed  neatly  with the farming  pattern.
(c) Sheep  production  competed  financially  with other enterprises  on the 
farm.
Of the 107,000  ewes in the county  in 1977, about 70% were Suffolk  
Crosses  and the remaining  30% were mainly.  Cheviot  types. The Suffolk  
is the predominant  sire breed and some Dorset  Horn rams are used for 
early fat lamb production.  More recently  the Texel has been introduced  
as a sire breed.
Production  systems
The Suffolk  cross  ewe is commonly  used for the production  system  best 
suited to Wexford  farmers,  namely,  mid-season  fat lamb production.
39
Many  flock owners  are now concentrating  on producing  more mid-season  
fat lambs,  with some early  lambs  mainly  on the smaller  holdings.  This is 
a change  which has occurred  in the past two years from the traditional  
finishing  of store lambs  on turnips.
A mid-season  fat lamb production  system fits in very well with the 
grass growth  pattern  of the county  and with seasonal  labour  demands.  
With young  leys and the geographical  position  of the county,  grass  growth  
is reasonably  early but the maintenance  of a good sward of grass in 
July-August  on the dry type of soil in the county  can be difficult.  A 
production  system  of weaning  in mid-February  to March  and selling  fat 
lambs  in June-July  certainly  has much to offer in the county.
Physical  factors  and returns
The average  flock size in Co. Wexford  is 65 ewes per farm. The 
stocking  rate for the country  is the equivalent  of 3 ewes per acre with the 
better  farmers  carrying  the equivalent  of 4 ewes per acre. It is estimated  
that only to ^ of the area under  grassland  on the average  sheep  farm in 
the county  is devoted  to sheep. Cattle utilise the greater  portion  of the 
grassland  on the dry stock farms.
In early 1978, when the bilateral  agreement  with France  came into 
operation,  the county  Advisory  Service  examined  the economic  prospects  
for sheep in the county. Farm accounts  from 30 selected  farms were 
studied  before  the new agreement  was reached.  Selection  of farms  was 
on the basis of good performance  in tillage,  cattle  and sheep  output. The 
results  on income  are summarised  in Table 1.
Table 1
Gross margin  from farm enterprises  on 30 selected  farms in Co. Wexford  in 1977.
Gross margin  
per acreSheep
£100Cattle
£78Malting  Barley  
£134
Some effieiency  factors  in flock performance  on these 30 farms are 
shown  in Table 2.
Table 2
Flock  performance  on 30 selected  farms 1977
Average Average Stocking  rate % Lambs
farm size flock size ewes/acre weaned
acres equivalent
150 105 4 1.25
In 1978 gross margins  in a range of farm enterprises  were compared.  
The opportunity  for such comparisons  arose when  economic  returns  from 
sugar beet growing  were being examined  on a random  sample  of farms
40
classified  as low, medium  or high yields namely,  13 tons, 17 tons or 20 
tons/acre.  Table 3 summarises  the gross margins.
Table 3
Gross margins  (£/acre)  for enterprises  on farms with low, medium  or high yields
of sugar beet in 1978
Low Medium High Average
Sugar beet 132 230 309 224
Wheat 116 136 135 129
Malting  barley 115 155 139 136
Feed barley 137 127 140 135
Dairying 250 227 269 240
Cattle 80 99 100 90
Sheep 121 119 172 137
Although  Wexford  has the second  highest  stocking  rate in the twenty-  
six counties,  Wexford  sheep farmers  have the capacity  to increase  ewes  
to 150,000  and at the same time increase  the stocking  rate of cattle by 
approximately  J of a livestock  unit p)er acre by the adoption  of better  
management  practices.
(1) A System  of Production
The management  skills required  to carry out efficiently  any one system  
of production  are numerous,  be it early, mid-season  or store lambs.  
Having  more than one system  of sheep production  on the farm, in my 
opinion,  may result in the key management  factors  of production  being 
overlooked.  Farmers  should  adopt  a system  of production  which  fits into 
the farming  pattern  as well as giving  economical  returns.
(2) Wintering
Sheep  wintering  at present  is mainly  outdoor  on grass,  sugar  beet tops 
and swedes,  but over the past three years  there is an increased  interest  in 
the housing  of ewes on straw and feeding  them on hay and meals. This 
system  would  seem to be much more acceptable  to the Wexford  farmer  
than other wintering  systems  like slats and silage. The cost of straw 
bedded  housing  is approximately  £30 per ewe after grant,  or £40 gross.  
This type of housing  has a flexibility  that the tillage/dry  stock farmer  
likes.
Wintering  facilities  must be acceptable  to the shepherd  as well as being 
tailored  to the production  system. It should be noted that the family  
members  are frequently  the shepherds  at weaning  time. In the future,  
when larger  flocks  may be a necessity,  hired supervision  will be required  
at yeaning  if mortality  is to be reduced.
41
(3) Better  fencing
After  lamb price,  fencing  is probably  the most important  management  
factor  that will affect  ewe numbers  on farms. This is particularly  true on 
tillage  farms.  Fencing  must  facilitate  the ever increasing  width  of combine  
harvesters  and at the same time be stock proof and give an efficient  
grazing  system. One must ask why, in a county  such as Wexford,  are 
there so few farmers  practising  mixed  grazing  ? I would  suggest  that ;
(a) Farmers  believe,  contrary  to research  findings,  that cattle and sheep 
grazing  the same pasture  have an adverse  affect on the daily live- 
weight  gain of both cattle and sheep,  particularly  on cattle perform ­
ance.
(b) On the majority  of farms  only 2 or 3 fields are reasonably  fenced  for 
sheep,  hence those fields are kept for sheep.
If we are to increase  the numbers  of sheep and cattle on tillage  farms,  
fencing  is a priority.
42
Factors  Affecting  Carcass  Composition  
in Beef Cattle
M. G. KEANE
A f>riciiltural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
The objective  of a carcass  classification  scheme  is to classify  carcasses  
according  to economically  important  characteristics  and thereby  facilitate  
payment  to producers  on the basis of these characteristics.  The value of 
a carcass  depends  mainly  on its meat yield but carcass  weight,  shape and 
muscle  thickness  are also important.  The objective  in beef production  
should be to produce  meat which is highly  acceptable  to the processor  
and consumer.  High percentages  of fat or bone in a carcass  reduce  its 
meat yield and consequently  its value.
Within  sexes, payment  to date has largely  been at a flat rate per kg 
carcass,  but in future  the price paid to producers  will be more related  to 
the carcass  meat yield. Therefore  it is important  to understand  how 
several  different  factors  affect meat yield so that producers  can aim to 
optimize  meat production  rather than simply carcass  production.  This 
paper  attempts  to summarize  the present  state of knowledge  on the main  
factors  which affect  carcass  meat yield.
Carcass  development
Before discussing  differences  between  carcasses  in meat yield, it is 
necessary  to understand  firstly how the carcass  develops  in terms of its 
composition  (i.e. percentage  of bone, muscle  and fat). In the young  ani­
mal the percentages  of bone and muscle  are high and there is very little 
fat. With increasing  weight, bone percentage  declines  gradually  to 
maturity.  Muscle  percentage  first increases  for a period,  the remains  
relatively  constant  for a further  period and subsequently  declines.  Fat 
percentage  remains  low until the onset of the fattening  phase and there ­
after increase  rapidly. Thereafter,  once fattening  commences,  muscle 
percentage  and consequently  meat percentage  declines  with increasing  
weight. While this general  pattern  or development  is common  to all 
cattle,  the relaive  rates of change  for the three tissues  are influenced  by 
a number  of factors,  the most important  being (1) sex, (2) breed type,  
(3) slaughter  weight,  (4) plane of nutrition,  (5) type of diet, (6) growth  
promoters.
Sex effects
Three sex categories  are recognized  in commercial  beef production — ■ 
bulls,  steers  and heifers.  Compared  with steers,  bulls  grow faster,  use feed 
more efficiently  and have a higher percentage  of meat in the carcass.  
Table 1 shows  the average  carcass  composition  of bulls and steers from  
seven experiments  at Grange  (Harte,  1969a). Because  bulls grew faster,
43
Table 1
Carcass  composition  of bulls and steers —average  of 7 experiments  
(Harte,  1968)
Bulls Steers
Carcass  weight  (kg) 239 211
% Meat 71.2 67.1
% Bone 18.6 18.8
% Fat 9.3 13.3
they had heacvier  carcasses  and in addition  they had lower  fat and higher  
meat percentages.  As a result, every 14 kg of bull carcass  yielded  the 
same quantity  of meat as 15 kg of steer carcass.  When account  is taken  
also of their greater  carcass  weight,  five bulls yielded  as much as six 
steers.
The difference  in meat yield between  bulls and steers is not the same  
at all slaughter  weights  because  their main tissues  grow at different  rates. 
Relative  to overall  carcass  growth,  the rate of muscle  growth  is higher  
and the rate of fat growth  is lower in bulls than in steers. Consequently,  
the difference  in meat percentage  between  the two increases  with increas ­
ing weight. This was illustrated  in an experiment  in which  both bulls and 
steers were slaughtered  at two ages and consequently  at two different 
weights  (Harte,  1969b). The results  are shown  in Table 2. At the lower 
carcass  weights,  the bulls had only 2.8 percentage  units more meat than 
the steers  whereas  at the higher  weights  the difference  was 7.7 percentage  
units in favour  of the bulls.
Table 2
Carcass  composition  of bulls and steers  at two slaughter  weights
Low slaughter weight High slaughter  weight
Bulls Steers Bulls Steers
Carcass  wt. (kg) 220 201 320 278
% Meat 69.0 66.2 71.8 64.1
% Bone 20.4 20.5 15.7 16.3
% Fat 9.3 12.0 10.7 18.6
Although  bull beef production  has been extensively  studied  in this 
country,  it has not been adopted  in commercial  practice.  This contrasts  
with the situation  in many other European  countries  where bull beef 
production  is common.
There is less information  on tissue growth  patterns  of heifers. The 
main difference  between  heifers and steers is that heifers commence 
fattening  at lower  weights.  Once fattening  has commenced  relative  rates
44
of fat and muscle  growth  are about  the same in heifers  and steers (Berg 
et al. 1979).
Although  there are clear differences  in carcass  composition  between  
breed  types,  the size of the difference  depends  on the basis  of comparison.  
Ccmparisons  are usually  made  at either  the same age, the same slaughter  
weight  or the same level of fatness  (finish).  The data in Table  3 are taken  
from a United  States study (Germ Plasm Evaluation  Programme,  1974)
Table 3
Carcass  composition  of different  breed  crosses  slaughtered  at the same  age
Sire breed Charolais Simmental Limousin Hereford Angus
Carcass  wt. (kg) 324 315 301 294 296
% Meat 69.3 68.4 69.8 65.8 65.5
% Bone 12.9 13.3 12.6 12.2 11.9
% Fat 17.8 18.2 17.5 22.2 22.8
in which  the steer progeny  of bulls from different  breeds  mated  to Here ­
ford and Angus  cows were slaughtered  at the same age. In addition  to 
having  heavier  carcasses,  the continental  crosses  had on average  3.5 per­
centage  units more meat and 4.7 percentage  units less fat than the 
Hereford  and Angus  types.
An experiment  in France  (Geay,  1976) compared  pure bred Charolais,  
Limousin  and Friesian  bulls slaughtered  at the same carcass  weight  (312 
kg). The data, which are in Table 4, show that the Charolais  had 6.3 
percentage  units more meat and 6.2 percentage  units less fat than the 
Friesians.  The main difference  between  the Charolais  and Limousin  
breeds was that the latter had more fat and less bone. These results  
emphasise  the superiority  of the continental  breeds  over Friesians  in 
carcass  quality  and indicate  the type of carcasses  with which Irish beef 
must compete  in European  markets.
Table 4
Carcass  composition  of pure bred bulls slaughtered  at the same weight^a)
Charolais Limousin Friesian
% Meat 70.3 71.2 64.0
% Bone 18.0 14.5 18.6
% Fat 9.7 12.8 15.9
la) 312 kg carcases
In Britain,  the Meat and Livestock  Commission  have compared  the 
carcasses  of different  breed types slaughtered  at the same level of fatness  
(MLC,  1978). The data in Table 5 refer to the steer progeny  of dairy  
cows and a number  of different  sire breeds.
45
Table 5
Meat percentages  of ditferent  breed crosses  at the same level of subcutaneous  fat
(finish)  (a)
Breed  type Charolais Simmental Friesian Hereford Angus
Carcass  wt. (kg) 290 265 241 221 201
% Meat 71.2 70.9 70.0 70.5 71.4
(a) Average  for 18 and 24 month  old production  systems.
When fat level was standardised  the differences  between  the various  
breed  types  in meat percentage  were small but there were large differences 
in the carcass  weights  at which  these similar  meat percentages  occurred.  
The carcasses  of Charolais  crosses  were almost  50 kg heavier  than those 
of the Friesians  which  in turn were 40 kg heavier  than the Angus  crosses.  
These data show that continental  type cattle can be taken to much  
heavier  weights  than Friesians  and still have high quality carcasses  
whereas  the traditional  British  beef breeds  must be slaughtered  at lighter  
weights  in order to achieve  high carcass  meat percentages.  It should  be 
noted that the carcass  weights  in this MLC study were much lower than 
commercial  carcass  weights  in Ireland  generally.
Slaughter  weight  effects
Since the weight  at which  cattle are slaughtered  is completely  under  the 
control  of the producer,  it is important  that the influence  of slaughter  
weight  on carcass  composition  and meat percentage  be fully understood.  
Results  show that when animals  reach  a certain  weight,  the percentage  of 
fat in the carcass  increases  and the percentage  of meat decreases  with 
increasing  weight.  The rate at which  this happens  varies  with sex, breed,  
level and type of feed. For a similar  increase  in carcass  weight  there is 
a greater  increase  in fat percentage  and a greater  decrease  in meat per­
centage  in steers than in bulls. Similarly  the late maturing  continental  
breed types fatten less rapidly  than the early maturing  traditional  breed  
types.
The effects  of increasing  slaughter  weight  on the carcass  composition  
of Friesian  steers are shown  in Table 6. Fat percentage  increased  with 
increasing  carcass  weight  while meat and bone percentages  decrea.sed.  
Over the carcass  weight  range of 260 to 340 kg, meat yield declined  by 
0.65 percentage  units for every 10 kg increase  in carcass  weight.
Table 6
Carcass  composition  of Friesian  steers  at ditferent  slaughter  weights
Carcass  weight  (kg)
150 260 300 340
% Meat 73.4 69.6 65.5 64.4
% Bone 21.6 19.5 19.0 17.9
% Fat 5.0 10.9 15.5 17.7
46
Plane  of nutrition  effects
As in the case of slaughter  weight,  plane of nutrition  is also controlled  
by the producer.  Thus, it is equally  important  to know how it affects 
carcass  composition.  Opinions  differ among research  workers  on the 
extent to which nutrition  influences  composition.  Some studies have 
shoyvn only small effects  of nutrition  on composition  whereas  in other  
cases quite large effects  were recorded.  In an experiment  carried  out in 
the United  States  (Keane  et al, 1979) the effect of nutrition  on the com­
position  of Charolais  and Simmental  cross steers fed from 208kg to
Table 7
Average  composition'a)  of Charolais  and Simmental  cross steers fed 
two levels  of nutrition
Level  of nutrition High Medium
Daily gain (kg) 1.47 1.34
Carcass  wt. (kg) 330.8 331.3
% Meat 60.9 62.1
% Bone 16.4 16.3
% Fat 22.7 21.6
<a) of round  + rump
slaughter  at 550kg  liveweight  was negligible  (Table  7). Other  studies  in 
the United  States  (Prior'et  ai, 1977) also found that level of feeding  had 
little effect  on the composition  of continental  breed  types but in the small 
breed types,  high planes  of nutrition  resulted  in increased  fat and reduced  
meat percentages.
The effects  of plane of nutrition  on the carcass  composition  of Friesian  
steers was investigated  in an experiment  at Grange.  The cattle were fed 
high, moderate  or low levels  of nutrition  and slaughtered  at 230, 285 and 
340 kg carcass  weights  to separate  the effects  of nutrition  and slaughter  
weight. Table 8 shows the percentage  carcass  subcutaneous  fat in the 
various  treatment  groups. Fatness  increased  with increasing  slaughter  
weight  on all planes  of nutrition.  In addition  increases  in the level of 
nutrition  increased  fatness  at all slaughter  weights.  Of course,  the cattle
Table 8
Percentage  subcutaneous  fat in Friesian  steers  fed different  levels  of nutrition
Level of nutritionCarcass  weight  (kg)
230 285 340
High 8.5 12.1 14.2
Moderate 7.7 9.7 13.0
Low 5.9 7.3 10.7
47
fed on the higher  levels  of nutrition  grew faster  and reached  their slaughter  
weights  earlier.  Therefore,  although  they had more fat they had less bone  
and as a result there were only small differences  in meat percentage  
between  the different  nutritional  levels. In Ireland,  where grazed and 
conserved  grass are the main feeds for beef cattle and where  high levels  
of concentrate  feeding  are generally  uneconomic,  the possibilities  for 
influencing  carcass  meat percentage  by manipulating  nutrition  levels  are 
limited.
Diet type effects
The dry matter  content  of conserved  grass  affects  the carcass  composit ­
ion of cattle. Work  at Grange  some years  ago (McCarrick,  1966) showed  
that cattle fed silage  were fatter  than those fed hay. More recently  it has 
been shown  that animals  fed unwilted  silage were fatter than those fed 
wilted  silage (Flynn,  1978). Cattle  being  finished  for slaughter  on silage  
are generally  fed concentrate  supplements.  An experiment  was carried  
out in which  a commonly  used diet of unwilted  silage supplemented  with 
rolled barley  was compared  with a prepared  diet based on concentrates  
(mainly  rolled barley) and chopped  straw. Both diets had adequate  
protein,  minerals  and vitamins  and had the same estimated  energy  value 
(11 MJ ME  / kg DM). Friesian  steers  were used in the experiment.  They  
had similar  rates of gain on the two diets and were slaughtered  at 260, 
300 and 340 kg carcass  weights.  The effects  of the diets on fat and meat  
percentages  are shown  in Table 9.
Table 9
Fat and meat percentages  of cattle  fed silage/barley  or concentrate/straw  diets
Carcass  weight  (kg)
260 300 340
% Fat : Silage/barley 11.2 16.6 20.4
Concentrate/straw 11.0 15.3 16.6
% Meat : Silage/barley 69.7 64.9 62.1
Concentrate/straw 70.0 66.0 65.7
In agreement  with results  shown  earlier,  fat percentage  increased  and 
meat percentage  declined  with increasing  slaughter  weight.  There  was an 
effect  of type of diet on carcass  composition  but it was not the same at all 
slaughter  weights.  At 260 kg carcass  weights,  there was little difference 
between  the diets in carcass  composition.  However,  as carcass  weight  
increased  the effects  of diet became  more pronounced  and at 340 kg the 
differences  were 3.8 percentage  units more fat and 3.6 percentage  units  
units less meat for the silage and barley  fed cattle.
48
While the results  of this experiment  show that the silage based diet 
increased  fatness,  at present  this factor alone is not sufficient  to justify  
any change  by producers  in the use of unwilted  silage  for beef cattle.
Growth  promoter  effects
Information  on the effects  of growth  promoters  on carcass  composition  
is limited. In an experiment  at Grange  (Drennan  et al, 1979) Friesian  
steers fed silage plus 3 kg barley  daily were used to compare  the effects 
on carcass  composition  of different  growth  promoting  compounds  and 
combinations  of compounds.  Compared  with controls,  the feed additive  
Romensin  increased  carcass  weight  and as a result  fat percentage  was also 
slightly increased.  Ralgro plus Finaplix  treatment  increased  carcass  
weight also but in addition  it reduced  fatness and increased  meat  
percentage.
Conclusions
Bulls grow faster but fatten slower  than steers  while heifers  fatten at 
lighter  weights.  Equally,  continental  breed types grow faster  and fatten  
slower  than the traditional  breeds. Therefore,  the superiority  in com­
position  of bulls over steers and continentals  over traditional  breeds  
increases  with increasing  weight.
Carcass  fat percentage  increases  and meat percentage  decreases  with 
increasing  slaughter  weight. There  are no precise  estimates  of the rate at 
which  this happens  for the different  breed types. Approximate  estimates  
obtained  from research  work indicate  that over the normal slaughter  
weight  range there is a decline  in meat percentage  of 0.54 percentage  
units for Charolais  crosses,  0.65 percentage  units for Friesians  and 0.80 
percentage  units for Hereford  crosses  per 10 kg increase  in carcass  weight.
Both level of nutrition  and type of diet affect  carcass  composition  but 
in the context  of Irish beef production  the effects of these factors  are 
small.
In addition  to improving  growth  rate, hormonal  type growth  promoters  
also increase  meat percentage.
References
Berg, R. T., Jones,  S. D. M., Price, M. A., Fukuhara,  R., Butterfield,  R. M. and 
Hardin,  R. T. (1979). Patterns  of carcass  fat deposition  in heifers,  steers and 
bulls. Can. J. Anim.  Sci. 59 : 359-366.
Drennan,  M. J., Roche,  J. F. and L’Estrange,  J. L. (1979). Effect of Monensin  
sodium,  resorcylic  acid lactone  and trenbolone  acetate  on performance  and feed 
intake  of finishing  cattle. Anim. Prod. 28 : 416 (abstr.)
Flynn,  A. V. (1978). The relative  importance  of different  factors  in determining  
the beef production  of silage. Ph.D. Thesis,  National  University  of Ireland.
Geay,  Y. (1976). Fitting  the diet to the potential  of the animal. In Improving  the 
Nutritional  Efficiency  of Beef Production,  p. 333-347.  Ed. J. G. Tayler  and J. 
M. Wilkinson,  Commission  of the European  Communities.
49
Germ Plasm  Evaluation  Programme  (1974). Progress  Report  No. 1, Agricultural  
Research  Service,  U.S. Dept. Agr.
Harte,  F. J. (1969a).  Six years  of bull beef production  research  in Ireland.  In Meat  
Production  from Entire  Male Animals,  p. 153-171.  Ed. D. N. Rhodes,  Publ.
J. & A. Churchill  Ltd., London.
Harte,  F. J. (1969b).  The production  of beef from young bulls. III. Ir. J. Agric.  
Res. 8 : 293-305.
Keane,  M. G., Self, H. L. and Topel,  D. G. (1979). Effects  of dietary  energy  and 
slaughter  weight  on performance  and carcass  traits of Charolais  and Simmental  
cross steers.  Anim.  Prod. 28 : 458 (abstr.).
McCarrick,  R. B. (1966). Effect of method  of grass conservation  and herbage  
maturity  on performance  and body composition  of beef cattle. Proc. 10th Int. 
Grassld.  Cong.  Helsinki,  575-580.
MLC (1978). Beef Improvement  Services,  Newsletter  No. 34.
Prior, R. L., Kohlmeier,  R. H., Cundiff,  L. V., Dikeman,  M. E. and Crouse,  J. D. 
(1977). Influence  of dietary  energy  and protein  on growth  and carcass  com­
position  in different  biological  types of cattle. J. Anim.  Sci. 45 : 132-146.
50
SPECIAL  PRICE REDUCTIONS
to
MEMBERS  OF THE IRISH GRASSLAND  
ASSOCIATION
at
APPLEBY  JEWELLERS  LTD.
5 Johnston ’s Court,  Grafton  St., Dublin  2 
10 Aungier  St., Dublin  2 
Blackrock  and Dun Laoghaire
As manufacturers  and wholesalers  of gold jewellery  we 
can offer wholesale  discounts  to Macra members  as 
follows :
Engagement  Rings  and Wedding  Rings 33% 
Watches  by all best makers  25%
Gold & Silver  Jewellery  25%
Silver  Goods,  Cutlery,  Glass,  etc. 25%
HOPING  OUR FARMING  FRIENDS  HAVE  A GOOD  YEAR
APPLEBY  JEWELLERS  LTD.
Telephone  7S3991,  758483
51
SIZE  
SCALE  
GROWTH  
HIGH GAIN
COLOUR  MARKING
express  the superiority  
of the
CHAROLAIS
breed above  all others
Full information  from :
Walter  Feely,  Secretary,
Irish Charolais  Cattle  Society  Ltd.,
Irish Farm  Centre,  Bluebell,
Dublin  12. Tel. (01) 501166.
52
Beef Carcase  Classification  and 
Market  Requirements
P. O. RYAN
Department  of Agriculture,  Dublin  2.
Regulations  providing  for the Beef Carcase  Classification  Scheme  came  
into effect  on August  13th 1979 (1). The scheme  is currently  being  phased  
in on steers  at eleven  plants  and should  be fully operational  in 1980. One 
of the basic objectives  of the scheme  is to facilitate  the transmission  of 
market  requirements  back through  the production  and distribution  chain  
to the producer.  This paper presents  data on current  market  require ­
ments as determined  during  classification  studies  on overseas  markets  
over the past two years. These  requirements  are discussed  in the light of 
classification  returns  from export  abattoirs  during  the past six months.
The Classification  Scheme  is basically  a system  for describing  carcases  
in a standardised  manner (2). Two of the economically  most important  
characteristics  described  are ‘Conformation ’ and ‘Fatness ’. The distribu ­
tion of 57,000  steer carcases  among  the conformation/fatness  subclasses  
during  Autumn  1979 is shown  in Table 1.
Table 1
Percent  of steer carcases  in each Classification  Subclass
Fatness
ClassConformation  class
I R E L A N D Overall
1 — — — 0.1 0.1 — — 0.2
2 — 0.2 1.2 3.3 0.9 — — 5.6
3 — 0.6 9.2 14.2 1.4 — — 25.4
4 — 0.6 16.8 13.9 0.7 — — 32.0
5 — 0.5 15.2 6.5 0.2 — — 22.4
6 — 0.4 9.8 2.1 — — — 12.3
7 — 0.1 1.6 0.4 — — — 2.1
Overall — 2.4 53.8 40.5 3.3 — — 100.0
Average  carcase  wt. = 315.2 kg; N = 57,217.
The conformation  scale is constructed  in such a way that Classes  E 
(good commercial  type) and L (average  dairy type) are numerically  the
53
most important.  Class A can be regarded  as ‘reject ’ level for steers  but, 
as the scale also covers  cows, would be regarded  as a good commercial  
cow carcase.  Class R for steers  is a superior  type, while Class I (extra)  
is very exclusive,  with less than 0.1% of carcases,  and is designed  to cater  
for the exceptionally  well conformed  carcases  common  in some European  
countries.  The fat scale is constructed  to give an approximately  normal  
distribution  about  the central  class, 4.
Of the factors  determining economic  value  of carcases,  yield of saleable  
meat is perhaps  the most important.  The relationship  between  subclass 
and yield of saleable  meat is shown  in Table  2. A standardised  commer ­
cial cutting method  (3) was used to separate  431 steer carcases  into 
‘saleable  meat ’, ‘fat trim ’ and ‘bone ’. Fatness  class is the most important  
determinent  of yield, ranging  from an average  yield of 71.2% for fatness  
class 2 to 63.4% for fatness  class 7. Conformation  is also important  in 
determining  yield but only at low fat levels,  e.g. fatness  class 2, confor ­
mation  class I yields  77.3%,  R yields  74.2% and E yields  71.1%. But at 
higher  fat levels  (class  4) the conformation  effect  is insignificant;  I yielding 
69.0%,  R yielding  68.9% and E yielding  68.1 %.
Table 2
Effect  of conformation  and fatness  class on yield of saleable  meat  
(Steer  carcase;  N = 431)
Fatness
ClassConformation  class
I R E L A N D Overall
1
2 77.3 74.2 71.1 70.8 69.6 70.0—
71.2
3 74.5 70.3 70.0 69.7 69.0 68.7 — 70.1
4 69.0 68.9 68.1 67.9 65.7 68.3
5 71.1 68.3 67.1 68.2 — ' 67.7
6 67.8 67.6 66.1 65.6 — 66.9
7 63.6 63.4 62.7 65.6 — 63.4
Overall 69.5 68.6 69.2 69.2 69.8 68.9
It is clear,  therefore,  that carcases  vary considerably  in value according  
to variations  in conformation  and fatness.  These  differences  in value are 
reflected  in prices obtainable  on open wholesale  markets.  In a study 
carried  out at Rungis  market  in Paris in 1978 (4) classification  data were
54
related to wholesale  price. The study showed  that conformation  and 
carcase  weight  are the most important  detriments  of price in this market.  
Fatness  is relatively  unimportant,  largely because  all carcases  sold in 
Rungis  are pre-selected  and trimmed  down to an acceptable  relatively  
uniform  level of fatness.  Mean  prices  for each conformation  weight  sub­
class are presented  in Table 3. An additional  category,  ‘X’, was created  
to cater for the double  muscled  carcases  found in Rungis.
The magnitude  of the premium  for heavy,  well conformed  carcases  is 
somewhat  surprising  and is certainly  greater  than justified  by the higher
Table 3
Effect  of weight  and conformation  class on wholesale  price (Rungis  1978)  
(price in pence  per Kg; N = 210)
Weight
RangeConformation  class
X 1 R E L
500 Kg + 257 207 186 166 —
460-500  Kg 257 — 182 161 —
420-460  Kg 239 189 166 160 157
380-420 — 186 172 155 144
Under  380 Kg — — — 153 144
Overall 243 193 174 160 154
yields of saleable  meat  (5). Whatever  the reason,  the implications  for 
Irish cattle production  are significant,  e.g. a typical  Irish steer carcase  of 
320kg and conformation  class E would  realise  a price of 153p/kg.  An 
improvement  of one class in conformation  (to R) and an increase  of 60kg 
in carcase  weight  would  realise  a price increase  of 19p/kg —a premium  of 
£164 per carcase.  However,  of the sample  of 57,000  carcases  classified 
during  Autumn  1979, only 150 carcases  could meet these requirements,
i.e. less than three container  loads from all plants  in the country  over a 
three  month  period.
From this study and from trials carried out in co-operation  with 
exporters  and continental  buyers  it is possible  to construct  a contin ­
ental carcase  specification —particularly  for the prime Paris and Belgian 
markets  (Table  4). The inner grouping  of subclasses  (IR 123) can be 
regarded  as ‘very suitable ’ and the outer range (IRE 4 and E 123) as 
suitable  but at a discount.
55
Table 4
Continental  steer carcase  specification
1 R ELAND
1 1 1
1 1 1
i > 1
- - - - - - - -i- - - - - - - - ' - J - - - - - - - - -
v e r y 1 r !
s u i t a b l e
( 3 5 0 K g )
1 1 !
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ i_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1_ _ _ _ _ _J_ _ _ _ _ _ _T- - - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - - - \
S u i t a b l e1 1 1 ^
( 3 2 0 K g . - F ) !______ •_______ 1___„J______
1---------- r , T
' 1 1 1 1 1' 1 1 1 1 1
1-------- 1----------- i-------- 1--------
1 1i'll
1 11 i 1 11
- - - - - - - - - - - - - ^- - - - - - - - - - - — 1——-I—
1 11 1 r1 11 1
1 11_ _ _ _ _ _ 1_ _ _ _ _ _ I- - - - - - - - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - -2
4
F r o m t h e r e s u l t s  s h o w n  i n T a b l e 1 t h e p e r c e n t a g e  o f o u r s t e e r c a r c a s e s  
meeting  these requirements  are :
Very suitable  : 
Suitable  :less than
11%1%
Currently  about  20% of our steer carcases  are shipped  to the Continent  
but are only accepted  at a discount  and following  extensive  trimming  of 
excess  fat.
Turning  to our principal  export  market,  the United  Kingdom,  the situa ­
tion is more satisfactory.  The premium  market  in the U.K. is the super ­
market  and retail butchers  sector. Preliminary  data from a study  into the 
marketing  of Irish beef in the U.K. facilitate  the construction  of a typical  
U.K. Supermarket  purchasing  specification  (Table  5).
56
Table 5
U.K. supermarket  steer carcase  specification
Approximately  25% of our steer slaughterings  can meet these require ­
ments. This seems  an adequate  number  to ensure  a significant  trade with 
supermarkets,  but when spread over all plants it means  that only the 
largest  plant can assemble  more than two containers  per week.
Differences  in market  value have not in the past been communicated  
to the producer  and so there has been very little incentive  to change  
production  methods or breeds  to produce  a more suitable  type of carcase.  
The Classification  scheme  facilitates  realistic  price schedules  with pay­
ments  based  on quality  differences.  It is gratifying  to report  that several 
p’ants are already  paying  on the basis  of classification.  Table  6 shows  the 
price schedule  currently  (December  1979) operated  by one plant.
While the premia  and penalties  do not reflect  the full extent  of the 
variation  in market  value,  nevertheless  this schedule  represents  a welconie 
first step in the right direction.  It is to be hoped that all plants will 
institute  realistic  price schedules  when the classification  scheme  is fully
57
Table 6
Actual  price schedule  (December  1979)  
(prices  in p/kg carcase)
N D
2
3+ 3p.
-2p.
Standard
quoted
priceat
valuation
-4p,
-8p,
operational  so that the Irish producer  will have the opportunity  and 
incentive  to improve  his product  and render  it more suitable  for current  
market  requirements.
References
1. Fresh Meat (Beef Carcase  Classification)  Regulations  1979. S.I. No. 274 of 
1979. Stationery  Office,  Dublin  2.
2. Beef  Carcase  Classification  Scheme,  Dept, of Agriculture.  Leaflet  1979.
3. Ryan, P. O. (1978). Classification  and Carcase  Value. CBF —Irish Livestock  
and Meat Board 6th International  Beef Symposium,  Dublin  1978.
4. O’Connell,  J. et al. (1979). The marketing  of Irish beef in France  with special  
reference  to price/quality  relationships.  Irish Agricultural  Trust 1979.
5. Mulvehill,  P. (1979). The importance  of conformation  in assessing  carcase  
quality  and value. Irish Farmers ’ Journal  1979.
58
a dairy  herd, feed  a pig, 
fertilise  afield  and fuel a tractor.
A Bank  of Ireland  cheque  book is a most  adaptable  piece  of farm  
equipment.
It allows  you buy what  you need quickly  and simply.  It provides  you with an 
accurate  record  of who you've  paid. It tells you how you stand.
Make  sure you've  got a Bank  of Ireland  cheque  book.  It's a piece  of farm  
equipment  no farmer  should  be without.
BanKcrlreiand.
The  bank  of a lifetime
59
Pushing  up
Ireland ’s stock  
worldwide
Through  our marts  and meatplants 
and our worldwide  penetration  of 
available  markets  we provide  an 
unrivalled  service  to Irish farmers.
Take last year, Cork Marts-IMP  
Group  handled  over 307o of all Irish 
beef exports!  Our reputation  for 
quality  and continuity  of supply 
enables  us to pay top prices  for top- 
quality  stock.  And in tne process  makes  
the Cork Marts-IMP  Group  Ireland's  
largest  producer-owned  livestock  and 
meat marketing  organisation.  With the 
support  of our shareholders  and 
thousands  of other  farmers  through ­
out the country,  we will continue  to 
push up Ireland's  stock worldwide.
CORK  MARTS  
IMP  CROUP
Head  Ofice,  Wilton,  Cork Tel (021)  
45733 Meat Division  Headquarters.-  
Bamhall,  Leixhp,  Co Kildare  
Tel. (01) 280771
60
Use of Grass  Varieties  in Inereasing  
Produetion  of Beef
M. RYAN
An Foras  Taluntais,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
There are presently  47 ryegrass  varieties  on the Department  of Agricul ­
ture ’s recommended  list (1). In the Department ’s assessment,  all varieties  
are tested for at least three years at five centres.  Mechanical  harvesters  
are used to determine  DM yields and persistency  is assessed  on a scale  
of 1-9. Varieties  are assessed  in maturity  groups. It is clearly  desirable  
but impractical  to have animal  performance  data on all of these varieties.  
Cost factors  and land limitations  preclude  evaluation  of such large num ­
bers via the animal.  A limited  number  of varieties  are being  tested using 
animal performance  as the measuring  parameter  in the Agricultural  
Institute.
Connolly  et al (2) evaluated  a small number  of ryegrass  varieties  both 
as grazed  herbage  and winter  feed silage. Evaluations  of these varieties  
using grazing  animals  was carried  out using extra carrying  capacity  over 
and above the standard  grass (S^j) as the measure  of superiority.  The 
model  used was the common  intercept  model  (3).
At Johnstown  Castle in the years 1977-79  inclusive  an evaluation  of 
six varieties  .sown in monoculture,  has been conducted.  No legume  was 
sown,  nitrogen  fertiliser  input was 250 kg per ha per annum  given in 5-6 
incremental  dressings.  A description  of the varieties  is given in Table 1.
Table I
Varieties  evaluated  at Johnstown  Castle  1977-79
Variety Heading  date Ploidy
s.. Early Diploid
Barpastra Late Tetraploid
Sabrina Early Tetraploid
Vigor (Melle) Late Diploid
Cropper Early Diploid
Oakpark Early Diploid
61
The mean  effect  of variety  on liveweight  gain is shown  in Table  2.
Table 2
Effect  of variety  on liveweight  gain (kg/ha)— mean 1977-79
Variety LWG Relative
s.. 846 100
Barpastra 819 97
Sabrina 700 83
Vigor 911 108
Cropper 840 99
Oakpark 808 96
Only Sabrina  and Vigor  results  were significantly  different  from S21.
Seasonality  effects  were shown  by the different  varieties.  Table 3 illus­
trates the effect of variety  and stocking  rate on liveweight  gain and 
percentage  of total liveweight  gain attained  between  April and July, 1977-  
79.
LVv'G f.g/hc SEASONALITY  OF GROWTH  1977-79
62
Table 3
Effect  of variety  and stocking  rate on liveweight  gain (kg/ha)  April to July-
mean 1977-79
Variety  — SR LWG % of annual  total 
by July
Sj4 low SR 577 62
Sj, high SR 490 55
Barpastra  low SR 502 55
Barpastra  high SR 414 47
Vigor low SR 452 47
Vigor  high SR 477 50
Cropper 552 59
Oakpark 465 53
The period  mid-April  to early July represents  40 percent  of the total 
grazing  season. The early varieties  achieved  53 to 62 percent  and the late 
varieties  47 to 55 percent  of total annual  production  in that period.
The relatively  good mid-summer  production  of Vigor  compared  to S2. 
at the high stocking  rate is shown  in Fig. 1. The sharp decline  in live- 
weight  gain in S12 from early June onwards  is notable.
Wl(l(g) Livewcighf  change  (kg) April - July \978
April
FIGS.  2 & 3lAay Juno July
63
There were contrasting  weather  conditions  in the three years of the 
experiment.  The spring  of 1977 was normal  but the 1978 and 1979 spring 
seasons  were poor for grass growth  with resulting  effects  on liveweight  
gain of the animals.  These effects  are shown  in Figures  2 and 3 for 
and Vigor.
In 1977 animals  on these treatments  gained  weight  without  interruption  
from date of turn-out.  However,  in 1978 negative  liveweight  changes  
occurred  in all treatments  over the first three weeks  after turn-out.  The 
cattle on the late-heading  Vigor  showed  the greatest  loss in performance.  
A month  elapsed  before  the live weights  returned  to the levels  at turn-out.  
These were fasted weights  and while they may not represent  actual loss 
of carcase  weight,  nevertheless  they indicate  restriction  in DM intake. 
Maximum  possible  gains  are not likely in these circumstances.  The 1979 
data are illustrated  in Figure  4 and they indicate  that the cattle on high 
stocking  rate (HSR)  treatments  lost weight  or gained  very little liveweight  
for two cycles, i.e. five weeks after going to grass. The cattle on low 
stocking  rate treatments  (LSR)  performed  better  with only the late variety 
Vigor  showing  restriction  for one cycle.
Botanical  changes  were monitored  over time to check  on persistence  of 
sown species. These  are given in Table  4.
Table 4
Effect  of management  on percentage  ryegrass  in swards  (%) 1978
Variety Grazed Silage  + Grazed
s.. 80 75
Barpastra 68 44
Sabrina 18 24
Vigor 91 87
Cropper 85 82
Oakpark 82 75
The poor persistence  of the teraploids Sabrina and Barpastra  is notable.  
Cutting  silage and then grazing  the plots adversely  affected  survival,  
notably  in Barpastra.  Vigor  showed  better  persistence  than other  varieties  
under  both management  systems.
A small winter feeding  trial comparing  the six cultivars  was also 
undertaken.  The results  are summarised  in Table 5.
Table 5
Effect  of variety on average  daily gain (kg) of steers  fed on silage + 2.3 kg 
beet pulp nuts
VarietyAverage  daily gain 
kg/day Relative
s.. .89 100
Barpastra .78 88
Sabrina .93 104
Vigor .82 93
Cropper .91 102
Oakpark .80 90
The results  indicate  that Sabrina  gave much better  results  as a silage-  
fed grass than as a grazing  grass. However  differences  shown  in Table 5 
were not significant.  Further  studies  on the silage feeding  value of these 
varieties  are in progress.
It is concluded  that there are a number  of new ryegrass  varieties  avail ­
able which have advantages  to offer in terms of good mid-summer  
production,  persistence,  silage yield and quality. It behoves  the farmer,  
adviser  and research  worker  alike to seek out these better varieties  and
65
to recommend  and use only those which have shown their superiority  
over the standard  varieties,  especially  in trials where measurements  of 
animal  production  were made.
References
1. Herbage  Varieties,  Recommended  List 1980, Dept, of Agriculture.
2. Connolly,  V., de Valle Ribeiro,  M., Crowley,  J. C. Potential  of grass and 
legume  under  Irish conditions.  Proc. Int. meeting  on Animal  Prod, from Temp.  
Grassld.  June 1977, Irish Grassld.  & Animal  Prod. Assoc,  and An Foras  Talun ­
tais, Dublin.
3. Connolly,  J. The design  of grazing  experiments  : 2. A simple  linear  model  for 
the gain-stocking  rate relationship.  Ir. J. agric. Res. 15, 365-374,  1976.
66
GOOD NEWS!
HELP CONTROL  
GRASS  TETANY
New Greenvale  Cal-Mag  Grass Nuts 
will help protect your animals  
against GRASS TETANY for as 
little as 4p a day for cattle and 2p 
a day for sheep.
Greenvale  Cal-Mag  Grass Nuts are 
formulated  to give the required  
daily amount  of Calcined  Magnes ­
ite. And the high nutritional  value  
of G.C.M. Nuts provide valuable  
nutrients  for the profitable  produc ­
tion of meat and milk.Easy to store . . . easy to handle  . . . 
easy to feed. Ask your Irish Sugar  
Co. man about the GOOD NEWS  !
2 ozs. of Calcined  Magnesite  per 
pound  of nuts :
Cattle 1 lb. per day per head.  
Sheep J lb per day per head.
CAL • MAG CRASS NUTS
Greenvale
The Irish Sugar  Company  Ltd.,
St. Stephen ’s Creen House,  Dublin  2. Tel. 767501Greenvak
CAL MAG 
GRASS  
NUTS
67
Premier  Meat  
Packers  (I) Ltd
Sallins,  Co. Kildare
We require large numbers
of
PRIME BULLOCKS  
and HEIFERS  
LEAN COWS
For Quotations  Please  Ring  
045-9871  (10) Telex  5301
68
A System  of Low Cost Production  in 
the United  Kingdom
J. C. WILCOX
Farm Director,  Trawsgoed  Experimental  Husbandry  Farm, Dyfed,
Wales.
The location  of Trawsgoed  Experimental  Husbandry  Farm on the edge 
of the coastal  belt of mid-Wales  plays an important  part in determining  
the type of farming  system  which  can be followed.  The climate  is relativ ­
ely mild due to the influence  of the Gulf Stream  and the rainfall  is 1200 
mm and is well distributed  throughout  the year.
The lower part of the farm, which is used predominantly  for dairying,  
is 30 to 100 metres  above sea level. The lower land is reasonably  level 
and can be used for grazing  and silage while the slopes  are steep  enough  
to limit their use to grazing. Perennial  ryegrass  and white clover  sown  
as semi-permanent  swards  are the basis  of all the grass  seeds  mixtures  and 
the favourable  climate  and high rates of fertilizer  used result in good  
yields. In recent years under various  systems  of grazing  management,  
yields  of dry matter  per hectare  have exceeded  12 tonnes.
One of the objectives  in setting up this system of production  some  
twelve years ago was to maximise  the amount  of milk produced  from 
grass and to minimise  the input of purchased  concentrates.  In order to 
do this a spring  calving  herd was established  and early work investigated 
stocking  rates and time of calving.  AHhough  higher  stocking  rates have 
been used,  experience  has resulted  in the 180 Friesian  cows being  stocked 
at 2.5 cows per ha of grass receiving  approximately  400 kg of nitrogen  
fertilizer  per ha annually.  Average  annual  milk production  for 1977-79  
was 4586 litres sold per cow and was supported  by 618 kg of concentrates  
per cow. To achieve  this level of performance  careful  investigation  of 
three main aspects  of management  has been necessary.  The date of 
calving  in relation  to the date of turnout  to grass has a large effect  on the 
amount  of milk produced  and was investigated  in an early series of 
experiments,  the results from which indicated  that January/February  
calving  was beneficial  from he aspecas  of v'cld. financial  return and 
ease of management.  Secondly,  to sustain  a high level of production  from  
grass some system  of grazing  management  must he nracticed  and there ­
fore since the spring  calving  herd was first established  three main systems 
of grassland  management  have been employed.
The first system  used in the early days of the unit was one of paddock  
grazing,  generally  with two days spent in individual  paddocks  and a 
rotation  of 24 days. This was managed  in coniunction  with an equal area 
of grassland  used mainly  for conservation.  The management  during  the 
grazing  season  was for early  grazing  of the conservation  area,  followed  by 
grazing  the paddock  area for most of the season,  but allowing  for sup­
69
plementation  of the paddock  area by grazing  part of the conservation  
area if shortages  of grass occurred  during  mid-summer.  In the autumn  
the conservation  area was again  grazed  after the third silage  cut had been 
taken. During  the years when this system  of grazing  management  was 
used, a stocking  rate of 3 cows per hectare  was maintained.
The second  system  of grazing  management  employed  was one of set 
stocking,  or more accurately  continuous  grazing,  as a grassland  area 
stocked  at 2.5 cows per hectare  was used for grazing  and the density  of 
stocking  controlled  by taking  conservation  from part of the area. For 
most  of the grazing  season  one half to three quarters  of the area was used 
for grazing  and the remainder for conservation.  During  the early  part and 
at the end of the grazing  season  the whole  area was used for grazing.  By 
this system,  although  part of the grassland  area was continuously  grazed,  
the area was adjusted  to ensure  that there was always  sufficient  grass  and 
also that the grazing  area was never  seriously  undergrazed.
The third grazing  system  consisted  of utilizing  five or six paddocks  in 
no strict rotation,  but always  ensuring  that the cows had plenty  of grass 
for grazing  with any surplus  taken as silage. During  the course  of the 
grazing  season all paddocks  were cut for silage at some stage. The 
stocking  rate on this system  of management  was also 2.5 cows  per hectare.
Although  these three systems  of management  were not run as a strict  
comparison,  all were on the farm during  some seasons  and apparently  
supported  very similar  levels  of production.
Because  of a swing away from paddock  grazing  to the apparently  
simpler system  of set stocking,  a critical  comparison  of continuous  grazing  
and paddock  grazing  was started  in 1977. The provisional  results  from 
three years of this experiment  have indicated  that rotational  grazing,  
although  giving less total DM production,  has resulted  in higher  milk 
production.  This appears  to be due to the better  rationing  of the grazing  
availab'e,  particularly  at times of grass shortage.  The results  for 1977 
and 1978 are given in Table 1.
Table 1
Comparison  of rotational  and continuous  grazing
Rotational Continuous
Total grass 1977 11.6 12.4
DM production  
tonnes/ha 1978 11.6 12.1
Total lactation 1977 4491 4076
yield kg 1978 5054 4718
In 1979 an investigation  into the level of production  from grass under  
a system  where ad libitum  good quality  grass was always  available  to 
cows, has indicated  that higher  milk yields  may be possible  throughout
70
the grazing  season. This feature  has yet to be combined  with a manage ­
ment system  to provide  adequate  returns  per hectare.
In a system  of milk production  where individual  cow yields  are rela­
tively modest  it is imperative  that levels  of concentrate  feeding  must not 
be high if good financial  returns  are expected.  If only a limited  amount  
of concentrate  is fed it is obvious  that careful  consideration  must  be given  
to the stage of lactation  when it is most profitable  to feed concentrates.  
Three main periods  of feeding  have been investigated,  feeding  at grass,  
steaming  up before  calving,  and feeding  in early lactation  between  calving  
and turning  out in early April.
For a period of seven years, half the cows on an intensive  paddock  
grazing  system  were fed a flat rate of 1.8 kg of concentrates  per day. The 
overall response  to this feeding  was 1 kg of milk for every 1.6 kg of 
concentrates  fed. In one year only, did the extra mi'k pay for the con­
centrates  fed. Access  to a feed dispenser  while grazing  in two years of 
another  trial produced  no extra milk in one year and an increase  of 1 kg 
of mi'k for every 1.7 kg of concentrate  fed in the second  year.
Silage is fed during  the winter  period and gives an adequate  rate of 
liveweight  gain in the dry period. An experiment  was run in the three  
years 1975-1977  in which two groups  of cows were fed good quality  
silage and one group received  in addition  3 kg of concentrates  per cow 
per day for 50 days before calving. The concentrate  feeding  did not 
produce  any extra mi'k in the subsequent  lactation.  A series of experi ­
ments  has been carried  out to measure  the response  to concentrates  fed 
in early lactation.  One experiment  for three years compared  two levels 
of flat rate feeding.  Cows  calving  in January/February  and in February/  
Aoril  were fed either  5 kgs or 10 kgs of concentrates  per day together with 
ad Ubitifm  silage. The results  are shown  in Table 2
Table 2
Response  to concentrates  fed in early lactation
Calving  periodSilage +
5 kg concentratesSilage +
10 kg concentrates
January  - February
Lactation  yield 4835 kg 5004 kg
Concentrates  fed 660 kg 1003 kg
February  - April
Lactation  yield 4318 kg 4395 kg
Concentrates  fed 471 kg 561 kg
With January/February  calving  cows the response  to doubling  the 
quantity  of concentrates  fed per day was to produce  an extra kilogram  
of milk for every 2.02 kg of concentrates  fed. With February/April  
calvers  a much smaller  increase  in average  yield was also uneconomic.
71
As a result  of this and other  experiments  it is now the practice  with the 
herd to restrict  concentrate  feeding  to the period  from 2-3 weeks  before 
calving  until mid-May.  During  the dry period  silage gives an adequate  
rate of gain and concentrate  feeding  in early lactation  is restricted  to 7.5 
kg per day  for Januaiy/February  calvers  and to 5-6 kg for March  calvers. 
Extra feed is only given if grass production  is seriously  reduced  when 
some extra concentrates  may be used to supplement  either grazing  or 
silage.
Nitrogen  fertilizers  have generally  been applied  at high rates, approx-  
irnately  400 kg per has is used per annum. Following  six years of high 
nitrogen  fertilizer  application  to a paddock  grazing  system,  half the area 
was top-dressed  with only 250 kg of nitrogen  per hectare  each year while  
the heavier  450 kg dressings  were maintained  on the other half. The 
results  are shown  in Table 3.
Table 3
Nitrogen  level on paddocks  — milk production  litres per ha
250 kg N 450 kg N
1974 2905 1 2968 1
1975 2659 1 2746 1
1976 2891 1 3082 1
At the end of the three year period  milk production  from the paddocks  
receiving  the lower level of nitrogen  had been reduced  by 7% and the 
amount  of time spient grazing  the paddocks  was considerably  reduced  
with correspondingly  more time spent grazing  the area allocated  for 
conservation.
One of the problems  of spring  calving  is the production  of heifers  for 
herd replacements.  Because  of the necessity  for batch calving  at a time 
to make maximum  use of the subsequent  grass production,  calving  can 
only be at two or three years old. Two year old calving  while relatively  
easy with autumn  calvers  is more difficult  with spring  calvers  which  do 
not reach an adequate  pre calving  liveweight  with the same ease. As a 
consequence  of this an investigation  was started  to compare  three  year old 
calving  with calving  a year earlier. It is intended  to carry out this investi­
gation through  the productive  life of the heifers  but preliminary  results 
are indicating  that the heifers  calving  at three  years  are over 75 kg heavier  
at first calving  and over 70 kg heavier  at the second  calving  than those 
first calving  at two year old. The three year old calvers  produced  868 kg 
more milk in the first lactation  and only 309 kg more milk in the second  
lactation.  This increase  in yield does not compensate  for the extra lac­
tation  obtained  from the two year old calving  heifers.
The overall herd performance  in 1979, despite  the late cold spring, 
follows  closely  on results in previous  years. The results  are shown in
72
Table  4. The price used in calculating  the output  was 10.62 p per litre 
for milk and the price of the home mixed  concentrates  £104 per tonne.
Table 4
Herd performance  1979
Average  number  cows 171
Milk sold per cow 4538 1
Milk sales per cow £482
Concentrates  fed per cow 635 kg
Concentrates  fed per litre milk 0.14 kg
Margin  over concentrates  per cow £416
Calving  date has an important  effect  on yield with much  reduced  yields  
for March/April  calvers  as compared  with the January/February  calvers. 
Later  calving  is associated  with much lower  levels  of concentrate  feeding 
but this is insufficient  to compensate  for the lower  yield and margins  are 
reduced.  The contribution  of grass to annual  milk production  is shown 
in Table 5.
Table 5
Contribution  of grass to annual  milk production
Calving  periodAnnual  concentrate  
use kgMilk yield 
kg/cow% total energy  
from grass
January/February 711 4779 80
February/March 456 4419 86
March/April 203 4083 93
Late calving  is associated  with the more efficient  use of grass but calv­
ing in January/February  which is now the general  pattern  in this herd 
combines  good grassland  utilization  with higher  milk yields and better  
financial  returns.
73
Leo
Y^low
Ireland ’s leading  
milking  cow 
injector
guaranteed
uIrish
cP
LeoLaboratoriesLEO  Veterinary  Division  •Dublin  12.
74
Economics  of Low and High Cost  
Dairying  Systems
S. J. AIMES
Farm Management  Services.  Milk Marketing  Board, United  Kingdom.
Last year the results of a comparison  of dairying  in our respective 
countries  were summarised  (reference  1). It may be argued  that the fig­
ures, referring  to the calendar  year 1977, have been overtaken  by events, 
but they serve to emphasise  some of the differences  between  low and high 
cost systems  (Table 1).
Table 1
Physical  and financial  performance  (£ per acre)
Ireland England  and Wales
Herd size 48 74
Milk yield (galls) 724 1100
Concentrate  use (cwts) 8.4 35.4
Stocking  rate (acres/cow) 1.4 1.3
Farm gross margin 159 143
Overhead  costs 54 99
Profit 105 44
By tradition  Irish dairying  can be regarded  as being  low cost in terms  
of all the major inputs, feed, fertiliser,  paid labour, equipment  and 
borrowed  money. So far as Britain  is concerned  the opposite  is true. 
The figures  show that while by conventional  measures  of efficiency,  such 
as herd size and milk yield the Irish levels are below the British  levels,  
they are higher  in terms  of the factor  that really  matters,  profitability.
At this point it is important  to consider  why the British  and Irish sys­
tems of dairying  differ to such an extent. Historically  Britain  has had a 
far higher  milk price than that prevailing  in Ireland  and profitability  has 
consequently  been greater.  At the same time there has also been a good 
deal of prestige  associated  with a high milk yield per cow. These two 
factors  in combination  have encouraged  expenditure  on commodities  
assumed  to help bring about  the desired  high yield, namely  concentrates  
and sophisticated  technical  equipment.  Such expenditure  has inevitably  
been encouraged  by commercial  organisations  selling  the various  products.
Such developments  are fine so long as the milk price is high enough  to 
support  them. A sophisticated  industry  is however  far more vulnerable  
to a reduction  in price such as that currently  taking  place.
For the British  farmer,  operating  his high cost system, the outlook  is 
bleak, especially  since there is currently  little improvement  in technical
75
performance;  milk yields in our FMS sample  being static around  1150 
gallons  and concentrate  use around  36 cwt. Thus  the anticipated  increase 
of 11 per cent in milk price for the year ending  March 1980 will be 
inadequate  to meet cost increases  in general  and the rise in overhead  
costs in particular  (Table  2).
Table 2
FMS 82 all-grass  farm sample —financial  results  (£ per acre)
Year ending  MarchPercentage
1979 1980 change
Whole  farm gross margin 187 208 -h 12
Overhead  costs 136 162 + 20
Profit 51 46 - 11
Reference  2
Reference  to profit is meaningless  unless  we consider  how it is used.  
The main demands  on profit are for loan repayment,  tax, capital and 
private expenditure.  In 1979 these amounted  to almost £20,000  and 
resulted  in an increase  in overdraft  of nearly  £4,000. The implication  of 
such figures  is that at current  performance  the existing  milk price cannot  
support  the present  levels of skilled  labour,  modern  technology  or bor­
rowed  capital.
The lesson for the Irish dairy farmer  is that even if current  levels of 
profitability  leave him with spare cash, he should be careful  not to use 
it to build an overhead  cost structure  such as that commonly  seen in 
Britain  unless  he can achieve  physical  efficiency  well in excess  of 1150 
gallons  from 36 cwt concentrates  when stocked  at 1.3 acres  per cow. This 
argument  is strengthened  when we consider  that with the current  surplus  
in Europe,  the milk price is unlikely  to be maintained  in real terms. 
Further  there is a possibility,  hopefully  remote,  that the current  disagree ­
ment amongst  EEC members  may lead to a breakdown  of the Common  
Agricultural  Policy. One of the consequences  of such a breakdown  may 
well be to force Irish milk back on to the depressed  world  market.
It would therefore  seem vital that the Irish dairy industry  moves  for­
ward in a manner  that, while not necessarily  showing  maximum  profit 
under  current  conditions,  maintains  a reasonable  level of profit in more 
adverse  circumstances.  That surely means  making  the most of Ireland ’s 
natural  advantage,  grass,  and being  wary of an over capitalised  industry.
It should perhaps  be remembered  that sophisticated  capitalisation  is 
not in itself a guarantee  of improved  physical  performance.  Indeed  the 
recent  ADAS  surveys  of ‘Complete  Diet Feeding ’, surely  the ultimate  in 
sophistication,  have shown no economic  advantages  over conventional  
systems. Indeed examination  of some of the conclusions  of the most 
recent  report  suggest  the opposite.
76
Summary  of economic  conclusions  (Reference  3)
1. There was no clear evidence  of complete  diet herds improving  yields  
faster  than other  herds;  indeed  the evidence  indicated  the reverse.
2. Complete  diet herds used considerably  more concentrates  per litre of 
milk produced.
3. Complete  diet fed herds  did not on average  achieve  a higher  margin  
over concentrates  than conventionally  fed herds.
4. There still appears  to be no direct financial  reward  from herds on 
complete  diet feeding.
Such conclusions  do not however  show that complete  diet feeding  never  
has a place in dairy herd management.  What they suggest  is that the 
system  should  be adopted  only for reasons  such as ‘ease of management ’ 
rather  than for expectation  of improved  performance.  I would  argue  that 
such ‘ease of management ’ reasons  are far more likely  to apply  in the east 
of England  where a farmer  has access  to countless  arable by-products  
than they are in the west of Ireland.
The merits  of the latest  ‘system ’ of cow feeding —Flat Rate Feeding  of 
Concentrates  — must be judged in a similar way. While the results  
achieved  by such as Fred Gordon  at Hillsborough  and Cled Thomas  at 
Hurley  are impressive,  it is likely that if the system  were adopted  by a 
large number  of commercial  farmers,  results  would show no advantage  
over existing  systems.  Thus flat rate feeding  must be judged  on a wider  
basis,  and it is by such a measure  that it seems  to hold attractions  for the 
Irish farmer.
The philosophy  of the system  meets  the ideals  outlined  earlier  namely,  
using the natural  resource  of grassland  and being a champion  of the 
simpler  approach.  In its simplest  form flat rate feeding  would  require  a 
clamp,  albeit large, of self-feed  silage,  a trough  for feeding  concentrates  
and an unsophisticated  milking  parlour.  So far as the cows  are concerned  
housing  would  be of little benefit,  but from the farmer ’s viewpoint  prob ­
ably essential.
Discussion  of flat rate feeding  tends to mix up two separate  issues,  
firstly the method  of feeding  concentrates  and forage to cows and sec­
ondly,  the absolute  levels  of each component.  Complete  diet and flat rate 
feeding  should be evaluated  on whether  they seem to be the correct  
method  of feeding  for the individual.  The wider question  of absolute  
amounts  of forage and concentrates  is one which all dairy farmers,  
irrespective  of system  of feeding,  should  be asking.
Considering  concentrates  first, where the FMS average  use is currently  
35 cwt per cow, there is no indication  that the use of anything  over about  
25 cwt per cow leads to an improvement  in gross margin  per acre (Table
3).
Table 3
Analysis  of performance  of 1005 FMS farms  by concentrate  use (Reference  2)
Concentrate  use per cow (cwt)  17 23 27 32 37 46
Gross margin  per acre 173 195 217 216 222 221
77
When  .examining  these figures  in the Irish context,  it should  be remem ­
bered that the majority  of the herds included  in the sample  above are 
autumn  calving  and that for spring  calvers  the optimum  use is likely to 
be lower.
When a similar  analysis  is made on the basis of nitrogen  use, some  
improvement  can be seen at the highest  levels, although  that rate of 
improvement  slows  down at about  200 units per acre, around  the current  
FMS average  (Table  4).
Table 4
Analysis  of performance  of 1005 farms  by nitrogen  use (Reference  2)
Nitrogen  use (units  per acre) 62 100 139 178 218 259 333
Gross  margin  per acre 157 193 212 239 238 252 262
The implication  of such figures  is that the average  farmer  is likely to 
get a better  financial  response  from additional  fertiliser  than from addit ­
ional concentrates.  Such analyses  are however  sometimes  misleading  in 
their application  in that the inter-relationships  of such as nitrogen  use 
and stocking  rate are ignored.
This problem  can be overcome  by multiple-regression  analysis.  A 
recent study (Reference  4) indicated  that the direct response  to 1 lb 
nitrogen  was about  0.5 gallons  of milk while  the response  to 1 lb concen ­
trates  was only about  0.1 gallons  milk.
In terms of performance  levels shown  in the Irish comparison  earlier  
in this paper,  it could be argued  that there is scope for increase  of all 
inputs. The weight  of evidence  does however  suggest  that effort should 
be concentrated  on grassland  improvement.  This development  should 
take place alongside  an attempt  to maintain  the traditional  low-cost 
approach  through  which  Irish dairying  can ensure  its future. Lest I be 
accused  of talking  abstractly,  I would  conclude  by suggesting  that target  
p)erformance  might  well be 1100 gallons  from 16 cwt concentrates  when 
stocked  at 1.2 acres  per cow with 250 units of nitrogen,  under  conditions  
prevailing  in much  of western  England.  In the best areas  of Ireland,  con­
centrate  use ;could  well be decreased  and stocking  rate increased  to make  
full use of the potential  of the land.
Such performance  while  not over taxing  the system,  be that the cow or 
the grassland,  is likely to show a good return in terms of both gross 
margin  and, more importantly,  profitability.
References
1. Hughes,  H. C. A comparison  of the economics  of milk production  in Ireland  
and Great  Britain.  Ir. Grassl.  & Anim.  Prod.  Assoc.  J. Vol. 14, p. 67, 1979.
2. Amies,  S. J., Craven,  J. A. and Surah,  M. S. An analysis  of FMS costed  farms  
1978-79.  Milk Marketing  Board. FMS Information  Unit Report  No. 22, Dec­
ember 1979.
3. MAFF.  Complete  feeding  of dairy cows —supplementary  report  on investiga ­
tions carried  out during  1978-79.
4. Hawkins,  S. W. and Rose, P. H. The relationship  between  the rate of fertiliser  
nitrogen  applied  to grassland  and milk production;  an analysis  of recorded  
farm data. Grass  and Forage  Science,  Vol. 34, No. 3, September  1979.
78
Brucellosis  — Strategy  for the Farmer
B. CUNNINGHAM
Department  of Veterinary  Pathology  and Microbiology,  Faculty  of 
Veterinary  Medicine,  University  College,  Dublin.
Although  the strategy  of controlling  Brucellosis  on the farm might be 
simply stated as the “hygienic  management  of every parturition ” it is 
always  helpful  to know why one is advised  to do one thing and not do 
another.  If one has an adequate  knowledge  of the disease  suitable  man­
agement  methods  can be easily  deduced  to suit one’s own farm.
For all practical  purposes  the route of infection  on the farm is via the 
mouth  (it is possible  to transmit  the disease  in other ways but these are 
not of any great importance  in the field).  Thus  we have to protect  animals  
against  eating,  drinking,  or licking  any food,  water  or other  materials  that 
may have become  contaminated.  For instance,  a cow can become  infected  
by licking  her legs after paddling  through  infected  mud or slurry. A 
simpler  approach  is to prevent  these materials  from becoming  contamin ­
ated.
When ingested  the organism  passes  through  the mucosa  into the lym­
phatic  system  where  it meets  the major  defence  system  of the body. The 
bacterial  cells are engulfed  by phagocytes  and carried  to the next lym­
phatic  gland. Some destruction  of the organisms  takes place (more or 
less depending  on whether  the animal  is immunised —vaccinated —or not). 
In the unvaccinated  animal some organisms  will survive  the passage  
through  the lymphatic  system and pass into the blood stream via the 
thoracic  duct — and then become  widely dispersed  through  the body 
tissues. What  happens  next depends  on the age of the animal,  its sex and 
whether  or not it is pregnant.
(i) The young  calf and non pregnant  heifer are very resistant  to infec ­
tion. After  exposure  to infection they  may show  transient  blood  titres  
(very few will develop  permanent  blood titres)  which  in a matter  of 
six months  or so will usually  return  to negative  levels. These  animals  
will have thus acquired  a very useful Natural  Immunity  which  will 
protect  them against  re-infection  in later life. A small percentage  of 
such exposed  animals  (1-2%)  may however,  become  Latent  Carriers  
—and show no sign of the disease  until their first pregnancy  ends in 
an abortion.
It is not a good idea to rely on Natural  Immunity  as this small 
number  of latent carriers  can keep the disease  going in cycles  for 
many years in any large herd.
It is better  to rear the replacement  heifers  away from the adult  herd,  
and when  they are about  a year old to vaccinate  them. At this stage, 
if the adult  herd has been cleared  of the disease,  it might  be prudent  
to carry out an Anamnestic  Test on the heifer replacements  and 
remove  any possible  latent  carriers.
79
Immunisation  — whether  natural  or by vaccination  is not 100%  
effective  . It will protect  70-80%  of females  against  reasonable  
challenge  during  pregnancy.  Hence,  we must arrange  our manage ­
ment  so that in even an accident  situation  heavy  exposure  of pregnant  
females  is not possible.
(ii) The preg;nant  female
If unvaccinated,  the pregnant  female  has no initial defence  against  
invasion  and some organisms  will gain access  to the uterus  and the 
developing  udder. These are the two important  predilection  sites in 
cattle.
In the uterus, the developing  foetal membranes  are particularly  
attractive  to brucella  abortus  and enormous growth  in numbers  takes  
place in them. The foetal cotyledons  are damaged  and abortion  
usually  follows  anytime  later than 37 days after infection —a usual 
interval  is about  6 to 8 weeks. At the time of abortion  enormous  
numbers  of brucella  are released  in the placenta,  the foetal fluids  
and in the foetus. All the aborted  materials  are highly  dangerous  to 
both animal  and human  health.
If no precautions  are taken to control  the spread  of infection  in a 
non-vaccinated  herd the likely outcome  is that 90-100%  of females  
will abort with a loss of 80% of the calf crop.
In unvaccinated  animals  an infective  dose of 15 million  organisms  
will cause 100% abortions.  But a dose as low as 1500 organisms  
can cause 70% of heifers  to abort. Under  normal  farm conditions  
15 million  organisms  would  be a very small dose —emphasising  the 
need for very careful  hygiene.
(iii) The vaccinated  pregnant  female,  although  still susceptible  to heavy 
challenge,  has a very useful degree  of immunity— sufficient  to cope 
with environmental  risks on a well managed  farm.
Subjected  to a challenge  of 15 million  organisms,  70-80%  of vaccin ­
ated heifers  will be completely  protected.  Of the 20-30%  of heifers 
which  will become  reactors  possibly  half of them would  have viable 
calves. This is in marked  contrast  to the case of the unvaccinated  
heifers.
(iv) The male calf is quite resistant  to infection.  At the age of puberty  
he becomes  more susceptible  and can become  infected  in the repro ­
ductive  tract. Infected  bulls sometimes  produce  infected  semen  and 
although  they usually  appear  to cause little harm in natural  service  
their semen  can be very infectious  if used in AI. Chronic  infection  
can cause sterility.
Animal  health
1) An infected  cow discharges  enormous  numbers  of organisms  at the 
time of parturition  (whether  full term or premature).  These  must not 
drain into areas  where  other  cattle  can come in contact  with them.
2) After the placenta  is passed the genital  tract rapidly  involutes  and 
even in a few days the amount  of infection  being passed may be
80
minimal  or nil. Any cow should thus be kept separate  from her 
comrades  at least until after she has cleansed.
3) The loose box should  be cleaned  out and disinfected  after each par­
turition —and the hind parts  of the cow should  be sponged  down  with 
a suitably  diluted  disinfectant  after cleansing.
4) The calf should  be left with the cow for 24 hours so that it will be 
licked clean and will also get sufficient  colostrum.  A “wet” calf put 
in a pen with other  calves  can spread  the disease  as its coat can carry  
heavy  infection.  Even if the mucous  is allowed  to dry into the calf ’s 
coat it is still infective.
5) Dead  calves and foetal membranes  must be buried. They must not 
be thrown  on a dung heap or slurry  tank. They are often lifted with 
a fork, and moved  in a wheelbarrow —both  of which should  then be 
cleaned  and disinfected.
6) Leave  a trough  of disinfectant  outside  each isolation  box— and disin ­
fect your boots when going  in and coming  out.
7) Infection  can survive  in manure  or slurry for 3 months. Thus the 
manure  from the isolation  boxes should  be stacked  in a safe-draining  
area and allowed  to ferment.  Ideally,  isolation  boxes  should  not drain  
into the main slurry tank. If they do, slurry must only be spread  on 
non-grazing  land.
8) An infected  udder  is not of any great importance  to animal  health — 
even to a calf suckling  it (but infected  milk is a great hazard to 
humans.
9) Good herding  every day is essential  during  the season  of calvings  or 
possible  abortions.
At any sign of impending  parturition,  or of abdominal  discomfort  or
uneasiness,  a pregnant  animal  should be isolated  — at least until it is
apparent  that she is not going  to abort.
Human  health
Humans  are often quite susceptible  to Brucellosis.
1) Ninety  per cent of infected  cows are infected  in the udder  and thus 
produce  infected  milk —at least intermittently.  The milk of such cows 
will give a positive  MRT result. Such milk should  never be drunk  
unless  effectively  pasteurised.
2) Assisting  at an abortion,  or even a full term infected  parturition  can 
be particularly  dangerous  as the level of infection  on the calf and in 
the fluids and placenta  can be enormous.  If so assisting  or handling  
any of these materials,  rubber  or plastic  gloves  should  be worn.  After  
use they (and any ropes  used)  should  be effectively  cleaned,  disinfected  
(or sterilised  by boiling) —or buried  with the calf and placenta.
3) Placentae  should  not be manually  removed  unless  the cow is clinically  
ill with metritis —a decision  for your veterinary  surgeon.
4) Before  removing  bedding  from an isolation  box it should  be sprayed  
with disinfectant —e.g. Halomid.
5) Any clothing  contaminated  with uterine  discharges  should  be steeped 
in disinfectant  and then washed.  Furthermore,  any parts of the body
81
similarly  contaminated  should be thoroughly  washed as soon as
possible.
The newborn  calf should not be handled  — except  with gloves. It 
should  be left with the dam for at least a day so that it will be licked  
clean by the dam.
In a vaccinated  herd the within-herd  spread of Brucellosis  can be 
completely  prevented  by using the information  given above.
The only time there is any significant  risk of spread  of infection  on the 
farm is at or near the time of parturition.  Almost  all the attention  should 
be focussed  on this.
For the present,  in the pre-intensive  area, it is most imjxirtant  to keep  
the spread of disease  to a minimum.  In doing so. Brucellosis  can be 
virtually  eliminated  without  too much financial  strain.
At the commencement  of 1981 it is expected  that compulsory  eradica ­
tion measures  will come into force. These can prove economically  
disastrous  if there is much  infection  left in the herd. Most herds  clear up 
rapidly  under  intensive  measures  but some,  particularly  the larger  herds,  
may experience  difficulties.
It is not a simple process  to finally get rid of the last pockets  of 
Brucellosis  infection  in a country.  But the means  to do so are available  
and with farmer  co-operation  they will succeed.  The total eradication  of 
Brucellosis  is worth  working  for—and it is something  that can definitely 
be achieved.
82
Mewgrowth.
If Irish farming  has one basic  strength, it is our ability  
to grow  grass  like nowhere  else in Europe.  And every  new 
growth of grass  is a promise  of more  fodder,  more  stock,  
more  income  for Irifeh farming.
AtGouldings,werelyon  basic  strengths  too.
Reliable  research, dependable  service,  
first class  products.  And  this 
year, as always,  we’re ; v 
workingtowards  
new growth  
in all of .
Gofdding  grows""S'
GoukJing
83
ORBENIN
Beecham  Animal Health, Ferry  House. Lr. Mount Street. Dublin 2 
Orbenin  contatna  500 mg cioxacillin  par syringe
84
Financing  the Dairy  Industry  in 
the Future
P. MacCANNA
Chief  Agricultural  Adviser,  Bank of Ireland,  Dublin,
In the recent  past, we have emerged  from a particularly  buoyant  period  
of credit sufficiency,  good prices,  unprecedented  windfall  gains, and a 
generally  favourable  investment  climate  which accommodated  and en­
couraged  an adventurous  investment  approach.
For those  who availed  of the opportunity,  it was a time which  projected  
farming  onto a new and higher  place of deserved  affluence.  It was a time 
which  the sector  needed;  it was a period  when farmers  were rescued  from  
even the most crude management  of their financial  affairs  by large and 
sometimes  unexpected  price increases.  There was little urgency  in the 
acquisition  of improved  farm or financial  management  skills.
By contrast,  we are now faced with :
— A climate  of credit  restraint
— Higher  interest  rates
— Static prices  and rising costs
— Some uncertainty  about  the shape  of future  agricultural  policies. 
These changing  circumstances  have shifted  the parameters  and have
made decisions  about future investments  more difficult.  The year 1979 
was a bad year for farming;  a year which,  from a borrowing  viewpoint,  
brought  home to farmers  and, indeed,  to lending  institutions,  the need  
for more control in the administration  and use of farm credit in the 
future.
(A) General  availability  of credit
It is relevant,  before we discuss investment  at farm level, to look 
globally  at the credit situation.  The total amount  of credit  made avail ­
able to agriculture  in the years ahead will be shaped  by three major  
factors :—
1. The European  Monetary  System  ; the stability  of our economy  and 
the degree to which the Central  Bank see control  of credit as an 
essential  component  in maintaining  that stability.
2. Agriculture  as a sector  within  the economy  : its importance;  the return  
on the investment  and its overall  stability.  In the last five years,  
agriculture  has clearly  been a priority  area in terms  of opportunities  
for justifiable  and profitable  investment.  The positive  response  by 
Government  and lending  institutions  in making  the necessary  invest ­
ment capital  available  was conditioned  by :
a) The undoubted  potential  which existed  and indeed still exists in 
the agricultural  sector  for increased  production.
b) Our comparative  advantages  in many  areas  of agricultural  produc ­
tion, particularly  in the context  of grassland  based enterpri.ses.
85
c) Price and market  stability  under the influence  of the Common  
Agricultural  Policy.
3. The repayment  capacity  of agriculture  and the security  which  it offers.  
There was considerable  surplus  repayment  capacity  in the sector to 
justify  a 100% increase  in borrowing  by this sector within the last 
7 years.
The credit restrictions  imposed  by the Central Bank, which were 
understandably  in the interests  of the econcmy  as a whole,  were com­
pounded  by other  factors,  particu'arly  the break in the link with Sterling 
and industrial  prob ’ems in the non-Bank  segment  of the financial  sector.  
These events posed particular  difficulties  in rearranging  availab ’e re­
sources  so as to ensure  an even  flow of funds  throughout  the year.
Current  indications  wou ’d suggest  little prospect  of a significant  easing 
in credit  restrictions  for 1980 and perhaps  for some time to come.  How ­
ever, despite  the overall  restrictions  to date, agricu'ture  as a sector has 
fared extremely  well. Despite  the 18% credit expansion  guideline  for 
the economy  as a whole in 1979, advances  to agriculture  increased  by 
25%. I confidently  expect  the sector  to remain  a priority  area for scarce  
funds in the future. Furthermore,  careful management  by lending  
institutions  should  ensure that essential  productive  needs can be satis­
factorily  met throughout  the year.
The Common  Agricultural  Policy is the foundation  for much of the 
increased  confidence  evident  in agriculture  in recent  years.  Its continuation  
is vital if the sector is to remain  a priority  area and justify  preferential  
treatment  and priority  access to scarce funds. Therefore,  I will refer  
briefly  to the Common  Agricultural  Policy  and my current  perception  of 
its likely  development  and impact  in the immediate  years ahead.
(B) Future  development  of the C.A.P.
Current  political  and media  comment  might tend to suggest  that com- 
p’ete disintegration  of the C.A.P.  is imminent.  However,  when looked  at 
dispassionately,  this viewpoint  gives a rather  imbalanced  reflection  of the 
real situation.
In reality,  external  political  issues  and frustration  with the lack of pro­
gress in developing  other Community  policies  play as important  a role 
in the current  controversy  as do any internal  deficiencies  in the C.A.P.  
as an institution.
A realistic  view of the future development  of the C.A.P. demands  
rational  assessment  of the many complex  interacting  issues, some of 
which  demand  change,  while  others  strongly  favour  retention  of the status  
quo.
I see the critical  influences  which  will determine  the future  development  
of the C.A.P.  as follows  :
(1) Negative  pressures
— Existing  limits of the Community ’s so called ‘own resources ’, as 
determined  by the current  ceiling  of 1 % VAT receipts,  are likely 
to be reached  later in 1980 or early in 1981.
86
The British  problem,  whereby  the UK is calling  for a contribution  
to the Community  Budget  more in line with its receipts  from the 
Community,  is exerting  significant  downward  pressure  on EEC  
expenditure,  particularly  in the agricultural  sector.
The European  Parliament  is engaging  in a degree  of muscle-flexing 
in an effort to gain more control  over Community  agricultural  
expenditure.  These tactics  are tending  to disrupt  the day-to-day  
financial  operations  of the C.A.P.
Community  enlargement  through  the accession  of Greece  in 1981 
and possibly  Spain and Portugal  at a later date could lead to a 
further  dilution  of the funds available  to meet the needs of an 
expanded  agricultural  sector  in the Community.
Current  international  developments,  particularly  the recent  deter ­
ioration  of the US/USSR  conflict,  have market  implications  for 
certain  food products.  Maintenance  of prices for these products  
may necessitate  increased  Community  support  in an already  
delicate  budgetary  situation.
Structural  surpluses,  particularly  in the dairy sector,  are absorbing  
an increasing  proportion  of dwindling  Community  resources.  
Growing  consumerism.
(2) Positive  influences
— The Common  Agricultural  Policy is central to the continued  
existence  of the European  Community  as a coherent  unit. At the 
present  time, the C.A.P.  is the most developed  and arguably  the 
only fully fledged  Community  Policy  in existence.
— The EEC Commission  accepts  the need for an agricultural  policy 
incorporating  a system of supports  and safeguards  for farm in- 
eomes  if the Community  ideal of efficient  family  farms is to be 
attained.
— Removal  of support  could mean the movement  of 3-4 million  
peop'e  off the land, adding  to an already  serious  unemployment  
problem.
— The dynamic  nature of agriculture  itse’f is likely to betray the 
transient  nature of current  market  problems.  Factors  such as 
disease,  the international  economic  and trading  climate  and in 
particular,  weather,  all have a significant  influence  on the nature  
of agricultural  production  so that within  three or four years,  the 
current  dairy surplus  is likely to be supplanted  by problems  of a 
totally  different  nature.
— Ireland  is by no means  alone in its defence  of the C.A.P. Other  
influential  Community  partners,  particularly  France,  have expres ­
sed solidarity  in the objective  of maintaining  the C.A.P.  more or 
less in its present  form.
— The stren^h  of the farming  lobby,  not alone here in Ireland,  but 
particularly  in Germany  and France must be recognised  as a 
formidable  force in promoting  the continued  existence  of the
C.A.P.  in its present  form. Farmer  power  and influence  is usually
87
disproportionate  to the numerical  strength  of farmers  in the overall 
population.
— The total commitment  of all our political  representatives  to the 
maintenance  of C.A.P.
Although  some modifications  are inevitable,  current  evidence  would 
suggest  that the essential  elements  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy 
will survive.  Future  modifications  are likely  to reflect  changes  in empha ­
sis and operational  details  rather  than in the fundamental  character  of the 
Policy  which  is likely to remain  more or less intact  as the cornerstone  of 
all Community  initiatives.
In the Irish situation,  possible  adjustments  to the Policy,  particularly  
in relation  to the dairy sector,  may have some effect on the repayment  
capacity  of existing  borrowers.  However,  I am satisfied  that at both the 
production  and processing  levels,  there is sufficient  scope for improved  
output  and efficiency  to offset the financial  effects  of any likely refine­
ments  in the C.A.P.
While the future environment  in the agricultural  sector will demand  
more stringent  loan appraisal  and financial  control,  I believe  that a com­
mitment  to the financing  of further  development  is fully justified  by the 
overall opportunities  for profitable  investment  which still exist in the 
industry.
As a Bank,  we are aware of the opportunities  that exist in the sector 
for additional  low risk investment  justifying  the sector as a priority  for 
allocation  of available  credit.
(C) Investment  issues  in dairying —taxation
Taxation  and other factors  are causing  some confusion  in farming  at 
the moment.  In relation  to the investment  options  that exist, recent  
surveys  by some Co-operatives  suggest  that some farmers  are thinking  of 
reducing  milk output,  other farmers  are considering  cessation  of milk 
production  altogether  and taking  advantage  of the Dairy Herd Conver ­
sion Scheme.
Income  taxation  is a new variable  in Irish farming  and is one which  
will continue  to exert an influence  on farm investment  decisions  through ­
out the 1980 ’s.
Table 1
Family  farm income  *
<£2000  £2000-£5000
All farms  50% 30%
Full-time  farms  24% 36%
* 1978 Farm Management  Survey£5000-£8000 >£8000
20%
18% 22%
Tab'e 1 shows the percentage  of farms in the various  income  cate­
gories  for 1978. The majority  of farmers  can intensify  without  taxation  
becoming  an issue. For farmers  for whom  taxation  is currently  an issue  
the following  points  are relevant.
88
(a) Income  will never be increased  by cutting back output while the 
value of marginal  (additional)  output  exceeds  marginal  costs.
(b) Taxation  will reduce the marginal  income from a given level of 
production  to an extent  which  varies  in accordance  with the marginal  
rate of tax which it attracts  but will never  eliminate  it.
This reduction  is more serious  for the larger,  higher  income,  higher  tax 
bracket  farm and gives rise to two separate  types of decisions  based 
purely  on utility  criteria :
(a) Decisions  in relation  to future  expansion.
(b) Decisions  in relation  to possible  contraction.
Decisions  to/not  to expand
It is important  here to repeat a point which I made at a meeting  of 
this Association  in 1975 ; “that from an economic  point of view a 
decision  not to expand  from say a 50 to a 70 cow unit and incur the 
capital  expenditure  involved  in reorganised  milking  facilities,  extra build ­
ings, extra stock, etc. is an absolutely  different  one to a decision,  once 
one has made the investment,  to reduce stock numbsrs  from 70 to 50 
and leave fixed investments  on which loan repayments  are being made,  
under utilised ”. 1 can think of no situation  where on strictly  economic  
grounds  such a cut-back  could be justified.
In considering  expansion,  the degree justified  will depend on the 
question  “At what point will the additional  effort and risk involved  in 
future expansion  not be justified  by the after-tax  return  to such expan ­
sion ?” Farmers  with an income  level being  taxed at the higher  rates will 
generally  reach that point at an earlier stage than those with lower  
income  levels  and lower marginal  rates of tax.
We must accept  that a tax regime,  by reducing  the marginal  return,  
will reduce the level of intensity  at which the more commercial  high 
income  farmer  will ultimately  farm.
Decision  to change  system  (Dairy  Herd Conversion  Scheme)
This Scheme  has a limited  application  to the Irish dairying  sector. Its 
application  is strictly for farmers  who have large acreages;  a tillage  
option;  mediocre  performance  or some particular  personal  circumstances  
which  might  justify  the decision.  For farmers  who do not have a tillage  
option  and who would have to rely on the substitution  of a low income 
drystock  farming  system,  the Dairy Herd Conversion  Scheme  has no 
place.
Again,  for the smaller  farmer  where the attainment  of an income  to 
provide  a reasonable  standard  of living is the objective,  the Dairy Herd  
Conversion  Scheme  is not an economic  option.
With the increase  in the number  of farmers  paying  tax on accounts  we 
should  be wary not to pursue  tax minimisation  as an end in itself through  
indiscriminate  or marginal  investments,  particularly  in elaborate  machin ­
ery and buildings.  The UK experience  has shown  that the introduction  
of taxation  on accounts  gave a boost to investment  in buildings  and
89
machinery,  obviously  with a view to minimisation  of tax. This false 
strategy  was pointed  out recently  by no less an authority  than Mr. 
Arnold  Christensen,  President  of the British  Grassland  Association.  He 
emphasised  the danger  of such a strategy.  His priorities  were investments  
not in depreciating  or wasting  assets but, rather investment  in wealth  
creating  assets, particu'arly  stock. One must however  in making  this 
statement  point  to the need for substantial  additional  investment  by many  
farmers  in basic building  structures.
Desirable  tax incentives
Whatever  the future shape of the taxation  regime,  there is a need for 
incentives  to encourage  investment  in stock as a priority.  A considerable  
proportion  of investment  over the last four/five  years has been infra ­
structural  with little direct impact  on direct output. Therefore,  special  
treatment  is required  for such investment  since stock is not a self- 
liquidating  asset like machinery  or buildings.  This characteristic  of stock 
tends to lead to constraints  if increased  investment  in stock is taxed as 
current  income.
(D) Cost of credit —minimising  annual  repayments
Current  high interest  rates are a major deterrent  to investment  in all 
sectors. Strategies,  which will minimise  the total cost of servicing  loans,  
can be adopted.
(1) Use of overdraft
The first facility  which should be used to the optimum  level is the 
overdraft.  Typically,  £1,000  which can legitimately  be transferred  from 
term loan to a justifiable  overdraft  reduces  annual commitments  by 
approximately  £120. This is due to a lower interest  rate and to the fact 
that the average  utilisation  of overdraft  is approximately  66%. However,  
the account  must revert to credit for at least 30 days in the year. The 
use of overdraft  to the limit justified  by cash flow can effect considerable  
savings.
(2) Length  of term loan
There is some scope for reducing  annual  repayment  commitments  by 
lengthening  terms of loan. However,  there is a limitation  to this and 
Table  2 shows  that at high interest  rates,  there is litt'e advantage  in going
Table 2
Repayment  of £10,000  term loan at present  interest  rates
Term  of 
loan 
yearsRate of 
interestAnnual
repaymentsTotal
repayments
5 17 3,048 15,250
10 18 2,191 21,910
15 m 1,968 29,520
20 m 1,929 38,580
90
beyond  a 10-year  term when one takes account  of the total repayments  
which  have to be made.
When the profile  of borrowings  are short term, say under five years,  
difficulties  can be alleviated  by adding  a few extra years to the term of 
the loan However,  where  borrowings  are already  re’atively  long term,  say 
8-9 years, little advantage  can be gained from further  lengthening  the 
term of loan.
(3) Leasing —relevance
Leasing  also has certain  attractions  for farmers  who cannot  utilise  their  
full capital  allowances.  The following  points  are relevant :
• The advantages  of leasing  are very sensitive  to the ultimate  tax regime 
for farmers  and each case has to be assessed  in the light of individual  
circumstances.• It enables  farmers  not in the tax net to benefit  from lower interest  
charges,  since leasing  agencies  can claim tax credits  through  depre ­
ciation  allowances.• If the notional  system  continues  in some form, farmers  under such a 
system  with total interest  payments  in excess  of the normal  interest  
allowances  (currently  £2,400)  cou'd benefit  in a similar  way to those 
not in the tax net.• Leasing  releases  capital  for alternative  uses.
(4) Foreign  currency
Foreign  currency  has censiderab'e  attractions  in terms of reduced  
interest  charges.  However,  this advantage  must be balanced  against  the 
exchange  risk inherent  in foreign  currency  borrowing.  This risk can be 
covered  or insured  against  in the case of exports  which provide  foreign  
eurrency  receivables.  This is a mechanism  which has been widely  used 
by agribusiness.  Bank of Ireland has written some £30m in foreign  
currency  loans for agribusiness  in 1980.
At farm level, the application  of foreign  currency  borrowing  poses  
some problems,  un'ess  the Government  is prepared  to underwrite  possible 
exchange  losses. However,  special  circumstances  do occur,  for instance,  
where  the risk of exchange  loss can be minimised  and substantial  savings 
in terms of interest  can be made. Linder the Cattle Over-Wintering  
Foreign  Currency  Scheme  introduced  in 1979, Bank of Ireland has 
advanced  the equiva'ent  of approximately  £IR10m  which is currently  
attracting  an interest  rate of 10|% as opposed  to 16% and over for 
domestic  currency  borrowings,  if available.
Foreign  currency  lending  is a relatively  new development  in Irish 
banking  and more widespread  adoption  will demand  further  adaptation  
and improvement  of current  lending  mechanisms.  In this competitive  
world we will be constantly  searching  for ways in which it can be used 
to benefit  the whole  economy  and particularly  the farming  sector.
(E) Investment  decisions  in dairying —efficiency
Repayment  capacity  in dairying  has been reduced  considerably  by the 
price/cost  squeeze  and the prospects  of a more rigorous  tax regime  on
91
GastoGrass
iscomerting  
Natural  Gas 
into
Ammonia  
tomanufacture  
fertiTisersto  
service  agricuiturai  ireiand
to benefit  the 
Nation's  economyi
NET
NmUGIN  EIREANN  TEORAN1A
92
some farms. The importance  of improved  technology  as the basis for 
maintaining  or increasing  repayment  capacity  has been stressed  many  
times. Table 2 which  shows  the vastly increased  repayment  capacity  of 
an 850-gallon  cow herd at a stocking  rate of 1.2 as against  the more  
traditional  herd of 600-gallons  with a stocking  rate of 1.5/1.8.
Table 3
Importance  of good technical  performance —60 acre dairy farm
Stocking  rate600 gallons/cow
1.1 1.5850 gallons/cow  
l.I 1.5
Available  to meet  
repayments £3631 £1368 £7459 £3652
Borrowing  capacity  
(10 yr. term loan @ 18%) £16500 £6250 £34000 £16500
The break-even  yield which is necessary  to justify a certain  level of 
borrowing  will depend  on the particular  investment  to be made. Dairy  
farm investments  fall into three broad  categories  :
1. Cases  where  buildings  and milking  facilities  are adequate  and expan ­
sion requires  investment  only in additional  stock.
2. Cases  where  expansion  requires  investment  in stock and buildings,  but 
milking  facilities  are adequate  for the larger  herd.
3. Cases where expansion  requires  investment  not only in stock and 
buildings  but also in new milking  facilities  to accommodate  the ex­
panded  herd.
Table 4 gives an indication  of the average  borrowings  per additional  
cow added to the herd in each of these three situations  and gives the 
approximate  yield per cow necessary  to justify  the investment,  assuming  
all funds have to be borrowed.  It highlights  once again the importance  
of a high technical  performance,  particularly  where substantial  levels of 
fixed investment  have to be made.
Table 4
Expansion  from 30 to 50 cows
Investment  required Yield required
A. Cows only 500-550  gals.
B. Cows + extra
Accommodation 650-700  gals.
C. Cows -t- extra  
accommodation
New milking  parlour 800-850  gals.
93
(F) Some guidelines  on borrowing —the implications  
For planning
Priorities  must be carefully  considered  and the emphasis  must be on 
productive  investment.  For people  with limited  repayment  capacity,  cash 
generating  investments  must be given priority,  e.g. too much of the 
limited  repayment  capacity  of under-stocked  farms should  not be used 
in servicing  loans for drainage  which will not increase  cash income  for 
three/four  years. One needs to differentiate  between  drainage  of very 
wet land which will not increase  cash income  for three/four  years and 
the rehabilitation  of land from which a crop of barley  can be harvested  
within  a year.
Building  costs must also be examined.  Investment  in fixed assets  must  
be matched  to the immediate  cash return,  not the anticipated  cash return  
three/four  years hence. For example,  modification  of existing  milking  
facilities  as a first step would,  for many,  be a priority  over building  of a 
new facility. This philosophy  has much relevance  today to many 
developing  dairy  farms.
Technical  performance
The importance  of technical  performance  and its relationship  with 
various  levels of repayment  capacity  has been emphasised  already. In 
planning  investment  requirements  and estimating  repayment  capacity,  
farmers,  advisers  and indeed lending  agencies  should not budget  on a 
high performance,  simply  because  of a high level of commitment.  In 
these situations,  the evidence  suggests  that calculations  which are based 
on these types of assumptions  are unlikely  to occur.
Records/financial  control
The disciplines  of planning,  of keeping  farm accounts  to ensure that 
priorities  are right, to support  assumptions  about expected  levels of 
performance,  and to monitor  achievement  of targets, are becoming 
essential  components  in the proper  use of own and borrowed  funds.
It is important  that farmers  do not become  obsessed  with keeping  farm  
records  for taxation  purposes  alone. Farm records  are of greatest  value  
in helping  to improve  the technical  and financial  management of  the farm.
(G) Repayment  difficulties
It is useful to refer to the difficulties  which were created  by the sub­
stantial  drop in farming  incomes  last year. This drop in incomes  pre­
cipitated  liquidity  problems  on some farms. The cattle sector had a 
particularly  difficult  year and there were many  cases  where  requests  were  
made to have loan repayments  deferred.  Our Bank was constructive  in 
dealing  with these cases.
For a small minority  who have more deep rooted  problems  which  are 
now becoming  apparent,  I wish to emphasise  the Bank ’s commitment  to 
be constructive  namely,  taking  all feasible  steps  to ensure  the maintenance  
and indeed  expansion  of the farm business.  Our commitment  is to keep  
the agricultural  sector  moving  as rapidly  as possible  and each individual
94
2.
3.farm within  it. Some hard decisions  may have to be taken in a small 
percentage  of cases. The client  who has a problem  should  use the services 
of his Agricultural  Adviser/Consultant  to analyse the situation  and 
develop  strategies  to alleviate  the problem.
Options  open to the bank in a difficult  situation
1. Where  hard core has built-up  in the current  account : convert  this to 
a term loan, provided  the farm can meet existing  and new term loan 
repayments.
Restructure  term loan — some borrowings  may lend themselves  to 
being  put on a longer  term. However,  as pointed  out previously,  there  
is little benefit  in extending  the term of loan for longer  than ten years. 
In addition,  the desirability  of the lengthening  of the term of the loan 
would  depend  on the particular  project  and the use of the funds. 
Deferring  repayment  of principal  for one year —this would be a 
reasonable  strategy  provided  there was hope that the farmer  could  
return  to meeting  full principal  and interest  repayments.  However,  I 
would  point  out here that we are operating  within  a very tight guide ­
line from the Cenral Bank and deferred  repayments  of principal  
reduce  the capacity  of the total lending  system  to make  money  avail ­
able for new development  which  should  take place. However,  despite  
this implication  in some situations,  the strategy  is justified.
The one situation  which  must be avoided  at all costs by the Bank  and 
indeed  by the borrower  is that the borrowing  should  start to run away  
from the client,  i.e. that the borrower  cannot  meet interest,  and finds  
himself  paying  interest  on accumulating interest  in the following  years. 
This is a recipe  for disaster.
Options  open to the farmer
1. Improved  husbandry  : In many  cases we find that within  the limits  of 
the present  farming  programme  there is considerable  scope for in­
creasing  income  and repayment  capacity  through  improved  manage ­
ment,  e.g. on the dariy farm, improved  milk yield per cow, lower  feed 
costs, better  quality  silage.
2. A change  of system  : the disposal  of some drystock  assets,  substitution  
with tillage thus reducing  total overall  borrowings,  substitution  of 
cows for drystock,  substitution  of high yielding  cows for low yielding  
cows in the herd. All these strategies  can be considered.
In many cases, it is the last increment  of borrowing  that is causing  
most trouble.  The nature  of agriculture  itself being cyclical,  a good year 
would  put most accounts  back on the straight  and narrow  once again.
(H) Some  pitfalls  to be avoided  in using borrowed  finance
It is perhaps  now relevant  to deal with some of the pitfalls  which 
farmers  can encounter  in dealing  with the financing  of their operations  :
1. With repayment  difficulties,  faee up to problems  immediately  and 
seek help from Advisers/Consultants;  keep the Bank Manager  in­
formed.
95
2. In making  a case for concession,  provide  supporting  background  in­
formation.  Peope short of £10,000/£15,000  on budget,  looking  for 
concessions  in 1980 and 1981, should  be able to explain  or prove  that 
the flaws in the system  which  caused  the loss in the first place can be 
controlled.
3. Do not finance  fixed investment  out of cash flow. In recent years 
when cash flow was good and credit  not restricted  farmers  commonly  
embarked  on investment  in machinery,  farm buildings,  etc., only 
seeking  loan facilities  when the project  was well underway  and a 
shortage  of cash became  apparent.  This is a highly  dangerous  prac­
tice. Repayment  capacity  may not exist and current  credit  restrictions  
may not allow  the degree  of flexibility  which  existed  in the past.
4. Do not exceed  your loan approval  without  first consulting  with your  
lending  institution.  People  have commonly  exceeded  their permission,  
particularly  in the case of land purchase.  These applications  are 
examined  very critically  and in many cases, loans approved  are the 
very upper  limit of the repayment  capacity  of the client. There is no 
scope for exceeding  it. It is extremely  imprudent  to exceed  a loan 
approval  without  discussing  the matter  with your Manager.
5. There is concern  about easier credit. When some farmers  find it 
difficult  to obtain  credit from the major institutions,  which  examine  
applications  professionally,  they tend to utilise less disciplined  forms  
of credit. When repayment  capacity  is tight, resorting  to sources  of 
credit which do not subject  the total farming  operation  to critical  
analysis  is dangerous.  The total repayment  capacity  of the farm must  
always  be taken  into account.
However,  the responsibility  for his actions  is ultimately  the borrower ’s. 
Entering  into substantiai  financial  commitments  without  checking  on 
repayment  capacity  is likely to result in trouble. We have often been 
rescued  from careless  management  of our financial  affairs  in recent  years  
by windfall  gains which  are unlikely  to recur in the future.
(I) Conclusion
Despite  the current  uncertainties,  farmers  should  continue  to expand  
stock  numbers.  Investment  in stock,  e.g. breeding  heifers,  is considerably  
more attractive  now than in 1979. A reduction  in the price of heifers 
by over £200 is the equivalent  of approximately  6p-8p  per gallon,  a 
point  which  should  be borne in mind.
Smaller  farmers  have no option but to continue  to expand.  Current  
EEC proposals  are not policy and, in my view, are unlikely  to be 
accepted  in their present  form. Already  a considerable  part of the EEC ’s 
objective  in curbing  expansion  has been achieved  simply  by the confusion  
that has arisen from the proposals.
Farmers  should,  where feasible,  continue  to expand  stock numbers.  
Considerable  surplus  land and building  capacity  exist on many  
farms.
I am satisfied  that the future  of the milk producer  is fairly secure. By 
1983/84  1 doubt very much if it will be the problem  issue. Agriculture
96
is a cyclical  industry  and based on my experience  of our 20 years in 
dealing  with dairy farming,  I would  have no hesitation  in recommending  
to the young  farmer  to undertake  expansion  of a dairy  enterprise.
Credit  is likely to be tight for the economy  as a whole,  but agricul ­
ture will remain  a priority  area for additional  investment  funds.
There were considerable  difficulties  last year in spreading  available  
credit  evenly  throughout  the year. We hojje to ensure  an adequate  avail ­
ability  of funds for investment  of a productive  nature  right throughout  
the year. The size of this availability  will depend  on the Central  Bank  
guidelines.  Funds  should also be available  to meet ordinary,  seasonal  
and stocking  needs.
The emphasis  for the future must be on the improvement  of our 
technical  skills. More attention  must be devoted  to planning  financial  
aspects  of the farming  business.
Finally,  my view of the early  eighties  is one of cautious  optimism.  The 
climate  for investment  is considerably  more attractive  than that which 
faced many of our best farmers  when they initiated  dairy expansion  in 
the mid-sixties.  Overall,  I would  advise  young  farmers  in similar  situa ­
tions to ‘have a go’ and we as a Bank will support  them to the greatest  
fjossible  degree.
97
ABSTRACTS
TILLERING  IN GRASS  SWARDS
A. J. BRERETON  and O. T. CARTON  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
N ewtiller  production  and tiller deaths  occur  continuously  through  the 
season. For a brief period  shortly  before  flowering,  new tiller production  
ceases  and the rate of tiller death increases  sharply.  Shortly  afterwards  
new tiller production  rates increase  dramatically  for a short period  and 
the rate of tiller death declines.  The new tillers produced  immediately  
after flowering  do not emerge  until late in summer.
Data were presented  illustrating  these processes.  Data were also 
presented  relating  these processes  with flowering.  The implications  of the 
data for herbage  production  were discussed.
EVALUATION  OF THE MACHINE  WASHING  OF HERBAGE  
SAMPLES  CUT AT TWO HEIGHTS
G. B. NICHOLL
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunscny,  Co. Meath.
Herbage  samp'es  cut to ground  level may contain  soil contaminants  
which  can lead to analytical  errors. The washing  of herbage  samples  cut 
to either  ground  level or approximately  2.5 cm above ground  level was 
evaluated  using  a domestic  washing  machine  with a counter-sunk  agitator.  
Within  the two cutting  levels,  samples  were either  not washed,  or washed 
in cold water  for 2 minutes  with the excess  water  removed  by spinning. 
All samples  were dried, ground  and analysed  for percentage  ash and 
in vitro dry matter  digestibility  (DMD)  and organic  matter  digestibility  
(OMD).
Washed  samples  had a lower dry matter  (DM) content  and the same  
OMD as unwashed  samples.  Cutting  height  did not affect DM content  
of the samples,  but a difference  in favour  of cutting  above ground  level 
was found for OMD. Both organic  matter  (OM)  content  and DMD  were 
higher in washed  samples  but this depended  on cutting  height,  where 
larger differences  were generally  found in favour  of washed  compared  
with unwashed  samples  cut to ground  level. Samples  cut to 2.5 cm above 
ground  level were not adversely  affected  by washing.
It was concluded  that the machine  washing  of ground-level  cut herbage  
samples  was an effective  means  of removing  soil contamination  without  
adversely  affecting  analysis  of herbage  quality  components.
98
BREEDING  RYEGRASS  FOR IMPROVED  PRODUCTION  
AND PERSISTENCE
B. S. AHLOOWALIA
Plant Breeding  Department,  Agricultural  Institute,  Oak Park, Carlow.
Cultivars  of Italian  ryegrass  (Loliuin  multijloruni  Lam.) have earlier  
growth  in spring  and give higher  yield than those of perennial  ryegrass  
(Lolium  perenne  L.). They are, however,  less persistent  and have shorter  
life span than the perenials.  In order  to combine  the better  characters  of 
the two parents,  tetraploid  hybrids  were produced  by crossing  colchicine  
induced  polyploids  (2n=28,29,30)  of perennial  ryegrass  with the tetra ­
ploid cultivar  ‘Tetrone ’. One hundred  and fifteen populations  of such 
hybrids  were tested  for their yield and quality  in small plot (4.5 x 1.2 m^) 
trials and compared  with the cultivars  ‘Lemtal ’ (2x), ‘Tetila ’ (4x), ‘Tet­
rone ’ (4x), ‘Barmultra ’ (4x), ‘Sabalan ’ (4x) of Italian ryegrass  and a 
hybrid cultivar  ‘Sabel ’ (4x). The check cultivars  ‘Lemtal ’ and ‘Sabel ’ 
were replicated  three times  each; all the other  treatments  were unreplica ­
ted. The plots were sampled  during  1974- ’76 by cutting  four times each 
year.
The cultivars  ranked  as Lemtal  = Tetilia  > Barmultra  > Tetrone  
> Sabalan  = Sabel in their annual  dry matter  yield and digestible  dry 
matter  production,  the difference  between  the highest  and the lowest 
yielding  cultivars  being 10%.
The hybrids  (in their mean  performance)  produced  4% less annual  dry 
matter  (P>0.05),  and 5% less digestible  dry matter  (P>0.01)  and had 
1.3% lower  dry matter  content  than the mean of the six cultivars.  How ­
ever, the hybrid mean performance  was equal to that of the cultivars  
‘Sabalan ’ and ‘Sabel ’. The hybrid mean quality  i.e. digestibility,  crude  
protein  content,  crude protein  yield and seasonal  production  up to mid-  
June equalled  that of the cultivars.  Ten hybrids  were selected  on the 
basis of their individual  yield and quality  assessment,  which  out-yielded  
the parental  cultivar  ‘Tetrone ’ by 2-13%  in dry matter  yield.  Two hybrids  
out-yielded  the control  cultivar  ‘Lemtal ’ by 2% and 5% in dry matter  
and 3% and 9% in digestible  dry matter. Five of these hybrids  had 4 to 
14% more dry matter  up to mid-June  and 3-10% more protein  yield. 
These hybrids  rated between  6.5 and 7.0 for persistence  on 1-9 scale as 
compared  to 4.9 of ‘Lemtal ’, the cultivar  with the highest  persistence  
and 3.3 for Tetrone ’, the parental  Italian  cultivar.  The selected  hybrids  
headed  2-5 days later than cv. ‘Lemtal ’.
It is concluded  that hybridization  between  Italian  and perennial  rye­
grass at tetraploid  level is an efficient  technique  for combining  high yield  
and quality  with high persistence.
99
CULTIVAR  EVALUATION  USING  BEEF  CATTLE  
M. RYAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
Over three years,  6 ryegrass  cultivars  were compared  in terms  of carry ­
ing capacity,  DM yield,  DMD,  content  of live and dead material.
Vigor (Melle)  was 8% better in carrying  capacity  than the standard  
S24 while Sabrina  was only to 80% of S24. Vigor plots on botanical  
analysis  showed  higher tiller numbers  than the other grasses  with the 
highest  content  of ryegrass  in them. Ground  cover measurements  taken  
at the time of quadrat  sampling  for DM yield showed  that Vigor  had the 
highest  percent  ground  cover.  The tetraploid  Barpastra  had lower  values 
in November.
The regression  of total animal  LWG  on DM yield gave an R- value of 
74 for the equation  LWG (kg/ha)=284.3  -i- 0.07C6  DM (kg/ha).
In the silage evaluation  there was no significant  difference  in LWG  
between  the silages  made  from the 6 cultivars  which  were S24, Barpastra,  
Sabrina,  Vigor,  Cropper,  Oakpark.
EFFECTS  OF CATTLE  DUNG  PAT  ON PASTURE  DRY MATTER  
PRODUCTION  AND QUALITY
T. NOLAN,  J. F. CONNOLLY  and FRANCOISE  RONNEL  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Creagh,  Ballinrobe,  Co. Mayo.
Most studies  of mixed  grazing  have indicated  that the benefits  to pro­
duction  are associated  with the complementary  grazing  patterns  of sheep  
and cattle. This relates  especially  to sheep consuming  the high grass  
areas around  the cattle dung pats, which are refused  by cattle. Under  
cattle only grazing  approximately  10% of the area can be covered  by 
dung pats, 40% of the area can be under  high grass and between  35 and 
75% (depending  on season)  of available  herbage  DM can be in the high 
grass areas.
This study was devoted  to identifying  the characteristics  of the high 
grass areas. It was found that between  May Ilth and July 25th (which  
included  3 or 4 grazing  cycles)  these areas had two and a half times  
(excluding  dung pat areas) greater  pasture  growth  rate compared  with 
low grass areas. The area apparently  affected  (high grass with greener  
colour)  was about 0.2m “ on average  which was almost six times the 
average  dung pat area. The N P and K contents  in high grass DM were 
11% to 19% greater  than in low grass DM but the effect on N content  
was only for a short period. With average  contents  of 3.19% N, 0.50% 
P and 3.52%  K in high grass DM compared  with 3.08%  N, 0.44%  P and 
2.95% K in low grass DM it was found that 24% of N, 25% of P and 
26% of K in available  total DM can be concentrated  in one tenth of the 
area. Under  cattle only grazing,  ‘high grass ’ represents  10% to 18% of 
the area and about 36% of available  DM and could provide  37% of N, 
39% of P and nearly  40% of K.
High  grass  DM Ca content  was on average  14.5% lower  compared  with 
low grass. Mg levels  were similar  in both herbages.
100
THE EFFECT  OF WILTING  AND FORMIC  ACID  TREATMENT
ON SILAGE  INTAKE  AND MILK  PRODUCTION  BY COWS
J. J. MURPHY  and P. A. GLEESON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moore  park Research  Centre,  Ferinoy.
Co. Cork.
The effects  of wilting  herbage  up to 30% dry matter  before  ensiling  and 
the effects  of applying  85% formic  acid to direct cut material  on sub­
sequent  silage intake and milk yields by dairy cows were examined  in 
previous  experiments.  The effect of wilting  to higher  dry matter  levels 
or applying  acid to wilted herbage  before  ensiling  had not been investi ­
gated. Thus,  in this experiment  unwilted  and 36h wilted  silage both with 
and without  formic acid treatment  were studied together  with a 60h 
wilted silage.
An area of 17 ha of perennial  ryegrass  was divided  into five equal  
portions,  mown  and harvested  with a precision  chop forage  harvester  as 
follows;  (1) immediately  after mowing;  (2) immediately  after mowing  
treated  with 85% formic  acid (approx.  2.3 1/t); (3) following  36h wilting; 
(4) following  36h wilting  treated  with formic  acid (approx.  2.3 1/t); (5) 
following  60h wilting. These  silages  were fed ad libitum  over a six week  
period  to five groups  of 9 early calving  spring  cows selected  on calving  
date and blocked  on milk yield. They  were supplemented  with 5.0 kg/day  
of a 16% crude protein barley-soyabean  meal concentrate.  The pH, 
DM%  and resulting  animal  performance,  milk yield ,kg/day),  silage  DM 
intake  (kg/day)  and partial  feed conversion  efficiencies  (kg milk/ 1000 kg 
silage DM intake)  were as follows:  (1) 3.76, 21.2, 17.69, 1.76, 2009; (2) 
3.71,20.5,  17.98. 1.65, 2140;  (3) 3.97. 28.8 17.46.2.15,  1576; (4) 4.11, 31.4, 
16.92, 2.14, 1519; (5) 4.26, 39.2, 18.28, 1.99, 1806. All the silages  were 
well preserved.  Wilting  increased  the dry matter  content  from about  21% 
up to 30 and 39%. Milk yield on silage (4) was significantly  lower  than 
that on silage (5). There  were no significant  differences  between  the milk 
yields on the other silages. Wilting  significantly  increased  silage dry 
matter  intake  but since resulting  milk yields  were not significantly  chan ­
ged the partial  food conversion  efficiency  on these silages  was significantly 
lower  than on unwilted  material.  The application  of 85% formic  acid to 
the unwilted  or wilted herbage  did not improve  animal performance  
probably  because  in both cases  the control  silages  were well preserved.
101
THE EFFECT  OF WILTING  GRASS  SILAGE  AND MONENSIN  
SODIUM  ON THE INTAKE  AND PERFORMANCE  OF BEEF
CATTLE
R. W. J. STEEN
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough.
Co. Down.
In several  experiments  wilting  grass prior to ensilage  has increased  the 
dry matter  intake  of unsupplemented  silage but has not resulted  in any 
improvement  in animal  performance,  providing  a good fermentation  has 
been achieved  in the unwilted  material.  An experiment  has therefore  
been carried  out to examine  the effects  of wilting  on silage intake and 
animal  performance  and also to investigate  the interaction  between  wilt­
ing and the feed additive  monensin  sodium  when the silages  are supple ­
mented  with barley.
A perennial  ryegrass  dominant  sward  was cut in early August  and late 
September,  1979 after regrowth  intervals  of 8 and 7 weeks  respectively. 
Half of the material  was ensiled immediately  and the remainder  was 
wilted for 3-4 ways. At ensiling  the unwilted  and wilted herbages  con­
tained 160 and 266 g kg“^ of dry matter  respectively.  The silages  were 
offered  cd libimrn  to 48 aarolals-cross  cattle (32 steers and 16 heifers,  
mean initial fasted liveweight  350 kg) for a period  of 21 weeks. Twelve 
of the 24 animals  on each silage  treatment  received  a supplement  of 2.2 
kg of fortified  barley  per head per day while the other 12 received  the 
same supplement  plus 200 mg of monensin  sodium  per head per day. 
Silage dry matter  intake,  animal  liveweight  gain and carcase  gain data 
were presented.
A NOVEL  LABORATORY  APPROACH  TO STUDY  SILAGE
D. SEALE,  C. M. QUINN,  P. A. WHITTAKER  and R. K. WILSON  
Departments  of Biology  and Chemistry,  St. Patrick ’s College,  Maynooth.
The conservation  of grass  for winter  feed is a major  comjxment  of Irish 
agriculture.  About 12 x 10' tonnes are made annualyy.  Laboratory  
analyses  suggest  that about one third or 4 x 10' tonnes  are poorly  pre­
served. The reasons  for this are obscure.
The silage  process  is a very complex  fermentation.  In a study  involving 
152 grass cuts each ensiled  in triplicate  relationships  between  grass con­
stituents  (dry matter,  water soluble  carbohydrate,  glucose,  fructose  and 
sucrose  levels, nitrate,  buffer capacity  and fibre contents)  were poorly  
related  to final silage pH, with “r” values  all less than 0.4.
It is proposed  to study the microbiological  and chemical  changes  dur­
ing silage fermentation  using a novel approach.  Silage  will be made in a 
70 1 Mecaplex  “glovebox ” which  will allow control  of atmosphere,  con­
tinuous  sampling  through  entry ports and study of a larger  sample.  It is 
considered  that this approach  offers advantages  over the usual test-tube  
“batch ” system.
102
RED CLOVER  VERSUS  RYEGRASS  SILAGE  AS A SOURCE  OF 
WINTER  FEED  FOR STORE  LAMBS
S. FITZGERALD
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Three swards  namely,  a ryegrass  sward  (Agresso/Spirit),  a mixed  Red 
Clover/ryegrass  sward and a pure red clover  sward (Hungaropoly)  were 
established  in 1976 and cut twice a year over a period  of three years  for 
silage and fed to store lambs  ad libitum. The swards  were grazed  by 
weaned  lambs  in autumn  of 1977 & 1978. The ryegrass  sward received 
65-100  kg N/ha per cut while the red clover  sward received  none and 
the mixed sward received  65 kg N/cut  only in the third year due to its 
low clover  content  at that stage.
Silage dry matter  yields  for all three swards  averaged  over the three  
years for both cuts were 9.2, 8.7 and 7.8 tonnes DM/ha/year  for the 
ryegrass,  mixed and red clover  swards  respectively.
Results  show that red clover  silage when properly  preserved  can be a 
very useful source of winter  feed when fed to store lambs,  resulting  in 
high intakes  e.g. 2.5% - 3.0% of body weight  and producing  satisfactory  
lamb gains on silage alone. Ryegrass  silage would  require  supplementa ­
tion with 300-450  g barley/lamb/day  to achieve  a similar  level of per­
formance.  While it has a shorter  growing  season and consequently  a 
lower yield than ryegrass,  a significant  saving  in N fertiliser  and energy  
conservation  is achieved.  In a mixed sward the contribution  from red 
clover  can be substantial,  in terms  of high intakes  and lower  N fertiliser  
requirements  without  any significant  reduction  in yield.
STUDIES  ON THE MODE  OF ACTION  OF TBA AND RAL  
IMPLANTS  IN GROWING  CASTRATE  MALE  CATTLE
T. W. GRIFFITHS
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.
Two metabolism  and slaughter  experiments  using  24 Friesian  castrated  
male cattle were carried  out to investigate  the mode of action of the 
combined  implants  of Trenbolone  acetate  (TBA)  and Resorcylic  acid 
lactone  (RAL)  over the weight  range  250-400  kg liveweight.  Control  and 
implanted  (x 2) animals  were pair-fed  diets of differing  protein and 
energy levels. Responses  to implantation  were (kg/day  LWG):  Low 
protein  diets, 0.21; Normal  protein  diets, 0.24; Medium  energy  levels, 
0.25; High energy  levels,  0.34. Nitrogen  retention  was improved  in im­
planted  animals  in both experiments.  Implanted  animals  also gave lower  
fat and higher  meat yields  and chemical  analysis  of the edible  portion  of 
the carcass  showed  significantly  more water  and protein  and less fat.
These  results  are consistent  with the view that implantation  with TBA  
and RAL modifies  the metabolism  of the animal in the direction  of 
increased  protein  synthesis  and decreased  fat deposition.
103
PELVIC  SIZE AND SHAPE  IN BEEF  AND DAIRY  BREEDS
OF COWS  
O. H. LANGLEY
The Af’ricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
M. )J. DRENNAN
The Agricultural  Institute.  Grange.  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
D. HARRINGTON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Sandy  mount,  Dublin  4.
In Ireland  a high proportion  of calves  destined  for the beef herd come 
from cows in daily herds. With increasing  emphasis  on beef quality  some  
of these calves  will be sired by beef bulls. This is known  to cause some  
increase  in calving  difficulty,  and so it is important  to understand  more  
clearly  the factors which  contribute  to this increase.  An experiment  being 
carried  out at Grange  comparing  Friesian  cows,  Hereford  Friesian  crosses 
and Charolais  Friesian  crosses  as mothers  for single suckled  beef calves 
provided  an opportunity  to study the ease of calving  in these breeds. In 
the first year all first calf heifers  were mated  to a Limousin  bull; in the 
second  year one Simmental  was used on all second  calving  animals  and 
in the third another  Simmental  bull was used. In the month prior to 
calving  pelvic measurements  were made which recorded  the height  and 
the width of the internal  pelvic  opening.  The ease of calving  was then 
monitored  according  to the scale 1 for easy calving,  2 for slight  assistance,  
3 for difficult  calving  and 4 for very difficult  calving.
Both pelvic  height  and pelvic  width increased  in each breed from first 
calving  to second  calving  and from second  to third calving.  Whereas  the 
Charolais  had the highest  pelvic dimensions  in all years, the Hereford  
crosses  had the second  highest  pelvic  dimensions,  and the Friesians  had 
the least high pelvic dimensions  in all years. In contrast,  the Friesians  
had the greatest  pelvic  width  on average  in each year. The Charolais  had 
the second  widest  pelvis  and the Herefords  the least wide pelvis in each 
year. Thus, the ratio of the height to width varied between  breeds  of 
dam. The jDelvic height  divided  by pelvic  width  in the Friesians  always 
gave a ratio of less than 1 indicating  a pelvis  which  was slightly  wider  
that it was high, whereas  in both the Charolais  crosses  and Hereford  
crosses  the ratio of height  to width  was 1.1 in each year.
The ease of calving  is most easily  assessed  by investigating  the relation ­
ship between  the calf size and the pelvic  area. The most effective  way of 
achieving  this is to obtain  the ratio of the calf weight  compared  to the 
pelvic area (which  is obtained  by multiplying  the pelvic height by the 
pelvic  width). When  this ratio is greater  than 0.14 calving  is likely  to be 
more difficult.  When all animals  with a ratio of greater  than 0.14 were 
examined  it was found  that less than 50% of the Charolais  and Hereford  
cows had difficulty  calving,  whereas  more than 50% of the Friesian  cows  
had difficult  calving. It might be suggested  therefore  that the differ ­
ence in pelvic  shape may indicate  breed differences,  and that the Friesian  
calves  sired by Friesian  bulls might  be expected  to be a different  shape 
than calves sired by beef bulls. If this hypothesis  is correct  it might  
partially  explain  why greater  difficulty  was experienced  in Friesian  cows  
bred 'to beef bulls. ^ :
104
SUPEROVULATION  IN THE COW
M. P. BOLAND,  L. G. KENNEDY,  T. F. CROSBY  and I GORDON
U.C.D.,  Department  of Agriculture,  Lyons Estate,  Newcastle,
Co. Dublin.
The success  of egg transfer  in the cow depends  on a predictable  supply 
of fertilized  eggs for transfer.  PMSG  has normally  been used for super ­
ovulation,  but results  have been variable.  A crude  horse pituitary  extract  
(HAP)  has been used with success  for superovulation  in the sheep  in this 
laboratory.
In this study PMSG  has been compared  with HAP for superovulation.  
Forty-four  heifers  were given a single i/m injection  of 2,5C)0 i.u. PMSG  
during  the luteal phase of the cycle (days 8-12) and 39 heifers  received 
300 mg HAP  as a single  i/m injection  during  the same period.  Forty-eight  
hours  later animals  were injected  with 500 A^g Cloprostenol.  Donors  were 
inseminated  twice at oestrus  and egg recovery  attempted  3-8 days post 
oestrus. Mean ovulation  rates of 16.5 + 9.1 and 12.7 ± 10.6 were found  
for PMSG  and HAP,  and 7.5 and 5.1 fertilized  eggs respectively.
Slightly  higher  ovulation  rates and numbers  of eggs were found  in the 
summer  months. Extending  the interval  from PMSG  to prostaglandin  
injection  from two to three days increased  the ovluation  rate (16.3 vs. 
18.7) and number  of fertilized  eggs (7.9 vs. 9.0).
105
STUDIES  RELATED  TO EGG TRANSFER  IN SHEEP  
T. F. CROSBY,  M. P. BOLAND, A. A. AL-KAMALI  and I. GORDON
U.C.D.,  Department  off Agriculture,  Lyons  Estate,  Newcastle  P.O.,
Co. Dublin.
In the first of three experiments  39 Texel  ewes were heat synchronised  
with intravagina  sponge  pessaries  (30 mg FGA)  for 12 days. 200 mg/ewe  
of horse anterior  pituitary  extract  (HAP)  was administered  to induce  
superovulation.  The ewes were allocated  to one of three treatment  reg­
imes (a) 50 mg HAP on each of 4 days, (b) 100 mg HAP on each of 2 
days, (c) mg HAP as a single dose. The animals  were bred by uterine  
insemination  at 36-48  hrs. Mean  ovulation  rates of 15.0, 12.6 and 9.7 and 
egg recovery  rates of 6.8, 5.5 and 2.2 respectively  were obtained.  The 
percentage  of eggs fertilised  was 47.7, 56.3 and 75.0 respectively  and was 
significantly  different  between  treatments.  The fertilised  eggs were trans ­
ferred  to recipient  ewes and by 7 weeks  66% had not repeated.
In the second  experiment  27 crossbred  ewes were used to evaluate  the 
influence  of method  of synchronisation  on superovulation  and recovery  of 
fertilised  eggs. The four treatments  employed  were (a) 12 day intravag-  
inal sponge,  (b) 12 daily progesterone  injections,  (c) 12 day sponge  sup­
plemented  with four daily progesterone  injections,  (d) natural  cycle.  HAP  
was administered  over a 4 day period and breeding  was by uterine  
insemination  using pooled  semen.  Mean ovulation  rates of 10.6, 8.9, 8.9 
and 18.2 respectively  were recorded  and 85.7%,  76.2%,  75.0%  and 51.9%  
of eggs recovered  were fertilised.
In the third trial, 21 cull ewes were used to compare  uterine  insemina ­
tion with repeated  cervical  insemination  on egg recovery  and fertilisation.  
Pooled  semen  from Texel rams was used in breeding.  Significant  differ ­
ences were found in the percentage  of eggs recovered  (46.0%  v 78.9%)  
and in the percentage  of eggs fertilised  (77.3%  v 55.3%).
106
SYNCHRONIZATION  OF OESTRUS  AND A.I. IN GILTS
M. P. BOLAND,  J. CRAIG  and D. L. KELLEHER
U.C.D.,  Department  of Agriculture,  Lyons Estate,  Newcastle,
Co. Dublin.
A practical  method  of controlling  the cycle in the gilt would be of 
considerable  economic  importance.  In this trial a new synthetie  proges ­
tagen (Regumate)  was evaluated  as an oral synchronization  agent. Fifty-  
eight cyelic  gilts were fed one of three levels  (0, 15, 20 mg) daily for 18 
days. At the termination  of treatment,  half the animals  in each group  
received  either  0 or 500 i.u. PMSG. Gilts were bred at the first oestrus  
using one of three methods : (a) natural  service,  (b) A.I., (c) A.I. and 3 
minute  teasing  with a sterile  boar after A.I. Progestagen  treatment  had a 
significant  effect (P<0.05)  on the interval  to heat. Overall  PMSG  treat ­
ment had no influence  on the interval  to oestrus  onset.
A slightly  higher but non-significant  increase  in ovulation  rate was 
observed  with progestagen  treatment  and with PMSG.  The proportion  of 
gilts yielding  fertilized  eggs was 89%, 74%, 56% for nil, 15 mg and 20 
mg respeetively.
Results  would  indicate  that regumate  can be effective  a sa synchroniza ­
tion agent.
107
FERTILIZATION  AND EMBYRO  LOSS FOLLOWING  
ARTIFICIAL  INSEMINATION  IN THE COW
M. G. DISKIN  and J. M. SREENAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Fertilization  rate in the cow following  the use of natural  service  or 
artificial  insemination  using fresh extended  semen  is normally  estimated  
at about  90%. Calving  rates,  however,  are reported  to be closer  to 50%.  
There are few reports  on the timing  of embryonic  mortality  in the cow. 
A total of 256 beef heifers  was used in two experiments  to establish  
fertilization  and subsequent  embryonic  survival  rates following  the use 
of frozen-thawed  semen.  Fertilization  rate was estimated  at 90%. Embryo  
survival  rates were high (93%) up to and including  Day 8 but were  
reduced  at Days 12 (56%; P<0.001,  16 (66%; P<0.001)  and 42 (58%;  
P<0.001).  This study indicates  that fertilization  failure accounted  for 
10% of overall  reproductive  failure  while embryo  death accounted  for 
30%. The major portion  of this embryo  death occurred  between  Days 
8 and 16.
A further  146 heifers  were used in two experiments  to study  the effects  
of progesterone  supplementation  (100 mg daily)  or HCG administration  
(1500 i.u. daily) during  the luteal phase on CL weight and number,  
circulating  progesterone  levels and embryonic  survival. Progesterone  
supplementation  only slightly  increased  progesterone  level (P>0.10)  and 
had little effect on luteal tissue weights  (P>0.10).  HCG administration  
induced  accessory  CL numbers  (Mean ± SE, 2.18 ± 0.13) and weight 
(P<0.001)  and increased  progesterone  level (P<0.05).  Pooled  embryo  
survival  rates for control,  progesterone  and HCG  groups  were 54%,  71% 
and 64% respectively.  In a further  experiment  with 141 dairy cows,  
calving  rates of 65%, 73% and 57% were recorded  for similar  control,  
progesterone  and HCG treatments,  respectively.
108
THE DELETERIOUS  EEFECT  OF ENVIRONMENTAL
CONTAMINATION  ON FERTILITY  IN THE DAIRY  HERD
P. J. HARTIGAN
Physiology  Department,  Trinity  College,  Dublin.
It is well-recognised  that contamination  of the environment  of pregnant  
cows is a crucial  factor in the pathogenesis  of bovine  abortion.  Conse ­
quently,  control  measures  are designed  to break the ‘cycle of infection ’, 
largely  by secregation  of infected  animals,  disinfection  and vaccination.  
By contrast,  little attention  has been given to the possibility  that environ ­
mental  contamination  may lead to colonization  of the genital  tract of the 
non-pregnant  cow by pathogenic  microorganisms  with deleterious  effects  
on fertility.
In this communication  two episodes  are described  which indicate  that 
this does occur,  at least when the environment  is very heavily  contamina ­
ted. In one herd, infertility  in six cows was associated  with chronic  
inflammatory  lesions  in the reproductive  tract  due to Aspergillus  fumigatus.  
Transfer  of one affected  animal  to a new location  was followed  by elim­
ination  of the infection  and resolution  of the lesions. In another  herd,  
there  was massive  contamination  of the environment  by Corynebacterium  
pyogenes  in discharges  from purulent  sinusitis  in a number  of recently  
dehorned  cows. The organism  invaded  the reproductive  tract causing  
severe  inflammatory  lesions  and a marked  reduction  in herd fertility.
Segregation  of cows with purulent  discharges  and disinfection  should  
be an integral  part of any programme  of management  for improved  
fertility.
109
SILAGE  EFFLUENT  AS A PIG FEED
D. C. PATTERSON  and N. WALKER
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  
Co. Down,  Northern  Ireland.
Silage  effluent  is normally  an unavoidable  by-product  of ensiling  grass  
in our climate.  The quantity  of effluent  from a silo is primarily  deter ­
mined by the quantity  of grass and its dry matter  content  but some  
additives  can have an effect on effluent  yield. Collection  and storage  of 
silage effluent  can be accomplished  at low capital  cost and the material  
normally  of pH 3.8-4.2  can be preserved  with the addition  of formalin  
(3 1/1000  1 effluent)  in open tanks or by ensuring  anaerobic  conditions  
of storage.
In feeding  experiments  carried  out with pigs, effluent  was substituted  
on a dry matter  basis for 150 g/kg of a baconer  diet. The production  
results  obtained  in five experiments  involving  almost  400 animals  indicate  
that the digestible  energy : protein  ratio of effluent  and the amino acid 
balance  meet approximately  the nutrient  requirements  of growing  pigs. 
In five digestibility  studies  it was found that the mean digestible  energy 
content  of effluent  was 16.5 MJ/kg  organic  matter. Voluntary  intake  
studies  have shown  that intake  of effluent  dry matter  can be depressed  
when  the dry matter  content  is less than 400 g/kg. Although  some min­
erals in effluent  can exceed  the requirements  of the pig, there was no 
depression  in animal performance  when effluent  was given as a sole 
source  of liquid.
Silage  effluent  has been used successfully  in feeding  trials on commer ­
cial farms. Feeding  silage effluent  can increase  the fattener ’s margin  by 
over £3 per pig and since enough  silage effluent  is produced  in Northern  
Ireland  to feed all of the 1.2 x 10“ baconers  produced,  the potential  sav­
ing for the region  approaches  £M4.
no
PROBLEMS  ASSOCIATED  WITH  FEEDING  WHEY  AND  
DELACTOSED  WHEY  TO PIGS
T. J. HANRAHAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Whey and delactosed  whey are good sources  of nutrients  for pigs. 
Their  physical  composition  6.5% and 30% total solids  respectively  means  
that they are of little interest  to the provender  milling  trade.
When transferred  to pig farms the storage  life of whey can be very 
short especially  in unclean  tanks during  the summer  months.  Microbial  
degradation  by streptococci,  Clostridia  and yeasts  can release  50% of the 
molecular  weight  of lactose  as carbon  dioxide.  An experiment  at Moore ­
park showed  that poorly  stored whey contained  less than 50% of the 
nutrient  value of fresh whey.
Feeding  experiments  with whey demonstrated  that it has a depressing  
effect on appetite  as the quantity  fed increased  from 25% to 33%. Pigs 
on the higher level consumed  10% less feed (P<0.01).  There was no 
effect on feed conversion  efficiency  (P>0.05).  This result cannot  be 
attributed  to a higher  liquid intake since a similar  effect was observed  
when dried whey or whey concentrate  was used.
A number  of scientific  papers  have suggested  that the salt content  of 
whey can suppress  appetite.  Experiments  with delactosed  whey which  
has twice the salt content  of whey substantiate  this viewpoint.  Adding  
25% delactosed  whey  to the diet of individually  fed pigs suppressed  feed 
intake by 15% (P<0.01).  With group feeding  (10 pigs/pen)  a similar  
diet resulted  in 7 out of 80 pigs dying  from salt poisoning.  In the dietary  
regime,  these pigs were allowed  3.5 kg water  per kg of meal equivalent.  
The Na+Cl  content  of the diet was 1.95%. A similar  feeding  regime  did 
not cause mortality  in individually  fed pigs or in group  fed pigs with an 
ad libitum  water supply.
Ill
^ iti . ■: ' '''^■,:v:i;;
Irish Grassland 
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal  
1980
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol 15 1980
edited  by 
Sean Flanagan
Printed  by Lithographic  Universal,  Dargle  Vale, Bray
ICI FERTILISER  
PAYS
FOR ITSELF  
TIME  AND  
TIME  AGAIN
You can be confident  that 
having  invested  your 
money  in the right 
fertiliser  you will get results.
ICI put the right  balance  of 
Phosphate,  Potash  and Nitrogen  
into every  granule  in every  
bag you buy.
It's this consistency  which  helps  
give an even spread,and plenty  of good grass  for 
grazing  or silage.
Use ICI fertilisers  as part of 
your farming  system.
You'll  see the difference  in 
liveweight  gain or extra  
gallons  of milk.
So buy the fertiliser that pays 
for itself. Buy ICI.
W. Sheehan 
T. Nolan
B. Kilkenny  
W. Hartley  
M. G. Keane
P. O. Ryan
M. Ryan
C. J. Wilcox
S. J. Amies
B. Cunningham  
P. Mac CannaPage
15CONTENTS
Energy requirements  of pregnant  and 
lactating  ewes
Grazing  management  for mid-season  
lamb production
Sheep  production —components  of success 21
Sheep  and cattle on Wexford  farms  39
Factors  affecting  carcase  composition  in 
beef cattle  43
Beef carcase  classification  and market  
requirements  53
Use of grass varieties  in increasing  pro­
duction  of beef 61
A system  of low cost milk production  in 
the United  Kingdom  69
Economics  of low and high cost dairying  
systems  75
Brucellosis —strategy  for the farmer  79
Financing  the dairy industry  in the future 85
Abstracts  98
COUNCIL  1980/1981
President : J. Dardis  
Vice-President : P. Gleeson
Council  Members :
M. Barlow,  S. Brophy,  D. Browne,  D. Cashman,  M. Drennan,  D. Fay, 
V. Flynn,  J. Jennings,  J. Leeson,  P. MacCanna,  P. McFeely,  W. Murphy,  
J. O’Grady,  P. O’Keeffe,  M. Ward.
Hon. Secretary  / Treasurer  :
Dr. S. P. Flanagan,
Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam, Co. Galway.
3
tt’strue  what  they  say^ in Irdand  the  grass  egreen^
When  it comes  to the quality  of<lairy  pasture,  there ’s no 
other  country  in Europe  that  Irish  farmers  need  envy.  Irish 
pasture  land,  Irish  grass,  is ideal  for the production  of the milk 
from  which  the  world ’s best  dairy  products  are made.
As a result,  Irish  dairy  products  are  bought  and enjoyed  
the  world  over-many  of them  bearing  the world-famous  
Kerrygold  label.  They  accountfor  one-sixth  of  our  total  exports-  
an impressive  £600  million  plus-and  because  the import  
content  is low,  the economic  contribution  is huge.
But  ourworld-wide  marketis  steadily  increasingand  so 
we must  mairttain-and  increase-our  productivity  to match  that 
demand.
And  if we do, that  expansion  will  be matched  by sales;  
sales  of Irish  butter,  cream,  powders,  cheese  and other  dairy 
products.
So remember,  we have  the  land,  we have  the climate,  we 
have  the people.
Letis  make  the most  of them.B
miSH  DiVIRy  BQUtD
Energy  Requirements  of Pregnant  
and Lactating  Ewes
W. SHEEHAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Creagh,  Ballinrobe,  Co. Mayo.
The yield of lambs  from a breeding  flock is one of the principal  factors  
determining  the success  of a sheep  production  system.  The feeding  of the 
ewe during  the main phases  of its production  has an inevitable  bearing  
on her lambs.  The bodyweight  and nutritional  status  of the ewe at mating  
will have an important  bearing  on the number  of lambs  born to each ewe. 
The level of nutrition  during early pregnancy  may effect the level of 
embryo  mortality.  The later stages of pregnancy  are vitally influenced 
by maternal  nutrition  and the ewe becomes  progressively  more vulnerable  
to nutritional  stress  as pregnancy  proceeds.  Birthweights  of the lambs  and 
their subsequent  viability  are affected  by the level of nutrition  in the latter  
part of pregnancy.  High birthweights  as a result of good feeding  gives  
the lambs an initial weight  advantage  which,  other things being equal,  
will be maintained  till weaning.  Conditions  favouring  adequate  ewe 
nutrition  will also favour  milk yie’d and consequently  lamb growth  rates  
in early  life.
The critical requirements  of ewes during late pregnancy  and early  
lactation  are described  at some length in this paper. But firstly,  let us 
summarise  briefly the importance  of nutrition  prior to mating  and ifi 
early pregnancy.
Nutrition  prior  to mating
The practice  of improving  the nutrition  of the ewe prior to mating  is 
commonly  called ‘flushing ’. While the practice  has been widely  adopted  
in most of the sheep producing  countries,  surprisingly  little is known  of 
how its influence  is exerted.  Because  of the lack of a clear definition  of 
what constitutes  flushing  the methods  used by different  research  workers  
have varied greatly  and as a result the available  evidence  is somewhat  
conflicting.
Despite  the difficulty  in interpreting  the results  of the literature  there is 
no doubt  that, under certain conditions,  flushing  will result  in an increased  
lambing  rate due principally  to an increased  twinning  rate. There also 
appears  to be good agreement  that the observed  differences  in fertility  
are due to the increased  incidence  of multiple  ovulations  rather  than to a 
decrease  in the number  of barren  ewes. The effect  of ewe body condition  
at mating  on ovulation  rate is shown  in Table 1.
It is widely  accepted  that liveweight  per se of the ewe at mating  has an 
important  effect on fertility. Experiments  involving  different  planes  of 
nutrition  from weaning  to 3 weeks after mating have shown higher
Table I
Effect  of ewe body condition  at mating  on percentage  of ewes with 0-2 ovulations*
No. of ovulationsBody condition
Good Poor
0 0 12
1 50 88
2 50 0
*Gunn,  R. G., Doney,  J. M. and Russel,  A. J. F. J. agric. Sci., Camb.  79, 19-25,  
1972.
twinning  rates of approximately  6% for each 4.5 kg increase  in liveweight 
of the ewe. However,  claims  have also been made for a specific  flushing 
effect. In ewes of the same liveweight  at mating,  those which  are gaining  
weight  will have more twins  than those maintaining  weight  which  in turn 
will have more twins  than those losing  weight. More recently,  however,  
experiments  have shown  that ovulation  rate was not depressed  by poor  
nutrition  prior to mating.
In summary  there is good evidence  to suggest that high levels of 
fertility  are obtained  from ewes in which  the level of nutrient  intake is 
high,  from ewes gaining  in weight  if originally  in moderate  body  condition  
and from ewes in good condition  at mating  even though  they may be 
losing  weight.
Nutrition  in early pregnancy
Experimental  evidence  indicates  that most embryo  deaths  occur in the 
first 3-4 weeks  of pregnancy.  TTiis is the period  in which  the developing  
embryo  becomes  attached  to the wall of the uterus by the developing  
placenta.  Both high and low levels  of nutrition  immediately  after mating  
have been shown  to cause embryonic  mortality.  The apparent  disparity  
between  research  findings  may possibly  be due to the levels of nutrition  
imposed.  Plane  of nutrition  can mean  different  things  to different  people. 
It would appear,  therefore,  that in the absence  of precise  experimental  
data the level of feeding  should  not be altered  greatly  during  the first 3-4 
weeks  after mating.
The growth  rate of the foetus  proceeds  slowly  during  early pregnancy  
and by the end of the third month  the weight  of the uterus  and its con­
tents is only about one quarter  of the ultimate  uterine  weight before  
parturition.  Consequently  nutrient  demands  during  this period are not 
critical  but severe underfeeding  is to be avoided  since it can adversely  
affect lamb development  even when nutrition  is adequate  in late preg­
nancy. A modest  loss in liveweight  of about  6-7% in fat ewes during  this
♦Thompson,  W. and Aitken,  S. C. (1959.  Sheep Bur. Anim.  Nutr. Aberdeen.  Tech.
Commun.  No. 20.
p)eriod  will have no detrimental  effect  on ewe performance.  Furthermore,  
It is well reco^ised  that, if the feed intake  of fat ewes is for any reason  
suddenly  restricted  in late pregnancy,  these animals  are more susceptible  
to disorders  such as pregnancy  toxaemia  than ewes in a leaner body  
condition.
Nutrition  in late pregnancy
Approximately  75% of foetal  growth  occurs  during  the final 6-8 weeks  
of pregnancy  as shown  in Table  2. This results  in a considerable  increase  
in the ewes ’ requirements  for nutrients  and particularly  for energy.
Table 2
Mean  liveweight  increase  (kg) of ewes during  pregnancy*
Ewes with singles Ewes with twins
Total
L.W.G.Gain  of 
Gravid  UterusTotal
L.W.G.Gain  of 
Gravid  Uterus
Mating  to 28 days 0.77 0.09 2.82 0.14
Mating  to 56 days 3.10 0.19 5.86 1.64
Mating  to 84 days — — 9.04 4.18
Mating  to 112 days 10.14 4.27 15.32 8.86
Mating  to 140 days 16.36 11.36 22.00 20.23
♦Wallace,  L. R. .J. agric .Sci., Camb.  38, 93-153,  1948.
In the pregnant  ewe the foetus  obtains  its energy  from maternal  glucose 
mainly  from propionic  acid from ingested  nutrients.  The foetal demand  
for glucose  is high and if the proportion  of dietary  energy  available  as 
glucose  is insufficient  to meet this demand  then in order to maintain  
glucose  levels the ewe begins  to draw on her own body reserves.  The 
degree  to which  she does this depends  on (1) nutrient  intake,  (2) the stage 
of pregnancy  and (3) the weight  of foetus(es)  she is carrying.  Inadequacy  
of feed during  late pregnancy  adversely  affects lamb birthweights  and 
chances  of survival  and may lead to losses of ewes. The reaction  to 
undernutrition  during  late pregnancy  may result  in two situations.  Firstly  
the growth  rate of the foetus(es)  may be reduced.  This wou'd  appear  to 
be the most comon  reaction  resulting  in poor lamb birthweights,  reduced  
Vigour  and high mortality.  The second  reaction  may be that foetal  growth  
rate continues  at the expense  of maternal  tissue and thus exposing  the 
ewe to pregnancy  toxaemia.
Various  estimates  of requirements  of ewes in late pregnancy  are avail ­
able. For example,  it is estimated  that to prevent  loss of maternal  weight  
during  late pregnancy  a ewe wou'd need to consume  2-3 times as much  
feed as a non-pregnant  animal. In feeding  practice,  in order  to achieve 
such intakes  it would  be necessary  to supplement  the basic roughage  diet
with liberal quantities  of cereals. While cereal prices remain  at their  
present  levels this will result in a considerable  addition  to production  
costs and will therefore  affect  the profitability  of the enterprise.
Ideally  the ewe shou'd  gain sufficient  weight  during  late pregnancy  to 
allow optimum  development  of the reproductive  tract and of the udder  
without  loss of weight  in other tissues. While this condition  may be of 
great importance  in systems  such as those based on accelerated  rates of 
reproduction,  the aim of a more practical  production  system  might  be to 
allow ewes to mobilize  some of their own body reserves  to meet any 
deficit  in her intake. Provided  the resulting  loss in maternal  weight  is not 
too severe it will be quickly  recovered  on spring pasture  during  the 
subsequent  lactation.
We have recently  concluded  a series of studies  at Creagh  to examine  
the effects of a range of energy levels during late pregnancy  on the 
reproductive  performance  of the ewe, the aim being to determine  the 
minimum  amount  of food required  by the ewe during  late pregnancy  
consistent  with good reproductive  performance.  In view of the fact that 
roughages  make up the greater  proportion  of the ewes ’ diet during  preg­
nancy  and because  of the increasing  use of silage  as a feed for sheep,  an 
exjjeriment  was also carried  out to study the adequacy  of silages of 
varying  digestibilities  in terms  of meeting  ewe requirements.  In a further  
experiment  we studied  the effects  of energy  supplementation  of silage in 
late pregnancy  on ewe performance.
For the purpose  of this paper I have selected  one experiment  to 
illustrate  our findings  on the energy  requirements  of twin bearing  eweS  
in late pregnancy.  The energy levels studied  together  with the birth ­
weights  of the lambs and the bodyweight  changes  of the ewes are given  
in Table 3.
Table 3
Mean  daily nutrient  intakes  during  late pregnancy  and iamb birthweights  and 
ewe bodyweight  changes
Treatment
Low Medium High
Dry matter  (g) 608 1004 1256
Metabolisable  energy  (Mj) 6.5 9.8 11.9
Birthweight  (kg) 4.0 4.6 4.4
Ewes :
Liveweight  gain 1.3 10.5 12.8
Net bodyweight  change -10.2 -3.7 -0.8
In these experiments  we used a pelleted  roughage-concentrate  diet. The 
results  show that lamb birthweights  were highest  on the medium  energy 
level of 9.8 MJ ME (0.42 MJ/kg  W*’ ’^’). Rather  curiously  there was no 
significant  difference  in birthweights  between  the extreme  low and high
levels of nergy. While this might suggest  that the energy  requirements  
may be closer  to the lower  level this is clearly  not so when lamb  mortality  
(31, 12 and 10% of the Low, Medium  and High energy  levels respec ­
tively)  and ewe bodyweight  changes  are considered.
In farming  practice  and particularly  in the extensive  situation  it is 
difficult  to judge whether  the level of feeding  is excessive  or inadequate.  
Ewe bodyweight  changes,  despite  the limitation  of not knowing  the num ­
ber of foetuses  the ewe is carrying,  will serve as a useful guide to 
nutritional  adequacy.  In a review  of the literature  on the effect  of plane  
of nutrition  during  pregnancy  on reproduction,  Thompson  and Aitken*  
adopted  absolute  gain or loss of bodyweight  of the ewe as the major  
criterion  of plane of nutrition.  They concluded  that weight  increases  less 
than the weight of the products  of conception  are still adequate  for 
satisfactory  reproductive  performance.  They suggested  that a liveweight 
gain of 6.4 kg during  the final 8 weeks  of pregnancy  is sufficient  for a ewe 
carrying  singles. These weight  changes  apply to ewes of about 60 kg. 
The results  of our studies  (Table  3) show than an ME intake  of 9.8 MJ 
would  satisfy  these criteria.  The net bodyweight  loss associated  with this 
level of gain was low (4 kg) while the birthweights  of twin lambs  were 
excellent.
A major  question  in translating  the estimated  energy  requirements  into 
feeding  practice  is the extent  to which the intakes  of a roughage,  such 
as silage,  satisfy  these requirements.  A summary  of the results  showing 
the in vivo digestibility  and intakes  of four different  silages  together  with 
the calculated  energy  intakes  of twin bearing  ewes are given in Table 4. 
The birthweights  of single  and twin lambs  are also included.
Table 4
Mean  daily dry matter  intakes  (g/kg WO-75)  of silages  by ewes and the birthweights
of single  and twin Iambs
DMD  %Intake Birthweights  (kg)
Single  bearing Twin  bearing Singles Twins
58 52.1 (0.45)* 45.6 (0.40) 4.2 3.2
68 36.9 (0.38) 41.2 (0.42) 4.4 3.7
63 39.9 (0.40) 30.9 (0.31) 4.8 3.1
52 42.7 (0.33) 43.8 (0.35) 4.3 3.5
♦ MJ ME/kg  WO-75
The results  show clearly  that silage intakes  were variable  and were not 
related  to digestibility.  The results  also show that silage as a sole feed 
in late pregnancy  does not in most instances  meet the estimated  energy  
requirements  of twin bearing  ewes. It is also clear that, in terms of actual
* Thompson,  W. and Aitken,  S. C. (1959).  Sheep  Bur. Anim.  Nutr. Aberdeen,  Tech.  
Commun.  No. 20.
9
energy  intakes,  the digestibility  of the silage  is of major  importance.  This 
IS very obvious  if one compares  the intakes  and qualities  of the first two 
silages  m Table  4. A further  consideration  in regard  to silage feeding  is 
the tendency  for silage intakes  to decrease  with advancing  pregnancy  
when  the energy  requirements of the ewe are increasing.  Thus  a computed  
mean intake  over the final 6-8 weeks  of pregnancy  can be misleading.  It 
is for this reason that supplements  are fed with roughages  during  late 
pregnancy.
The effects  of supplementing  silage (D.M.D.  % 58) with barley on 
birthweights  and growth  rates of twin lambs  is shown  in Table 5. These 
results  show a significant  response  in birthweights  to supplementing  with 
13.5 kg rolled barley  in late pregnancy.  Increasing  the barley  level to 27 
kg did not further  improve  performance.
Table 5
Birthweights  and growth  rates of twin lambs  to 8 weeks  of age (kg)
Birthweight Weight  at 8 weeks
Silage ad libitum 3.2 16.8
Silage ad libitum + 4.0 18.4
13.5 kg rolled barley
Silage ad libitum + 3.9 18.0
27 kg rolled barley
Nutrition  in lactation
Any consideration  of nutritional  adequacy  in late pregnancy  cannot  be 
limited  to ewe bodyweight  changes  and lamb birthweights.  The subse ­
quent  rearing  ability  of the ewe and growth  rate of the lambs  in relation  
to birthweights  must be considered.  This is of paramount  importance  in 
relation  to twin lambs  when it could well be argued  that economies  of 
nutrition  in late pregnancy  may impair  their subsequent  growth  rates. 
There is no doubt that the level of nutrition  in late pregnancy  and the 
body condition  of the ewe at lambing  will act as a buffer  between  nutrient  
intake  and nutrient  requirements  of ewes during  lactation.  It is also true 
that provided  nutrition  during  pregnancy  is adequate  in terms  of lamb  
birthweights,  milk yields  and lamb growth  rates will depend  on the level 
of nutrition  during  lactation.  In the extensive  situation  there should  be 
sufficient  feed available  to the lactating  ewe, nevertheless,  in the context  
of twin bearing  ewes the first 2 to 3 weeks  are of particular  impiortance  
since it coincides  with pieaking  lactation  of the ewe and the critical  piost-  
natal period  for lamb survival.
The effects  of nutrition  in this critical  post-lambing  pieriod  were studied  
by continuing  the pregnancy  energy  levels for 2 weeks in lactation.  It 
must  be noted  that these levels  are much  lower  than recommended  energy 
levels  for lactation.  The lowest  level (6.5 MJ) is less than that estimated
10
Table 6
Mean  lamb birthweights  and performance  to 6 weeks  of age G(g)
Liveweight
Birthweight 2 weeks 6 weeks 0-6 weeks
Low 4.0 6.9 14.8 0.26
Medium 4.6 8.3 15.2 0.25
High 4.4 8.6 14.9 0.25
for maintenance  of a dry non-pregnant  ewe of similar  bodyweight  to 
those in the present  experiment.
The effects  of these levels  on lamb growth  are shown  in Table  6. Lamb  
growth  rates were directly  related  to energy  intake and to milk yields  
which  were 1.03, 1.48 and 1.99 kg per head per day on the Low,  Medium  
and High energy  levels respectively.  The ewes were then fed ad libitum  
and the results  show that lamb growth  rates were the reverse  of those in 
early lactation.  Milk yields averaged  2.0, 2.2 and 2.6 kg on the Low,  
Medium  and High treatments.  These results  indicate  that despite  low 
levels of energy in late pregnancy  and early lactation  that ewes will 
respond  to increased  nutrition  at a point in time before  they would  have  
attained  normal  milk yields.
Table 7
Ewe bodyweight  changes  (kg) in early lactation
Low Medium High
Post lambing
0-2 weeks -8.40 -6.95 -1.48
0-6 weeks 1.35 1.37 2.14
The rate of mobilisation  of body reserves  in early lactation  is shown  in 
Table 7. Ewe weight  loss during  the period of restricted  feeding  was 
directly  related  to energy  intakes. When  fed cd libitum  the ewes on the 
high energy  treatment  gained  less weight  than those on the lower  levels.  
The remarkable  recovery  of liveweight  during  early lactation  is due to 
the rapid expansion  of appetite  of ewes which fed ad lib (Fig. 1).
The results  in terms  of lamb  growth  rates and ewe bodyweight  changes  
further  support  the conclusions  that an energy  intake  of 9.8 MJ ME/day  
or 0.42 MJ/kg is adequate  for the pregnant  ewe even in situations  
of moderate  undernourishment  in early lactation.
While  this experiment  does not pinpoint  the actual  energy  requirements  
of twin bearing  ewes during  lactation,  from other work carried  out on
11
O)
v
a
"c
i
Q
DQ2-■ Low
1 ■ I I I
2 3 4 5
Week of lactation
Fig. 1: Voluntary  feed intake of ewes in early lactation.  
Table 8
ME allowance  (MJ/day)  required  by twin bearing  ewes in late pregnancy  
and early lactation
Ewe liveweight  
(kg)Late pregnancy Early lactation
50 7.89 15.78
60 9.05 18.10
70 10.16 20.32
80 11.23 22.46
lactation  requirements  it was concluded  that the energy  levels must be 
close to twice the estimated  pregnancy  levels.
A comparison  of the energy  requirements  of twin bearing  ewes in late 
pregnancy  and early lactation  is given in Table 8.
The approximate  estimated  theoretical  quantities  of various  feeds 
needed  to meet these requirements  for a 60 kg ewe are given in Table  9. 
The requirements  for silage  and hay are based on a digestibility  value of 
65 for both roughages.  The ME requirements  for dried grass,  swedes  and 
barley are calculated  from published  estimates  of their energy  concen ­
trations.  It must be emphasized  that, while these quantities  of feeds will
12
satisfy  the energy  requirements  of the ewe in late pregnancy,  protein  and 
minerals  may be deficient  particularly  in the case of swedes  and barley.  
It is also evident  that silage  intakes  during  late pregnancy  would  not meet  
ewe requirements  and it is therefore  necessary  to supplement  with con­
centrates.
Table 9
The quantities  required  of various  feeds required  by twin bearing  ewes during  late 
pregnancy  and early lactation
Feed (kg as fed) Late pregnancy Early lactation
Silage 5.85 11.70
Hay 1.23 2.46
Dried grass 1.00 2.00
Swedes 6.36 12.72
Barley 0.82 1.64
Cheveley  Johnston  & Company
Agricultural  Consultants  & Land Agents
Farm Reports  and Feasibility  Studies  
Management  Accounts  and Enterprise  Costings  
Farm and Estate  Management  
Staff Selection
Budgetary  Control  and Cash Flow Forecasts  
Land and Stock  Valuations —Farm Sales  and Purchases
26/27 WELLINGTON  ROAD,  CORK  
(Cork  501109)
13
Where  
there ’s growth  
—there ’s 
Grcissland  
I^rtilizers
Grassland  
covers  Ireland.}
Grasslan
f.it..  Mi
Grassland  Fertilizers  Ltd. The Pound Road, Slane Tel. (041) 24124"  & 24160
14
Grazing  Management  for Mid-Season  
Lamb  Production
T. NOLAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Creagh,  Ballinrobe,  Co. Mayo.
Mid-season  Iamb production  in Ireland  is associated  with lambing  ewes  
at a date when pasture  growth  is expected  to meet the nutritional  needs 
of the flock. With the exception  of tillage areas,  over 95% of the total 
annual  food supply  consists  of grazed  or conserved  herbage.  Due to the 
economic  necessity  to intensify  mid-season  lamb production  from pasture  
the most important  immediate  objective  is to ensure  good pasture  pro­
duction  and its efficient  use through  the application  of high stocking  rate.
More specifically  the aim is to achieve  an integrated  efficient  balance  
between  pasture  production  and utilisation  and sheep husbandry  and 
management  practices  which will secure sustained  acceptable  levels of 
individual  sheep  performance,  output  per unit area and economic  return.  
Institute  research  has developed  and tested relatively  simple integrated  
whole package  systems  which are practically  workable  and require  com­
paratively  low cost and labour  inputs.
Research  has shown  that on developed  lowland  permanent  grassland,  
using moderate  fertiliser  inputs  (about  77 lb N per acre per annum)  and 
concentrate  feed to ewes in late pregnancy  (40 lb per ewe) an all year 
stocking  rate of six ewes per acre for mid-season  fat lamb production  is 
possible.  Adequate  fencing  and good husbandry  are essential  for the 
suecessful  management  of these systems.  In this paper,  firstly the basic  
requirements  for intensive  mid-season  lamb production  from grassland  
are emphasised,  secondly  the more important  grassland  and sheep 
components  are outlined,  and thirdly  the integration  of these components  
in the whole system  are examined.
The basis
Planning  and general  organisation  are the basic requirements  for suc­
cess. This includes  the choice  of a particular  system,  an understanding  
of the target individual  sheep  and per unit area outputs  required,  and a 
suitab'e  husbandry  and management  programme.  Existing  weaknesses  
must be corrected.  Handling  and wintering  facilities  should  be provided  
to facilitate  efficient  production  and ease of operation.  The inclusion  of 
a programme  for disease  prevention  and control  should  be an essential  
feature  of the plan.
Grazing  management  is an important  component  because  it influences 
the efficiency  with which  a given  quantity  of food is apportioned  through ­
out the year in order  to meet the nutritional  requirements  of the flock.  An 
understanding  of the following  three fundamental  factors  is essential :
Firstly,  the rate of pasture  growth  varies  at different  periods  of the year 
and therefore,  for a given all year stocking  rate in the context  of inten ­
ts
sification,  the supply  of food can be expected  to be greater  than or less 
than flock requirement  according  to season. Secondly,  the food require ­
ment of the flock varies  in association  with the different  ewe and lamb  
physiological  states  throughout  the year and do not match  the pattern  of 
food supply  from pasture.  Thirdly,  the patterns  of food requirement  by 
ewes and lambs in the same flock are not the same throughout  the year 
and this can be exploited  to improve  grazing  management  efficiency.
Number  of paddocks
A 6-paddock  rotational  grazing  layout is considered  adequate  for a 
flock size of up to 200 ewes. Rotational  grazing  is recommended  as it 
facilitates  a better  appreciation  of how the food supply  and demand  ratio  
is progressing.  This in turn provides  confidence  and gives the operator  
a better opportunity  to sub-divide  flocks when necessary  as well as an 
improved  ability  to apportion  available  herbage.
Date  of lambing
The effects  on lamb  growth  rate of turning  out ewes to pasture  at three  
different  dates  in Spring,  each at three stocking  rates,  are shown  in Table
1. These results  indicate  that the stocking  rate could be increased  by
Table 1
Effects  of date of Spring  grazing  and of stocking  rate on lamb growth  
rate to 12 weeks
Date to pasture Stocking  rate 
(ewes  + lambs/acre)Lamb  growth  rate 
(Ib/lamb/day)
March  20 3.25 ± 4.3 0.78
4.00 ± 5.3 0.71
4.75 + 6.3 0.68
April 9 4.00 ± 5.3 0.74
4.75 ± 6.3 0.76
5.50 ± 7.3 0.62
April 29 4.75 ± 6.3 0.72
5.50 ± 7.3 0.71
6.25 ± 8.3 0.66
about 18% at each of the later dates without  reducing  lamb daily live- 
weight  gain below about  0.71 lb. There  appears  to be little justification  
for commencing  lambing  earlier than the 10th March or delaying  it 
beyond  the 20th March  where the stocking  rate is at or greater  than 5 
ewes per acre.
If an earlier  lambing  date is chosen  either the stocking  rate must be 
reduced  or extra feed must be brought  into the system  to maintain  in­
dividual  lamb growth rate. Reducing  the stocking  rate can only be
16
effective  in situations  where  the sheep  enterprise  is integrated  with some 
other  enterprise  to avoid  poor utilisation  later on in the season.
Thus the correct  choice of lambing  date is an important  factor in 
attempting to achieve  a suitable  fit between  pasture  food supply  and flock  
food requirement  in the context  of a low cost grassland  based  system.
Lambing  to weaning
During  this period  the aim is to obtain  a mean  daily lamb growth  rate 
of about  0.7 lb. This level of performance  corresponds  to a mean daily  
growth  rate of about  0.6 lb from birth to drafting  or mid-August.  Table  
2 shows  the effects  of five all year stocking  rates on lamb  growth  rate and
Table 2
Effects  of stocking  rate on lamb growth  rate and outputs  of Iamb meat and
wool per acre
Stocking  rate 
(ewes/acre/annum)*Lamb  growth  rate 
(Ib/day)Lamb  meat output  
(Ib/acre)Wool  output  
(Ib/acre)
3 0.61 145 23
4 0.61 181 28
5 0.59 228 36
6 0.57 269 39
8 0.38 — 147
* Mean growth  rate to slaughter  or mid-August.
Proportion  of lambs finished  varied  from 3 to 25%.
the outputs  of lamb meat and wool per acre. The important  point in 
relation  to grazing  management  from lambing  to weaning  is that when  
the stocking  rate approaches  the level required  to achieve  high output  
and efficient  use of herbage  the total area must be allocated  to grazing.
There is little information  to indicate  the correct  speed of rotation,  
pasture  height  and severity  of defoliation  which give best results  during  
this period. The present  state of knowledge  suggests  that height  of herb ­
age has no effect  on lamb growth  rate provided  there is ample  availability.  
It also indicates  that dry matter  intake begins  to fall when the post 
grazing  pasture  dry matter  residues  is less than about 1000 lb per acre 
or when the amount  of herbage  available  is lower than 3 times their  
daily intake. In at least one study  a slower  rotation  which  is associated  
with a longer  rest period  and higher  herbage  gave better results. These  
results  as well as more recent  findings  at Creagh  (which  were not direct  
comparisons)  indicate  that both ewe intake and milk production  are 
higher  when pasture  is high. As pasture  height  and density  affect  the size 
of bite and rate of biting,  sheep are forced to increase  their time spent  
grazing  when pasture  availability  is lower  to maintain  their intake.
There is a need for much more information  on all of these pasture  
characteristics  and associated  sheep responses  under Irish conditions
17
before a definitive  grazing  management  programme  can be advocated.  
The main points  are that after lambing  the aim is to provide  an adequate  
supply  of food to meet the greatly  increased  nutritional  requirements  of 
the ewe and to realise  that lamb  growth  rate during  the first 10 weeks  or 
so of life is closely  related  to the milk yield of the ewe.
A 2-year  experiment  at Creagh  compared  lamb weaning  ages of 8, 12 
and 16 weeks  at a standard  high stocking  rate of 7 ewes + 9 lambs  per 
acre. The results  showed  that during  the period April 12th to August  
16th the daily growth  rate (0.68 lb) of lambs  weaned  at 12 weeks  of age 
was greater  than in those weaned  at 8 (0.60 lb) or 16 (0.62 lb) weeks  of 
age. The earlier  weaning  ages resulted  in a greater  amount  of total her­
bage being available  for winter  feed conservation  (Table  3).
Table 3
Conservation  (fresh  cwt/acre)
Age at weaning June 19 Oct. 5 Total
8 57 107 164
12 23' 129 152
16 20' 85 105
' Amounts  of herbage  available  but not cut.
There is no advantage  in retaining  ewes and lambs  together  beyond 
the stage at which  ewe milk yield is so small as to have no effect  on lamb  
growth  rate. It appears  from this study that after about 12 weeks  the 
ewes are competing  with the lambs for available  feed. It will now be 
shown that the benefits  of weaning  at the correct  age cannot  be fully 
realised  unless  the post weaning  management  is correct.
Post weaning  management  and winter  feed
During  this period  the aims are to obtain  adequate  winter  feed for the 
ewes and to secure  continued  good growth  rate in lambs. Ewes  should  be 
stocked  at 15 to 18 per acre from weaning  to flushing  (i.e. 1st July to the 
20th September).  This means  that ^ of the farm is grazed  by weaned 
ewes. Experience  has shown  that ewes will lose about 7 lb liveweight 
under these conditions.  Whether  this is mainly  due to a change  in gut 
fill or body condition  is not clear. The imfxjrtant  considerations  are that 
this tightening  up of ewes which are not pregnant  or lactating  gives an 
opportunity  to obtain  adequate  winter  feed and to finish  remaining lambs.
It was stated  earlier  that at the higher  stocking  rates the total area must  
be allocated  to grazing  from lambing  to weaning.  After  weaning  half of 
the farm should  be closed  for early September  cut silage. About  11 cwt 
of silage por ewe is required.  Under the intensive  grassland  plan the 
conservation  date must be postponed  to about  early September  and the
18
question  of whether  hay or silage is better does not arise due to the 
obvious  risks associated  with hay at this late date.
Table  4 shows  the results  of a 2-year  experiment  which  compared  post 
weaning  stocking  rates of 12. 18 and 24 lambs  per acre. The results  are 
intended  to give guidelines  as to which stocking  rate would be chosen 
depending  on the amount  of liveweight  gain required  to achieve  the final 
target  liveweight  which  will be referred  to later in the section  dealing  with
Table 4
Effect  of stocking  rate on growth  rate in weaned  lambs
Stocking  rate♦Total  liveweight  gain per lamb  (lb)
(lambs  per acre) 1970 1971
12 19.5 13.1
18 16.8 10.0
24 10.5 6.5
* From  July 15th to August  31st in1970 and from July 5th to August  25th in 1971.
drafting  of lambs. It is recommended  that, in the whole system  context,  
the \veaned  lambs  be allowed  access  to the silage area up to the time of 
drafting  or mid-August.  At 6 ewes per acre and a weaning  percentage  of 
150 the lamb stocking  will be approximately  7 lambs or 5^ lambs  per 
acre depending  on whether  50% or 60% of them have been drafted  by 
weaning  time.
These  relatively  low lamb  stocking  rates  will ensure  that not alone  have 
the lambs  a plentiful  food supply  but also they will have an opportunity  
to exercise  their preferences  for preferred  plant species  or portions  of 
plants  or geographic locations  all of which  tend to contribute  to improved  
intake  and liveweight  gain.
Draftii^  of Iambs ’
Part of planning  a system  is concerned  with setting  target liveweight 
and degree  of finish at which lambs  will be drafted.  It is important  to 
adhere  to these targets  as closely  as possible  as every draft reduces  the 
stocking  rate thereby  giving  a better  opportunity  to finish  the remaining  
lambs. Where  the objective  is to produce  a 40 lb carcass,  for example.  
It should be remembered  that a liveweight  of approximately  85 lb is 
required  up to weaning  whereas  95 lb is required  later on due to a drop  
m killing  out percentage  from approximately  47% to 42%. This aspect  
is so important  that one should  not wait for even a slightly  greater  num ­
ber to be finished  before  drafting  the few which  are ready.
In an intensive  mid-season  fat lamb system  it is recommended  that all 
lambs  remaining  in mid-August  be drafted  out whatever  their liveweight. 
otherwise  they may seriously  affect the amount  of winter  feed obtained!
19
The temptation  to hold on to some ewe lambs  for breeding  must also be 
resisted  as this practice  belongs  to a ewe replacement  system.
Flushing
The post weaning  management  described  showed  that ^ of the farm is 
grazed by weaned  ewes, \ of the farm is fertilised  for silage and that 
lambs  are grazed  on f of the farm. This allows  ^ of the farm to be rested  
from mid-August  (i.e. after the lambs  are drafted)  which  will give a good 
start to flushing  about  3 weeks  before  mating  date. The regrowth  on the 
silage area will then give an adequate  supply of herbage  to continue  
flushing.  The j of the farm grazed  by weaned  ewes from early July to 
late September  is then rested to provide  a good start to grazing  in the 
following  spring.
Winter  management
This is the period  for which  there is the most clear-cup  management  
practice,  i.e. remove  sheep altogether  into wnter quarters  and rest the 
pasture.  The general  recommendations  to achieve  a good spring  pasture  
growth  is to rest the pasture  from not later than the third week of Nov­
ember,  apply P and K an apply 45 lb of N about 6 weeks before  spring  
grazing.
Conclusion
I hope that this paper  has shown  how the more important  sheep and 
grassland  management  practices  should  be integrated  to satisfy  the basic 
objective  of ensuring  an adequate  supply  of nutrients  which  will sustain  
the desired  outputs  per sheep and per acre. Clearly  the selection  of the 
correct  stocking  rate, lambing  date and lamb age at weaning  is important  
to achieve  the target  levels  of production.  These aspects  must be integ ­
rated with suitable  grazing  management,  conservation  and ewe wintering  
practices  in the context  of an efficient  whole system.
Further  research  is required  but at the present  time it is considered  that 
the adoption  of practices  outlined  here could at least double  the output  
from the grassland  area presently  devoted  to sheep  in Ireland.
20
Sheep  Produetion  — Components  
of Success
B. KILKENNY
Meat and Livestock  Commission,  United  Kinftdom.
The Meat and Livestock  Commission  in Britain  has been operating  a 
commercial  flock recording  scheme  since 1969. This paper  draws  on the 
results  from these recorded  flocks and concentrates  in particular  on the 
variation  in performance  levels —both physical  and financial—achieved,  
and attempts  to explain  some of the variation  in terms of management  
practices.
But firstly  let us review  the profitability  of sheep  production  in Britain  
over recent  years.
Gross  margins  unadjusted  for inflation  showed  a dramatic  increase  in 
the 1970 ’s, nearly  doubling  between  1970 and 1975, and again between  
1975 and 1978. This increase  was due almost  entirely  to lamb price 
increases  keeping  well ahead  of cost increases.  Physical  performance  per 
ewe hardly  changed,  but there was some increase  in stocking  rates. How ­
ever, when the gross margins  are adjusted  for inflation  the real value of 
the increased  gross  margin  was very small,  the averages  for 1976-78  being  
about the same as those between  1971 and 1973. The average  gross 
margins  in 1979 are likely to be slightly  lower than 1978 in real terms,  
and to be slightly  higher  again in 1980, but generally  not very digerent  to 
the last three-year  average.
One reason  for the increase  in lamb prices  not being fully reflected  in 
increased  margins  is the increase  in flock replacement  costs which has 
occurred  over the period. As lamb prices  have increased  so have the cost 
of replacements,  a’most in parallel.
Another  factor has been the increase  in fixed costs. It is always  
problematical  to allocate  fixed costs on an enterprise  basis but it is 
important  to do so if the real costs of production  are to be determined.  
In a sample  of MLC recorded  lowland  flocks  for 1977 and 1979, fixed  
costs accounted  for 60 per cent of total costs; they increased  by 24 per 
cent between  1977 and 1979.
Clearly  then there has been no ‘bonanza ’ period for British sheep 
producers  over recent  years,  the superficial  large increases  in lamb  prices  
has largely  been a reflection  of inflation  or has been absorbed  by higher  
costs. Nevertheless  sheep have probably  fared better than any other  
livestock  enterprise  over this time period,  and margins  have undoubtedly  
been higher  in real terms  in the 70’s than they were in the 60’s.
One of the clearest  messages  to emerge  from recording  is that good 
performance  always  pays best whatever  the general  cost/price  situation.  
Table 1 shows  the relationships  between  performance  and gross margins
21
Table 1
Relationship  between  performance  and gross margins
Extra  gross margin for extra  ;
0.1 lambs 0.1 ewes/hectare
reared/ewe stocking  rate
£/ewe £/hectare
1978 -1-2.17 + 2.01
1977 + 1.90 + 1.79
1976 + 2.15 + 5.14
1974 + 1.26 + 2.03
1972 + 1.02 + 2.15
(Average  lowland  and upland  flocks)
over a number  of years. The benefits  of improved  performance  have 
always  been substantial.  The general  cost/price  situation  within  which 
flockmasters  have to operate  their flocks  cannot  be changed  in the short ­
term —if it is not satisfactory  in the long-term  producers  will go out of 
sheep  production.  The best buffer  against  the general  cost/price  situation  
is good performance.  Improvement  of physical  performance  is important  
in both lowland  and hill flocks;  the difference  lies in the level of perform ­
ance at which improvement  is aimed.
Improving  performance
So far reference  has only been made  to average  results,  but in practice  
there is tremendous  variation  between  flocks  in both physical  and financial 
performance  (Table  2).
Table 2
Recorded  lowland  flock performance  levels  (5-year  average)
Range*
From  To All flocks
Number  of lambs  born per ewe lambed  
Number  of barren  ewes as % ewes to ram 
Number  of ewe deaths  as % ewes to ram 
Number  of lambs dead or died at birth  
as % of all births
Number  of lambs died subsequent  to birth  
as % of lambs survived  birth  
(♦ 95 % of range)1.0 1.91 1.41
0 20.0 8.4
0 17.2 4.2
1.0 34.5 8.0
1.0 14.1 5.5
22
Table 3 shows the difference  between  the average  and the top third  
flocks  (based  on gross  margin  per hectare).  The latter  provide  a basis  for 
setting  tough but realistic  targets  for lamb production.  The top third  
flocks sell more lambs at higher  than average  prices,  have lower costs 
despite  this higher  output  and achieve  better  ewe performance  with above  
average  stocking  rates.
Table 3
Difference  in performance  between  top third flocks  and average  (%) 1978
Lowland Upland  flocks
Lamb sales + 15.8 + 13.5
Output + 19.0 + 15.1
Concentrate  costs - 1.3 + 4.7
Lambs  born alive per 100 ewes to ram + 9.9 + 10.2
Lambs  reared  per 100 ewes to ram + 12.9 + 12.4
Overall  stocking  rate (ewes per hectare) + 19.8 + 20.9
The results  of MLC  fixed cost surveys  of sheep  production  shows  that 
there is a very close relationship  between  gross and net margins,  so that 
good physical  performance  does relate  to higher  profitability  too (Fig. 1).
CROSS MARGIN 
I/HA
60 75 90 ^ 105 120
ME'I' MARGIN C/1IA
Fig. 1—Relationship  between  gross margins  and net profitability.
23
The components  of success  in the breeding  flocks  are then :
* More lambs  reared
* Lower  costs
* Higher  stocking  rates
* Higher  lamb values
The contribution  of these to higher  gross margins  is shown  in Table  4.
Table 4
Components  of top third gross margins ______________
% contribution  to top third superiority  in
Gross  margin  per ewe Gross  margin  per hectare
Lowland  flocks
Lambs  reared 71
Lamb value 21
Flock replacement  cost 3
Feed and forage  costs 5
Stocking  rate
100
Upland  flocks
Lambs  reared 71
Lamb value 26
Flock replacement  costs 5
Feed and forage  costs -2
Stocking  rate
10033
10
2
2
53
100
41 
15
3
-1
42
100
The two major  physical  factors  affecting  gross  margins  are the number  
of lambs  reared  and the stocking  rate. The effect  of different combinations  
of stocking  rate and the number  of lambs  reared  per ewe are shown  in 
Table 5. Four categories  of flock were considered  ;
Above  average  stocking  rate — above  average  lambs  reared
— below  average  lambs  reared
Below  average  stocking  rate — above  average  lambs  reared
— below  average  lambs  reared
The highest  gross margin  per ewe occurred  in the high lambing  per­
formance.  low stocking  rate group  of flocks. Not surprisingly,  the lowest 
was for the low lambing  performance,  low stocking  rate group. 1 he 
highest  average  gross margin  per hectare  was the high stocking  rate, high 
lambing  performance  group.  The high lambing  performanre,  low stocking 
rate group gave the next highest  gross margin  above the low lambing  
performance,  high stocking  rate group. The differences  ’".S^ss  mar^ns  
per hectare  between  the four groups  were similarly  variable  for both
24
Table 5
The effect  of the number  of lambs  reared  and stocking  rate on gross  margins  
(Ave. of 1977 and 1978)
No. lambs  reared  per ewe 
High  Low
No. lambs reared per ewe 1.49 1.26
Overall  stocking  rate (ewes/hectare) I2.I 12.5 STOCKING
Concentrates  (kg/ewe) 60 55 RATE
Lamb price (£/lamb) 23.6 24.1 HIGH
Lamb sales (£/ewe) 35.2 30.4 A
Flock replacement  cost (£/ewe) 5.4 4.6 —
Total feed and forage  costs (£/ewe) 10.3 9.6 12.3
Gross margin  per ewe (£) 20.4 17.9 —
Gross  margin  per hectare  (£) 245.2 222.9
No. of lambs reared  per ewe 1.57 1.31
Overall  stocking  rate (ewes/hectare) 9.2 8.7
Concentrates  (kg/ewe) 51 50 LOW
Lamb price (£/lamb) 24.6 24.9 A
Lamb sales (£/ewe) 38.6 32.6 —
Flock replacement  cost (£/ewe) 5.3 4.2 8.9
Total feed and forage  costs (£/ewe) 9.0 8.7 —
Gross  margin  per ewe (£) 25.5 21.0
Gross  margin  per hectare  (£) 237.3 183.3
gross margin  per ewe and per hectare. Lamb  prices were lower in the 
high stocking  rate group.
The components  of success  are the same whatever  the type of flock — 
up'and,  lowland,  grass finishing,  forage  finishing,  store lambs  or hoggets.  
Changing  the system  of production  might be the right management  de­
cision in individual  farm situations  to better suit the whole farm plan.  
But, having  changed  the system,  the need to achieve  good performance  
will still be as strong  as ever; the change  might  however  allow this to be 
more readily  achieved.  Average  results  for contrasting  production  systems 
are very similar  (Table  6).
Table 6
Gross  margins  for different  sheep  systems —5-year  average  1974-78  (adjusted
for inflation)
Early lambing  
flocksGrass lamb  
flocksForage  lamb  
flocksHogget
production
Gross margin
per ewe (£) 17.7 19.6 20.5 21.1
Gross margin
per hectare  (£) 221.3 205.8 203.0 200.5
25
Lambs  reared
The number  of lambs  eventually  reared  is the combination  of a number  
of factors,  all of which have a major  effect on the rearing  percentage.  
These are the number  of empty ewes, number  of ewes dying before 
lambing,  number  of lambs born, the number  of lambs bom dead or 
dying at or around  birth, and finally  the number  of live lambs which 
subsequently  die.
Results  from MLC flocks show that although  the number  of lambs  
born per ewe lambed  is the biggest  single source of variation  in the 
number  of lambs reared,  each of the separate  wastage  factors  has a 
significant  effect. Individual  flocks may have a problem  with a single  
factor  but it is more often  the case that a low level of performance  in one 
factor  is associated  with an equally  poor performance  in several  others.  
Whilst  differences  between  breeds  and crosses  account  for some of the 
variation  between  flocks  in these vital performance  factors,  differences  in 
the management  and feeding  of the ewes are more important  and it is to 
these that individual  producers  must direct  their main attention.
Table 7
Commercial  ewe performance  in average  and top third flocks  (6-year  average)
Per 100ewes to ram
Some major Management* Lambed Total Reared Live lambs
crosses level lambs born per
born ewe lambed
Dorset  Horn Average 92 147 132 1.51
crosses top third 95 168 140 1.58
Greyface Average 93 174 153 1.75
top third 96 198 168 1.86
Mash  am Average 92 172 152 1.77
top third 95 196 167 1.87
Mule Average 93 176 154 1.76
top third 96 201 168 1.89
Scotch Average 92 171 150 1.73
Halfbred top third 95 195 165 1.88
Suffolk  X Average 93 173 152 1.72
Masham top third 96 197 162 1.82
Suffolk  X Average 93 169 151 1.71
Mule top third 96 193 161 1.83
Suffolk  X Average 91 163 143 1.66
Scotch  Halfbred  top third 94 186 155 1.78
(* Top third —-performance  in flocks  in the top third on grass margins  per hectare).
Table 7 summarises  the performance  of several  types  of British  cross ­
bred ewes in commercial  flocks and highlights  the disparities  in ewe
26
performance  between  the average  flocks  and those achieving  the top third  
gross margins  per hectare. The range in average  performance  between  
different  ewe types of similar  bodyweight  is smaller  than the variation  in 
performance  of individual  breed types in flocks  of different  management  
levels. There are naturally  exceptions  to this generalisation.  The Finish  
Landrace  produces  many  more lambs  than would  be deduced  for its size. 
The impact  of the Finish  Landrace  in crossing  in Britain  has been very 
marginal— it contributes  an insignificant  quantity  of genes into the final 
meat lamb. Thus, for most situations  in Britain  the generalisation  that, 
taking  account  of body size, lamb rearing  percentage  differences  between  
crosses  are relatively  small,  holds  good. Producers  should  concern  them ­
selves  with choosing  a type of ewe to suit individual  farm and marketing  
requirements  rather  than stock them according  to body size. Differences 
in output  per hectare  at the same level of management  will generally  be 
small.
Inadequate  or inappropriate  feeding  is often a major contributor  to 
losses  at each stage,  but health/disease  aspects  are also important.  What ­
ever the reason  for losses,  it is important  to keep some simple  records  of 
numbers  so that the reasons  for a low lamb rearing  percentage  can be 
ascertained.
Body  condition  scoring
A considerable  research  effort over the last 10 years has provided  a 
much clearer  insight  into the feed requirements  of the ewe at different  
times of the year. The problem  in practice  is the application  of this 
information  in the flock situation  where  there are ewes of varying  body  
size, with different  requirements  and with a spread  of lambing  dates.  The 
methodical  evaluation  of the body condition  of ewes using a scoring 
system  is a useful  indicator  of the nutritional  status  of a flock and allows  
more precise  feeding  practices  to be applied.
It has been clearly  demonstrated  by MLC and others  that there is a 
close relationship  between  body condition  and performance —lambing  
percentages,  and spread  of lambing  (Table  8). The scoring  system  is based
Table 8
Relation.ship  between  flock condition  score and flock performance
Percentage  of ewes in flock at different  
condition  scores
Breed  or
cross
Scotch1 li 2 21 3 4 41Flock No. of 
average lambs Spread  
body per 100 of 
-condition  ewes to lambing  
score ram (days)
Flalfbred 1* 000 12.1 25.5 50.4 6.0 6.0 0 3.3 174 44
flocks 2** 0.54.0 33.5 30.5 17.5 12.0 2.000 2.2 128 69
Masham 1* 00.5 3.6 6.534.7 26.2 20.0 7.6 1.0 3.4 169 39
flocks 2** 0.5 3.5 18.7 29.9 30.4 15.1 1.900 2.1 126 67
* Flock 1—good condition  at mating  
** Flock 2—poor condition  at mating
27
on a standardised  handling  technique  and the allocation  of a score in the 
range from 1 (very thin) to 5 (very fat). Target  scores  have been estab ­
lished for ewes at different  stages  of production  and in different  environ ­
mental  situations.  Target  scores for lowland  flocks  at different  times in 
the production  year are shown  in Table 9. Most flocks  (Table  8) contain
Table 9
Target  body condition  scores  for lowland  ewes
6 weeks  pre-mating 2i
Mating 3-31
Mid-pregnancy 21
Lambing 2-21
Weaning 2
a significant  group  of ewes which do not achieve  the appropriate  target  
scores  and which benefit  from specific  management.  If ewes are in the 
right body condition  and the results  are still low then a more detailed  
investigation  as to the reasons  will be necessary.  Again, some basic 
physical  records  will help with this type of evaluation.
In many  flock situations  better  lamb  survival  is a more urgent  problem  
than the increase  of litter size. The results  of a lamb loss investigation  in 
a sample  of MLC lowland  flocks are shown  in Table 10. Clearly  most
Table 10
Lamb deaths  in lowland  flocks
Proportion  of lambs  dying at different  ages (%) :
0-7 days 8-30 days 30-1- days 1
64 12 3
Causes  oflamb deaths (%) ; M ismothering/starvation 41
Physical  damage 3
E Coli scour/septicaemia 15
Pneumonia 2
Abcess/peritonitis/navel  ill 4
Miscellaneous 16
No cause found 2021
lamb losses occur within the first seven days of life and starvation  and 
rnismothering  are the biggest  single cause of loss. This again reflects  
directly  on management,  proper  lambing  facilities,  skilled  supervision  and 
the strategic  tube feeding  of colostrum  all make major  contributions  to 
lamb survival.  Improved  control  of microbic  and parasitic  disease  has 
greatly  reduced  wastage  but improvements  in the timing  of prophylactic
28
and therapeutic  programmes  could reduce  losses  further. Medicines  and 
veterinary  costs comprise  on average  almost  10 per cent of the variable  
costs per ewe, but there are flocks  in which  these costs are considerably  
higher  without  any complementary  increase  in the gross  margins  per ewe.
Sale value  of Iambs
The value of the slaughtered  lamb and consequently  the gross output  
per ewe is affected  by the date of sale, due to seasonal  variation  in prices. 
The ratio between  feed and forage  costs and lamb sales differs  between 
systems  of production  and is most sensitive  in the early lamb production  
systems  (2.7 ; 1) with their higher  feed and forage  costs (average  3.8 : 1 
in hogget  systems,  see Table 13). Quick  growth  to slaughter  weight  is an 
important  factor  in determining  the returns  from the production  of early  
out-of-season  lambs  and lambs  off grass.  Growth  rate is of less importance  
in late lamb and hogget  production  off forage  crops where  the final car­
case weight obtained  is relatively  more important.  Growth  rate is in­
fluenced  by breed and also by stocking  rate. It is important  that a 
decision  on the optimum  system  of production  is made on an individual  
farm basis. Then,  breeds  and stocking  rates can be adapted  to best meet 
the objectives.
Market  requirements  for lamb differ markedly,  but the two major  
variables  are weight  and fatness.  Differential  prices  between  top third  and 
average  producers  have increased  markedly  over recent  years and now 
account  for about 12 per cent of the superiority  in gross margin  per 
hectare  or the top third (Table  4). Regional  and time of sale differences 
between  the average  and top third units do not account  for all of this 
large difference  which reflects  real differences  in marketing  skills of the 
top third producers.
Carcase  weights  for different  types of lambs  can be predicted  within  a 
reasonable  degree  of accuracy  from their parent  bodyweight  (Table 11).
Table 11
Predicting  lamb carcase  weight  (kg)
Breed weight  of ram (Suffolk)
Breed weight  of ewe (Clun Forest)91
73
Slaughter  weight  of lamb  
Carcase  weight164 -F
41
20.5
Liveweight  can also give a guide to the average  fatness  of batches  of 
lambs within a breed type. Lambs  slaughtered  at the average  for the 
parent  breeds  will typically  fall into fat class 3 on the MLC  scale. Lambs  
slaughtered  about 10 per cent above or below the average  slaughter  
weight  of a particular  breed or cross will classify  as 4 or 2 for fatness.
29
These can only be guides;  they can be refined  further  by, for example,  
slaughtering  wether  lambs  5 per cent above and ewe lambs 10 per cent 
below  the average  liveweight  derived  from the adult body weights  of the 
parents  in order  to achieve  the same level of fatness.
The only precise  way of assessing  the market  requirement  and sending 
back the information  to the producer  is some form of carcase  classifica­
tion system. Having  established  a system  it must then be transformed  
into a method  that farmers  can use on the farm to predict  from the live 
animal  the likely  carcase  classification  of the dead lamb. Such a system  
depiends  on the handling  and methodical  scoring  of lambs  for subcutan ­
eous fatness.
Practice  in handling  is essential  to assess  accurately  the fatness  level of 
individual  lambs  before  slaughter  and, until experience  is acquired,  the 
carcases  should  be examined  after weighing  and classification.  If a visit 
to the abattoir  is not possible,  then carcase  classification  results  will show  
the level of accuracy  attained  in the selection  of lambs.
Some 14 per cent (1 in 7) of British  lamb carcases  fall into fat classes 
4 & 5. This means  that such lambs  are overfat  in terms  of most whole ­
salers ’ requirements.  At least nine per cent of the weight  of fat class 4 
carcases  and 13 per cent of the weight  of fat class 5 carcases  are likely 
to be trimmed  before retail sale. Additionally,  not all of the excessive  
fat can be assessed  from a fat trim percentage  alone; the extent  of un- 
trimmable  fat in joints is just as important  because  of its influence  on 
consumer  satisfaction.  It is apparent  from the rapid  decline  in sheepmeat  
consumption  in Britain  over the last decade  (from 11 kg per head/year  
in the early 1960 ’s to 7 kg/head/year  currently)  that the quality  of the 
product,  compared  with other meats,  is unable  to satisfy  demand.  Pro­
ducers should not consider  that the high lamb prices created  by the 
Continental  market  reflect  general  consumer  satisfaction  in their product.  
A major  challenge  facing the British  sheep industry  as a whole is the 
reduction  of fatness  in lambs. Lamb  will find it increasingly  difficult  to 
compete  with other  meats  if this problem  is not overcome.
Where  wholesalers  are paying  different  prices for lambs of different 
fatness,  it is important  for the flock owner  to assess  carefully  the advan ­
tage of increasing  weight  against  the penalty  which may be incurred  
through  the carcase  being  too fat.
Costs
Reference  has already  been made  to the fact that in the MLC surveys, 
fixed costs account  for 60 per cent of total costs. Labour  is the highest 
single item of costs accounting  for nearly  40 per cent of fixed costs. A 
high proportion  of the labour  figure  in this specific  survey  in both lowland  
and upland  flocks  was accounted  for by family  labour  costs. Fixed  costs  
by their very nature  are more a reflection  of the whole  farming  situation  
rather  than specific  to a single enterprise,  but clearly  the level of labour  
costs are uneconomically  high in some situations.
30
Table 12
Production  variable  costs —% of total
Lowland
Average Top thirdUpland
Average Top third
Flock replacements 33 30 29 25
Concentrates 28 30 26 29
Forage  costs 28 28 31 32
Vet and medicine 8 8 9 9
Others 4 4 5 6
100 100 100 100
Table 12 shows the proportion  of variable  costs accounted  for by 
different  items in both lowland  and upland  farms. The contribution  to 
total variable  costs is similar  in lowland  and upland flocks, and for 
average  and top third flocks  within  each category.  Between  them replace ­
ments, concentrate  and forage costs account  for about 85 per cent of 
total variable  costs.
Flock  replacement  costs
On the variable  cost side there are opportunities  for useful reductions  
in most sheep  flocks  and the first to be considered  is the flock replacement  
cost. Flock replacement  costs account  for about a third of the direct  
costs of production.  The factors  which control  the cost of maintaining  
the breeding  stock are the number  of replacements  required  annually  and 
their purchase  price in relation  to the price received  for culled  breeding  
stock. The number  of replacements  required  is determined  by the normal  
length of breeding  life of ewes and their mortality  rate. In practice,  
replacement  and selling  policies  are flexible,  varying  with circumstances  
particularly  with market  prices. The length  of breeding  life in the flock  
can be increased  by breeding  from ewe lambs  and by reducing  the rate 
of premature  culling. The true extent of premature  culling may be 
partially  masked  by economic  opportunism  in disposing  of cast ewes in 
a favourable  market.  Careful  attention  to the health and feeding  of the 
flock could allow a high proportion  of the ewes in many  flocks  to pro­
duce an extra lamb crop, providing  the over-age  ewes do not suffer an 
abnormally  high death rate or cause the value of the cull ewes to drop  
too markedly.  The practice  of mating  ewe lambs  reduces  flock  costs since  
the average  breeding  life is normally  increased  and it also increases  the 
number  of lambs  available  for sale. A more planned  approach  to replace ­
ment policies  could undoubtedly  bring about important  economies  in 
many  flocks.
Feed and forage  costs
Feed and forage costs account  for over half of the direct costs of 
production.  There is a wide range in feed and forage costs between
31
recorded  flocks in similar  systems  of sheep production.  Results  from 
recorded  flocks  show that there is no direct  correlation  between  the value 
of feed inputs  and the gross  output. The more efficient  ffocks  have lower 
feed costs  than average,  largely  because  less concentrates  are used. In the 
top third ffocks the feeding  of concentrates  is more precisely  related  to 
the ffocks ’ requirements  by ensuring  compact  lambing  groups  for feeding 
^ Table 13. As the fertility  .level of the flock rises it becomes  increasingly  
important  to adjust the feeding  levels to the requirement  of the ewe at 
key stages of production.  This is an area where practical  methods  of 
applying  technical  knowledge  on the nutritional  requirement  of the ewe 
can be improved  and will yield much benefit.
Table 13
Feed inputs  and production  for different  sheep  systems
Lowland —Spring  lambing  flocksEarly
lambing
flocksUpland
flocks
Grass lambs Forage  Iambs  
Ave. Topi Ave. Topi Ave. Top iAve. Topi
Spread  of lambing  (days) 63 42 64 41 51 36 59 40
Concentrates/ewe  (kg) 52 51 60 56 94 96 33 35
Grass requirements/  
head (ha) 0.09 0.08 0.10 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.12 0.10
Lambs  reared/ewe 1.40 1.60 1.38 1.53 1.35 1.50 1.25 1.45
Return  of lamb sales to 
feed and forage costs 3.8;1 4.5:1 3.2:1 3.9:1 2.7:1 3.1:1 4.7:1 5.3:1
Table 13 shows  how sensitive  the early lambing  systems  are to changes  
in feed and lamb prices. The average  ratio of lamb sales to feed and 
forage  costs over the last five years has been only 2.7 : 1, this compares  
with about  3.5 : 1 in other  lowland  systems  and 4.7 : 1 in upland  systems.  
Even^  in the top third early lambing  flocks  the ratio has only averaged
Stocking  rate
Despite  the very close relationship  between  stocking  rate and gross  
margin  referred  to earlier  the overall  usage of fertiliser  nitrogen  is low in 
sheep production  in relation  to the economic  response  that can be ex­
pected,  particularly  in the case of permanent  pasture.  Less than 10 per 
cent of recorded  flocks  on permanent  pasture  receive  more than 150 kg N 
per hectare,  for flocks  on leys less than 15 per cent fall into this category  
(Table 14).
32
Table 14
Distribution  of fertiliser  nitrogen  usage  in recorded  lowland  flocks
Fertiliser  N usage (kg/ha)Per cent of recorded  flocks 
Permanent  pasture  Leys
0 20 5
1 - 50 24 13
50- 100 32 54
100-150 15 16
150-200 7 7
200 plus 2 5
Average  N usage per ha (kg) 62 90
The distribution  of gross margins  per hectare  in lowland  flocks by 
stocking  rate and fertiliser  N levels is shown  in Table 15. Between  the 
top third and the average  there is about a 30 per cent difference  in fer­
tiliser  N usage and a 20 per cent difference  in stocking  rate. Between  the 
average  and the bottom  third a 30 per cent difference  in fertiliser  N usage 
is associated  with a 30 per cent difference  in stocking  rate.
Table 15
Distribution  of gross margins  per hectare  by overall  stocking  rate—lowland  flocks  
(average  of 1977 and 1978)
Stocking  rate ewes/ha Below  6 6-8 8-10 10-12 12-14 14-16 Over 16
Gross  margin/ha  (£) 154.2 170.2 205.2  247.6 291.2 321.9 338.4
Distribution  of gross margins  per hectare  by fertiliser
N usage per grass hectare
Fertiliser  N kg/ha Below  30 30-60  60-90 90-120 120-150 150-1-
Gross  margin  per ha (£) 210.5 218.5 234.6 236.5 277.4 313.38
Results  from recorded  flocks also show that there is a close average  
relationship  between  fertiliser  N usage and utilised  output  (expressed  as 
LU(jD, livestock  unit grazing  days*). This is shown in Fig. 2. This 
relationship  is best explained  by a curve which flattens  off appreciably  
above  200 kg N/hectare,  well below  the jxjint at which  grass production  
in relation  to fertiliser  N usage ceases  to be linear. This suggests  that 
sheep producers  find it difficult  to make the most efficient  utilisation  of 
grass growth  at high fertiliser  N levels. Associated  with this average
• 1 LUGD  = Amount  of grass consumed  in 24 hours by a 500 kg cow yielding  
3640 litres.
33
FIGURE  2. RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  FERTILISER  N LEVELS  S LVGD ’a/HECTARE
relationship  there is considerable  variation  in stocking  rate at each level 
of fertiliser  N usage. Differences  between  farms due to factors  such as 
weather,  location  and soil do not account  for a substantial  proportion  of 
the variation  which  reflects  wide differences  in the efficiency  of utilisation  
of the grass produced.
Guide-line  stocking  rates have been produced  by MLC. These are 
based on estimates  of grass production  for different  quality  sites (based 
on the National  Grassland  Manuring  Trial, GM20),  and the nutritional  
allowances  for ewes of different  body size and prolificacy.  Examples  of 
these guide-line  stocking  rates are shown  in Table 16. They have been 
expressed  on the basis of weight  of ewes and lambs because  of the wide  
range of body size and fertility  that exists between  different  breeds  and 
crosses  of ewes. In commercial  practice  there is only a limited  relation ­
ship between  size of ewe and stocking  rates; the theoretical  advantages  
of small ewes in relation  to lower maintenance  requirements  are by no 
means  fully taken into account.  Total ewe and lamb weights  per hectare  
can be converted  into stocking  rates for different  types of ewe according  
to the breed weights,  fertility  and predicted  lamb slaughter  weights.  These 
guide-lines  form a reliable  basis for planning.  They will require  modi ­
fication  in individual  farm situations  but unless  grass production  and flock  
requirements  are approximately  in balance  any further  refinement  of 
grassland  management  is of limited  value.
A closer  look at the relationship  between  gross margin  per hectare  and 
stocking  rate reveals  a distinct  fall in gross margin  per ewe despite  the
34
Table 16
Example  guides  to stocking  rates at different  levels  of fertiliser  N and different
quality  sites
Kg N/ha Poor Average Good
0-75 Ewe  weight/ha  (kg) 650 750 850
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 500 600 700
Total 1150 1350 1550
75-150  Ewe  weight/ha  (kg) 750 900 1050
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 650 750 850
Total 1400 1650 1900
150-225  Ewe weight/ha  (kg) 900 1050 1200
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 750 850 1000
Total 1650 1900 2200
225-300  Ewe weight/ha  (kg) N/A 1200 1350
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 950 1100
Total 2150 2450
higher  gross  margin  per hectare.  This is almost  entirely  due to a reduction
in the number  of lambs reared  per ewe and reduced  value of the lambs
reared —lower  weights  and fewer  finished  off grass (Table  17). If the level
Table 17
Analysis  of recorded  flock results  by overall  stocking  rate
Stocking  rate (ewes/ha)  6-8 8-10 10-12 12-14 14-16 Over 16
Gross  margin  per ha (£) 170.2  205.2  247.6 291.2 321.9 338.4
Gross margin  per ewe (£) 23.9 22.8 22.2 21.6 20.7 19.7
Lamb sales per ewe (£- 36.3 34.9 33.8 33.1 31.8 30.2
Lamb value (£) 25.2 24.4 23.8 23.6 22.7 21.7
Lambs  reared  per ewe 1.44 1.43 1.42 1.40 1.40 1.39
Costs per ewe 15.5 15.8 14.7 14.7 14.2 13.8
(inc. replacement  cost)
of ewe performance  (number  and value of lambs reared)  achieved  at 
moderate  stocking  rates (6-8 ewes per hectare)  were achieved  by the 
intensively  stocked  flocks  (16-17  ewes per hectare)  then this would  have 
a major  effect on the gross  margins  per hectare.  Alternatively,  the highest
35
gross margins  per hectare  could be achieved  with fewer  ewes per hectare  
if lamb performaice  was maintained —over the last three years 14 ewes  
per hectare  would have given the same gross margin  per hectare  as 17 
ewes per hectare  if lamb performance  was equivalent  to that in the lower  
stocking  rate flocks. This is of increasing  importance  as the value of 
breeding  stock and consequent  working  capital  requirements  continue  to 
increase.  The lower stocking  rate situation  in the example  just given 
would  produce  the same gross  margin  with an 18 per cent lower  require ­
ment for working  capital  per hectare.  The gross margin  expressed  as a 
percentage  of the working  capital  would  have been 45 instead  of 37. The 
main reasons  for the lower  individual  lamb performance  levels  are herb ­
age shortage  during  the second half of the grazing  season with com­
petition  from ewes and lambs and parasitism.  Management  practices  
required  to overcome  this involve  the integration  of grazing  with conser ­
vation areas, choice of lambing  date, early maturing  ram breed,  mid­
season  forage crops, use of a lower sheep stocking  rate by bringing-in  
cattle, preferential  grazing  for ewes with multiples,  choice of weaning  
date and judicious  use of supplementary  feed. The appropriate  package  
of management  practices  needs  to be carefully  tailored  to the individual  
farm situation.
Parasitic  worms  are a major  problem  in many situations,  the sensible  
use of anthelmintics  can reduce  worm  infection  but the most  effective  way 
of reducing  worms  in lambs  is to graze ewes and lambs  on clean  land ie, 
pastures  which have been free from lambs or ewe hoggs during the 
previous  12 months.  The problem  is how to find clean  grazing  when  and 
where it is required.  MLC records  show that many producers  spend a 
considerable  amount  of money  on worm drugs but often they are used 
inappropriately  and are not built into a grazing  strategy.  To operate  a 
clean grazing  system  it is essential  to plan ahead  to ensure  that sheep  do 
not graze  the same land between  breeding  and weaning  two years running.  
The grazing  history  of the pasture  is essential  information  for the planning  
of a cattle programme.  The clean  grazing  approach  in its entirety  cannot  
be applied  on farms  where  cattle  are not also kept other  than in the case 
of one-year  leys.
36
There ’s ,
great  grou/th
inanAIBsavtm  acmtu
Like  fertile  land,  an AIB 
Savings  Account  yields  
rich dividends.
In fact  you can earn  a good  
return  on your  deposits  
which  gives  you that  extra  
spending  power  when  you 
need  it
An AIB  Savings  Account  
Think  of it simply  as good  
husbandry.
And  start  saving  with  
Allied  Irish  Banks.
Allied  Irish  Banks
Banking  for  a betterfuture
37
NO OTHER  PAPER  
gives the Farmer  so much  
as THE
farmers
journal
Week after week over 100,000  farmers  read through  the pages 
of the Journal.  They find it full of up-to-the-minute  
facts,  features,  prices  and market  trends. It employs  the 
finest feature  writers,  leading  farming  experts,  skilled 
vets and legal and income  tax brains  to give Irish farmers  
a first-class  Newspaper.
Nowadays,  no wise farmer  would  be without  it . . . that’s why 
more and more you’ll hear the Journal  quoted  in farming  
circles. If you are not a reader  you ’re missing  a lot.
ONLY  2Sp EVERY  THURSDAY
38
Sheep  and Cattle  on Wexford  Farms
W. HARTLEY
A.C.O.T.,  Enniscarthy,  Co. Wexford.
Whilst  the emphasis  in this paper  is on sheep  production  it is appropriate  
that cattle should also be included  because  there are no farms in Co. 
Wexford  with sheep  only, and 97% of farms  have cattle  as an enterprise.  
Of the farms that have a sheep enterprise,  all have tillage crops and 
practically  all have a cattle enterprise.  It is against  this background  that 
we examine  the sheep  industry  in the county,  which  has much  in common  
with other lowland  sheep  production  areas in the south east.
Sheep  production  is an enterprise  on approximately  35% of the 5,500  
farms in the county. The sheep industry  in Co. Wexford  competes  with 
alternative  enterprises  in a thriving  agricultural  industry.  The soil has a 
wide use range and hence farmers  have options  in choosing  profitable  
enterprises.
About  30% of the total area of the county  is devoted  to tillage. In 
those areas which carry the greatest  number  of ewes about 45% of the 
land is tilled.  Sheep  enterprises  have competed  favourably  for profitability  
with other enterprises.  About  60% of the 3,100 farmers  in the Farm  
Modernisation  Scheme  are categorised  as Development  and Commercial.
In Co. Wexford,  tillage has been complementary  to sheep enterprises  
such as early lamb production,  mid-season  lamb production  and particu ­
larly the finishing  of store lambs over the winter  which was the most  
eommon  sheep enterprise  until recently.  Thus, there is a tradition  of 
sheep farming,  combined  with tillage and cattle, on dry tillage soils of 
the county.
Ewe numbers  and breeds
The number  of breeding  ewes in the county  did not fluctuate  markedly  
in the 1970 ’s, when lowland  ewe numbers  in the country  as a whole 
decreased  very significantly.  The fact that ewe numbers  were maintained  
in the county  was due to :
(a) A tradition  of sheep  farming.
(b) The enterprise  dovetailed  neatly  with the farming  pattern.
(c) Sheep  production  competed  financially  with other enterprises  on the 
farm.
Of the 107,000  ewes in the county  in 1977, about 70% were Suffolk  
Crosses  and the remaining  30% were mainly.  Cheviot  types. The Suffolk  
is the predominant  sire breed and some Dorset  Horn rams are used for 
early fat lamb production.  More recently  the Texel has been introduced  
as a sire breed.
Production  systems
The Suffolk  cross  ewe is commonly  used for the production  system  best 
suited to Wexford  farmers,  namely,  mid-season  fat lamb production.
39
Many  flock owners  are now concentrating  on producing  more mid-season  
fat lambs,  with some early  lambs  mainly  on the smaller  holdings.  This is 
a change  which has occurred  in the past two years from the traditional  
finishing  of store lambs  on turnips.
A mid-season  fat lamb production  system fits in very well with the 
grass growth  pattern  of the county  and with seasonal  labour  demands.  
With young  leys and the geographical  position  of the county,  grass  growth  
is reasonably  early but the maintenance  of a good sward of grass in 
July-August  on the dry type of soil in the county  can be difficult.  A 
production  system  of weaning  in mid-February  to March  and selling  fat 
lambs  in June-July  certainly  has much to offer in the county.
Physical  factors  and returns
The average  flock size in Co. Wexford  is 65 ewes per farm. The 
stocking  rate for the country  is the equivalent  of 3 ewes per acre with the 
better  farmers  carrying  the equivalent  of 4 ewes per acre. It is estimated  
that only to ^ of the area under  grassland  on the average  sheep  farm in 
the county  is devoted  to sheep. Cattle utilise the greater  portion  of the 
grassland  on the dry stock farms.
In early 1978, when the bilateral  agreement  with France  came into 
operation,  the county  Advisory  Service  examined  the economic  prospects  
for sheep in the county. Farm accounts  from 30 selected  farms were 
studied  before  the new agreement  was reached.  Selection  of farms  was 
on the basis of good performance  in tillage,  cattle  and sheep  output. The 
results  on income  are summarised  in Table 1.
Table 1
Gross margin  from farm enterprises  on 30 selected  farms in Co. Wexford  in 1977.
Gross margin  
per acreSheep
£100Cattle
£78Malting  Barley  
£134
Some effieiency  factors  in flock performance  on these 30 farms are 
shown  in Table 2.
Table 2
Flock  performance  on 30 selected  farms 1977
Average Average Stocking  rate % Lambs
farm size flock size ewes/acre weaned
acres equivalent
150 105 4 1.25
In 1978 gross margins  in a range of farm enterprises  were compared.  
The opportunity  for such comparisons  arose when  economic  returns  from 
sugar beet growing  were being examined  on a random  sample  of farms
40
classified  as low, medium  or high yields namely,  13 tons, 17 tons or 20 
tons/acre.  Table 3 summarises  the gross margins.
Table 3
Gross margins  (£/acre)  for enterprises  on farms with low, medium  or high yields
of sugar beet in 1978
Low Medium High Average
Sugar beet 132 230 309 224
Wheat 116 136 135 129
Malting  barley 115 155 139 136
Feed barley 137 127 140 135
Dairying 250 227 269 240
Cattle 80 99 100 90
Sheep 121 119 172 137
Although  Wexford  has the second  highest  stocking  rate in the twenty-  
six counties,  Wexford  sheep farmers  have the capacity  to increase  ewes  
to 150,000  and at the same time increase  the stocking  rate of cattle by 
approximately  J of a livestock  unit p)er acre by the adoption  of better  
management  practices.
(1) A System  of Production
The management  skills required  to carry out efficiently  any one system  
of production  are numerous,  be it early, mid-season  or store lambs.  
Having  more than one system  of sheep production  on the farm, in my 
opinion,  may result in the key management  factors  of production  being 
overlooked.  Farmers  should  adopt  a system  of production  which  fits into 
the farming  pattern  as well as giving  economical  returns.
(2) Wintering
Sheep  wintering  at present  is mainly  outdoor  on grass,  sugar  beet tops 
and swedes,  but over the past three years  there is an increased  interest  in 
the housing  of ewes on straw and feeding  them on hay and meals. This 
system  would  seem to be much more acceptable  to the Wexford  farmer  
than other wintering  systems  like slats and silage. The cost of straw 
bedded  housing  is approximately  £30 per ewe after grant,  or £40 gross.  
This type of housing  has a flexibility  that the tillage/dry  stock farmer  
likes.
Wintering  facilities  must be acceptable  to the shepherd  as well as being 
tailored  to the production  system. It should be noted that the family  
members  are frequently  the shepherds  at weaning  time. In the future,  
when larger  flocks  may be a necessity,  hired supervision  will be required  
at yeaning  if mortality  is to be reduced.
41
(3) Better  fencing
After  lamb price,  fencing  is probably  the most important  management  
factor  that will affect  ewe numbers  on farms. This is particularly  true on 
tillage  farms.  Fencing  must  facilitate  the ever increasing  width  of combine  
harvesters  and at the same time be stock proof and give an efficient  
grazing  system. One must ask why, in a county  such as Wexford,  are 
there so few farmers  practising  mixed  grazing  ? I would  suggest  that ;
(a) Farmers  believe,  contrary  to research  findings,  that cattle and sheep 
grazing  the same pasture  have an adverse  affect on the daily live- 
weight  gain of both cattle and sheep,  particularly  on cattle perform ­
ance.
(b) On the majority  of farms  only 2 or 3 fields are reasonably  fenced  for 
sheep,  hence those fields are kept for sheep.
If we are to increase  the numbers  of sheep and cattle on tillage  farms,  
fencing  is a priority.
42
Factors  Affecting  Carcass  Composition  
in Beef Cattle
M. G. KEANE
A f>riciiltural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
The objective  of a carcass  classification  scheme  is to classify  carcasses  
according  to economically  important  characteristics  and thereby  facilitate  
payment  to producers  on the basis of these characteristics.  The value of 
a carcass  depends  mainly  on its meat yield but carcass  weight,  shape and 
muscle  thickness  are also important.  The objective  in beef production  
should be to produce  meat which is highly  acceptable  to the processor  
and consumer.  High percentages  of fat or bone in a carcass  reduce  its 
meat yield and consequently  its value.
Within  sexes, payment  to date has largely  been at a flat rate per kg 
carcass,  but in future  the price paid to producers  will be more related  to 
the carcass  meat yield. Therefore  it is important  to understand  how 
several  different  factors  affect meat yield so that producers  can aim to 
optimize  meat production  rather than simply carcass  production.  This 
paper  attempts  to summarize  the present  state of knowledge  on the main  
factors  which affect  carcass  meat yield.
Carcass  development
Before discussing  differences  between  carcasses  in meat yield, it is 
necessary  to understand  firstly how the carcass  develops  in terms of its 
composition  (i.e. percentage  of bone, muscle  and fat). In the young  ani­
mal the percentages  of bone and muscle  are high and there is very little 
fat. With increasing  weight, bone percentage  declines  gradually  to 
maturity.  Muscle  percentage  first increases  for a period,  the remains  
relatively  constant  for a further  period and subsequently  declines.  Fat 
percentage  remains  low until the onset of the fattening  phase and there ­
after increase  rapidly. Thereafter,  once fattening  commences,  muscle 
percentage  and consequently  meat percentage  declines  with increasing  
weight. While this general  pattern  or development  is common  to all 
cattle,  the relaive  rates of change  for the three tissues  are influenced  by 
a number  of factors,  the most important  being (1) sex, (2) breed type,  
(3) slaughter  weight,  (4) plane of nutrition,  (5) type of diet, (6) growth  
promoters.
Sex effects
Three sex categories  are recognized  in commercial  beef production — ■ 
bulls,  steers  and heifers.  Compared  with steers,  bulls  grow faster,  use feed 
more efficiently  and have a higher percentage  of meat in the carcass.  
Table 1 shows  the average  carcass  composition  of bulls and steers from  
seven experiments  at Grange  (Harte,  1969a). Because  bulls grew faster,
43
Table 1
Carcass  composition  of bulls and steers —average  of 7 experiments  
(Harte,  1968)
Bulls Steers
Carcass  weight  (kg) 239 211
% Meat 71.2 67.1
% Bone 18.6 18.8
% Fat 9.3 13.3
they had heacvier  carcasses  and in addition  they had lower  fat and higher  
meat percentages.  As a result, every 14 kg of bull carcass  yielded  the 
same quantity  of meat as 15 kg of steer carcass.  When account  is taken  
also of their greater  carcass  weight,  five bulls yielded  as much as six 
steers.
The difference  in meat yield between  bulls and steers is not the same  
at all slaughter  weights  because  their main tissues  grow at different  rates. 
Relative  to overall  carcass  growth,  the rate of muscle  growth  is higher  
and the rate of fat growth  is lower in bulls than in steers. Consequently,  
the difference  in meat percentage  between  the two increases  with increas ­
ing weight. This was illustrated  in an experiment  in which  both bulls and 
steers were slaughtered  at two ages and consequently  at two different 
weights  (Harte,  1969b). The results  are shown  in Table 2. At the lower 
carcass  weights,  the bulls had only 2.8 percentage  units more meat than 
the steers  whereas  at the higher  weights  the difference  was 7.7 percentage  
units in favour  of the bulls.
Table 2
Carcass  composition  of bulls and steers  at two slaughter  weights
Low slaughter weight High slaughter  weight
Bulls Steers Bulls Steers
Carcass  wt. (kg) 220 201 320 278
% Meat 69.0 66.2 71.8 64.1
% Bone 20.4 20.5 15.7 16.3
% Fat 9.3 12.0 10.7 18.6
Although  bull beef production  has been extensively  studied  in this 
country,  it has not been adopted  in commercial  practice.  This contrasts  
with the situation  in many other European  countries  where bull beef 
production  is common.
There is less information  on tissue growth  patterns  of heifers. The 
main difference  between  heifers and steers is that heifers commence 
fattening  at lower  weights.  Once fattening  has commenced  relative  rates
44
of fat and muscle  growth  are about  the same in heifers  and steers (Berg 
et al. 1979).
Although  there are clear differences  in carcass  composition  between  
breed  types,  the size of the difference  depends  on the basis  of comparison.  
Ccmparisons  are usually  made  at either  the same age, the same slaughter  
weight  or the same level of fatness  (finish).  The data in Table  3 are taken  
from a United  States study (Germ Plasm Evaluation  Programme,  1974)
Table 3
Carcass  composition  of different  breed  crosses  slaughtered  at the same  age
Sire breed Charolais Simmental Limousin Hereford Angus
Carcass  wt. (kg) 324 315 301 294 296
% Meat 69.3 68.4 69.8 65.8 65.5
% Bone 12.9 13.3 12.6 12.2 11.9
% Fat 17.8 18.2 17.5 22.2 22.8
in which  the steer progeny  of bulls from different  breeds  mated  to Here ­
ford and Angus  cows were slaughtered  at the same age. In addition  to 
having  heavier  carcasses,  the continental  crosses  had on average  3.5 per­
centage  units more meat and 4.7 percentage  units less fat than the 
Hereford  and Angus  types.
An experiment  in France  (Geay,  1976) compared  pure bred Charolais,  
Limousin  and Friesian  bulls slaughtered  at the same carcass  weight  (312 
kg). The data, which are in Table 4, show that the Charolais  had 6.3 
percentage  units more meat and 6.2 percentage  units less fat than the 
Friesians.  The main difference  between  the Charolais  and Limousin  
breeds was that the latter had more fat and less bone. These results  
emphasise  the superiority  of the continental  breeds  over Friesians  in 
carcass  quality  and indicate  the type of carcasses  with which Irish beef 
must compete  in European  markets.
Table 4
Carcass  composition  of pure bred bulls slaughtered  at the same weight^a)
Charolais Limousin Friesian
% Meat 70.3 71.2 64.0
% Bone 18.0 14.5 18.6
% Fat 9.7 12.8 15.9
la) 312 kg carcases
In Britain,  the Meat and Livestock  Commission  have compared  the 
carcasses  of different  breed types slaughtered  at the same level of fatness  
(MLC,  1978). The data in Table 5 refer to the steer progeny  of dairy  
cows and a number  of different  sire breeds.
45
Table 5
Meat percentages  of ditferent  breed crosses  at the same level of subcutaneous  fat
(finish)  (a)
Breed  type Charolais Simmental Friesian Hereford Angus
Carcass  wt. (kg) 290 265 241 221 201
% Meat 71.2 70.9 70.0 70.5 71.4
(a) Average  for 18 and 24 month  old production  systems.
When fat level was standardised  the differences  between  the various  
breed  types  in meat percentage  were small but there were large differences 
in the carcass  weights  at which  these similar  meat percentages  occurred.  
The carcasses  of Charolais  crosses  were almost  50 kg heavier  than those 
of the Friesians  which  in turn were 40 kg heavier  than the Angus  crosses.  
These data show that continental  type cattle can be taken to much  
heavier  weights  than Friesians  and still have high quality carcasses  
whereas  the traditional  British  beef breeds  must be slaughtered  at lighter  
weights  in order to achieve  high carcass  meat percentages.  It should  be 
noted that the carcass  weights  in this MLC study were much lower than 
commercial  carcass  weights  in Ireland  generally.
Slaughter  weight  effects
Since the weight  at which  cattle are slaughtered  is completely  under  the 
control  of the producer,  it is important  that the influence  of slaughter  
weight  on carcass  composition  and meat percentage  be fully understood.  
Results  show that when animals  reach  a certain  weight,  the percentage  of 
fat in the carcass  increases  and the percentage  of meat decreases  with 
increasing  weight.  The rate at which  this happens  varies  with sex, breed,  
level and type of feed. For a similar  increase  in carcass  weight  there is 
a greater  increase  in fat percentage  and a greater  decrease  in meat per­
centage  in steers than in bulls. Similarly  the late maturing  continental  
breed types fatten less rapidly  than the early maturing  traditional  breed  
types.
The effects  of increasing  slaughter  weight  on the carcass  composition  
of Friesian  steers are shown  in Table 6. Fat percentage  increased  with 
increasing  carcass  weight  while meat and bone percentages  decrea.sed.  
Over the carcass  weight  range of 260 to 340 kg, meat yield declined  by 
0.65 percentage  units for every 10 kg increase  in carcass  weight.
Table 6
Carcass  composition  of Friesian  steers  at ditferent  slaughter  weights
Carcass  weight  (kg)
150 260 300 340
% Meat 73.4 69.6 65.5 64.4
% Bone 21.6 19.5 19.0 17.9
% Fat 5.0 10.9 15.5 17.7
46
Plane  of nutrition  effects
As in the case of slaughter  weight,  plane of nutrition  is also controlled  
by the producer.  Thus, it is equally  important  to know how it affects 
carcass  composition.  Opinions  differ among research  workers  on the 
extent to which nutrition  influences  composition.  Some studies have 
shoyvn only small effects  of nutrition  on composition  whereas  in other  
cases quite large effects  were recorded.  In an experiment  carried  out in 
the United  States  (Keane  et al, 1979) the effect of nutrition  on the com­
position  of Charolais  and Simmental  cross steers fed from 208kg to
Table 7
Average  composition'a)  of Charolais  and Simmental  cross steers fed 
two levels  of nutrition
Level  of nutrition High Medium
Daily gain (kg) 1.47 1.34
Carcass  wt. (kg) 330.8 331.3
% Meat 60.9 62.1
% Bone 16.4 16.3
% Fat 22.7 21.6
<a) of round  + rump
slaughter  at 550kg  liveweight  was negligible  (Table  7). Other  studies  in 
the United  States  (Prior'et  ai, 1977) also found that level of feeding  had 
little effect  on the composition  of continental  breed  types but in the small 
breed types,  high planes  of nutrition  resulted  in increased  fat and reduced  
meat percentages.
The effects  of plane of nutrition  on the carcass  composition  of Friesian  
steers was investigated  in an experiment  at Grange.  The cattle were fed 
high, moderate  or low levels  of nutrition  and slaughtered  at 230, 285 and 
340 kg carcass  weights  to separate  the effects  of nutrition  and slaughter  
weight. Table 8 shows the percentage  carcass  subcutaneous  fat in the 
various  treatment  groups. Fatness  increased  with increasing  slaughter  
weight  on all planes  of nutrition.  In addition  increases  in the level of 
nutrition  increased  fatness  at all slaughter  weights.  Of course,  the cattle
Table 8
Percentage  subcutaneous  fat in Friesian  steers  fed different  levels  of nutrition
Level of nutritionCarcass  weight  (kg)
230 285 340
High 8.5 12.1 14.2
Moderate 7.7 9.7 13.0
Low 5.9 7.3 10.7
47
fed on the higher  levels  of nutrition  grew faster  and reached  their slaughter  
weights  earlier.  Therefore,  although  they had more fat they had less bone  
and as a result there were only small differences  in meat percentage  
between  the different  nutritional  levels. In Ireland,  where grazed and 
conserved  grass are the main feeds for beef cattle and where  high levels  
of concentrate  feeding  are generally  uneconomic,  the possibilities  for 
influencing  carcass  meat percentage  by manipulating  nutrition  levels  are 
limited.
Diet type effects
The dry matter  content  of conserved  grass  affects  the carcass  composit ­
ion of cattle. Work  at Grange  some years  ago (McCarrick,  1966) showed  
that cattle fed silage  were fatter  than those fed hay. More recently  it has 
been shown  that animals  fed unwilted  silage were fatter than those fed 
wilted  silage (Flynn,  1978). Cattle  being  finished  for slaughter  on silage  
are generally  fed concentrate  supplements.  An experiment  was carried  
out in which  a commonly  used diet of unwilted  silage supplemented  with 
rolled barley  was compared  with a prepared  diet based on concentrates  
(mainly  rolled barley) and chopped  straw. Both diets had adequate  
protein,  minerals  and vitamins  and had the same estimated  energy  value 
(11 MJ ME  / kg DM). Friesian  steers  were used in the experiment.  They  
had similar  rates of gain on the two diets and were slaughtered  at 260, 
300 and 340 kg carcass  weights.  The effects  of the diets on fat and meat  
percentages  are shown  in Table 9.
Table 9
Fat and meat percentages  of cattle  fed silage/barley  or concentrate/straw  diets
Carcass  weight  (kg)
260 300 340
% Fat : Silage/barley 11.2 16.6 20.4
Concentrate/straw 11.0 15.3 16.6
% Meat : Silage/barley 69.7 64.9 62.1
Concentrate/straw 70.0 66.0 65.7
In agreement  with results  shown  earlier,  fat percentage  increased  and 
meat percentage  declined  with increasing  slaughter  weight.  There  was an 
effect  of type of diet on carcass  composition  but it was not the same at all 
slaughter  weights.  At 260 kg carcass  weights,  there was little difference 
between  the diets in carcass  composition.  However,  as carcass  weight  
increased  the effects  of diet became  more pronounced  and at 340 kg the 
differences  were 3.8 percentage  units more fat and 3.6 percentage  units  
units less meat for the silage and barley  fed cattle.
48
While the results  of this experiment  show that the silage based diet 
increased  fatness,  at present  this factor alone is not sufficient  to justify  
any change  by producers  in the use of unwilted  silage  for beef cattle.
Growth  promoter  effects
Information  on the effects  of growth  promoters  on carcass  composition  
is limited. In an experiment  at Grange  (Drennan  et al, 1979) Friesian  
steers fed silage plus 3 kg barley  daily were used to compare  the effects 
on carcass  composition  of different  growth  promoting  compounds  and 
combinations  of compounds.  Compared  with controls,  the feed additive  
Romensin  increased  carcass  weight  and as a result  fat percentage  was also 
slightly increased.  Ralgro plus Finaplix  treatment  increased  carcass  
weight also but in addition  it reduced  fatness and increased  meat  
percentage.
Conclusions
Bulls grow faster but fatten slower  than steers  while heifers  fatten at 
lighter  weights.  Equally,  continental  breed types grow faster  and fatten  
slower  than the traditional  breeds. Therefore,  the superiority  in com­
position  of bulls over steers and continentals  over traditional  breeds  
increases  with increasing  weight.
Carcass  fat percentage  increases  and meat percentage  decreases  with 
increasing  slaughter  weight. There  are no precise  estimates  of the rate at 
which  this happens  for the different  breed types. Approximate  estimates  
obtained  from research  work indicate  that over the normal slaughter  
weight  range there is a decline  in meat percentage  of 0.54 percentage  
units for Charolais  crosses,  0.65 percentage  units for Friesians  and 0.80 
percentage  units for Hereford  crosses  per 10 kg increase  in carcass  weight.
Both level of nutrition  and type of diet affect  carcass  composition  but 
in the context  of Irish beef production  the effects of these factors  are 
small.
In addition  to improving  growth  rate, hormonal  type growth  promoters  
also increase  meat percentage.
References
Berg, R. T., Jones,  S. D. M., Price, M. A., Fukuhara,  R., Butterfield,  R. M. and 
Hardin,  R. T. (1979). Patterns  of carcass  fat deposition  in heifers,  steers and 
bulls. Can. J. Anim.  Sci. 59 : 359-366.
Drennan,  M. J., Roche,  J. F. and L’Estrange,  J. L. (1979). Effect of Monensin  
sodium,  resorcylic  acid lactone  and trenbolone  acetate  on performance  and feed 
intake  of finishing  cattle. Anim. Prod. 28 : 416 (abstr.)
Flynn,  A. V. (1978). The relative  importance  of different  factors  in determining  
the beef production  of silage. Ph.D. Thesis,  National  University  of Ireland.
Geay,  Y. (1976). Fitting  the diet to the potential  of the animal. In Improving  the 
Nutritional  Efficiency  of Beef Production,  p. 333-347.  Ed. J. G. Tayler  and J. 
M. Wilkinson,  Commission  of the European  Communities.
49
Germ Plasm  Evaluation  Programme  (1974). Progress  Report  No. 1, Agricultural  
Research  Service,  U.S. Dept. Agr.
Harte,  F. J. (1969a).  Six years  of bull beef production  research  in Ireland.  In Meat  
Production  from Entire  Male Animals,  p. 153-171.  Ed. D. N. Rhodes,  Publ.
J. & A. Churchill  Ltd., London.
Harte,  F. J. (1969b).  The production  of beef from young bulls. III. Ir. J. Agric.  
Res. 8 : 293-305.
Keane,  M. G., Self, H. L. and Topel,  D. G. (1979). Effects  of dietary  energy  and 
slaughter  weight  on performance  and carcass  traits of Charolais  and Simmental  
cross steers.  Anim.  Prod. 28 : 458 (abstr.).
McCarrick,  R. B. (1966). Effect of method  of grass conservation  and herbage  
maturity  on performance  and body composition  of beef cattle. Proc. 10th Int. 
Grassld.  Cong.  Helsinki,  575-580.
MLC (1978). Beef Improvement  Services,  Newsletter  No. 34.
Prior, R. L., Kohlmeier,  R. H., Cundiff,  L. V., Dikeman,  M. E. and Crouse,  J. D. 
(1977). Influence  of dietary  energy  and protein  on growth  and carcass  com­
position  in different  biological  types of cattle. J. Anim.  Sci. 45 : 132-146.
50
SPECIAL  PRICE REDUCTIONS
to
MEMBERS  OF THE IRISH GRASSLAND  
ASSOCIATION
at
APPLEBY  JEWELLERS  LTD.
5 Johnston ’s Court,  Grafton  St., Dublin  2 
10 Aungier  St., Dublin  2 
Blackrock  and Dun Laoghaire
As manufacturers  and wholesalers  of gold jewellery  we 
can offer wholesale  discounts  to Macra members  as 
follows :
Engagement  Rings  and Wedding  Rings 33% 
Watches  by all best makers  25%
Gold & Silver  Jewellery  25%
Silver  Goods,  Cutlery,  Glass,  etc. 25%
HOPING  OUR FARMING  FRIENDS  HAVE  A GOOD  YEAR
APPLEBY  JEWELLERS  LTD.
Telephone  7S3991,  758483
51
SIZE  
SCALE  
GROWTH  
HIGH GAIN
COLOUR  MARKING
express  the superiority  
of the
CHAROLAIS
breed above  all others
Full information  from :
Walter  Feely,  Secretary,
Irish Charolais  Cattle  Society  Ltd.,
Irish Farm  Centre,  Bluebell,
Dublin  12. Tel. (01) 501166.
52
Beef Carcase  Classification  and 
Market  Requirements
P. O. RYAN
Department  of Agriculture,  Dublin  2.
Regulations  providing  for the Beef Carcase  Classification  Scheme  came  
into effect  on August  13th 1979 (1). The scheme  is currently  being  phased  
in on steers  at eleven  plants  and should  be fully operational  in 1980. One 
of the basic objectives  of the scheme  is to facilitate  the transmission  of 
market  requirements  back through  the production  and distribution  chain  
to the producer.  This paper presents  data on current  market  require ­
ments as determined  during  classification  studies  on overseas  markets  
over the past two years. These  requirements  are discussed  in the light of 
classification  returns  from export  abattoirs  during  the past six months.
The Classification  Scheme  is basically  a system  for describing  carcases  
in a standardised  manner (2). Two of the economically  most important  
characteristics  described  are ‘Conformation ’ and ‘Fatness ’. The distribu ­
tion of 57,000  steer carcases  among  the conformation/fatness  subclasses  
during  Autumn  1979 is shown  in Table 1.
Table 1
Percent  of steer carcases  in each Classification  Subclass
Fatness
ClassConformation  class
I R E L A N D Overall
1 — — — 0.1 0.1 — — 0.2
2 — 0.2 1.2 3.3 0.9 — — 5.6
3 — 0.6 9.2 14.2 1.4 — — 25.4
4 — 0.6 16.8 13.9 0.7 — — 32.0
5 — 0.5 15.2 6.5 0.2 — — 22.4
6 — 0.4 9.8 2.1 — — — 12.3
7 — 0.1 1.6 0.4 — — — 2.1
Overall — 2.4 53.8 40.5 3.3 — — 100.0
Average  carcase  wt. = 315.2 kg; N = 57,217.
The conformation  scale is constructed  in such a way that Classes  E 
(good commercial  type) and L (average  dairy type) are numerically  the
53
most important.  Class A can be regarded  as ‘reject ’ level for steers  but, 
as the scale also covers  cows, would be regarded  as a good commercial  
cow carcase.  Class R for steers  is a superior  type, while Class I (extra)  
is very exclusive,  with less than 0.1% of carcases,  and is designed  to cater  
for the exceptionally  well conformed  carcases  common  in some European  
countries.  The fat scale is constructed  to give an approximately  normal  
distribution  about  the central  class, 4.
Of the factors  determining economic  value  of carcases,  yield of saleable  
meat is perhaps  the most important.  The relationship  between  subclass 
and yield of saleable  meat is shown  in Table  2. A standardised  commer ­
cial cutting method  (3) was used to separate  431 steer carcases  into 
‘saleable  meat ’, ‘fat trim ’ and ‘bone ’. Fatness  class is the most important  
determinent  of yield, ranging  from an average  yield of 71.2% for fatness  
class 2 to 63.4% for fatness  class 7. Conformation  is also important  in 
determining  yield but only at low fat levels,  e.g. fatness  class 2, confor ­
mation  class I yields  77.3%,  R yields  74.2% and E yields  71.1%. But at 
higher  fat levels  (class  4) the conformation  effect  is insignificant;  I yielding 
69.0%,  R yielding  68.9% and E yielding  68.1 %.
Table 2
Effect  of conformation  and fatness  class on yield of saleable  meat  
(Steer  carcase;  N = 431)
Fatness
ClassConformation  class
I R E L A N D Overall
1
2 77.3 74.2 71.1 70.8 69.6 70.0—
71.2
3 74.5 70.3 70.0 69.7 69.0 68.7 — 70.1
4 69.0 68.9 68.1 67.9 65.7 68.3
5 71.1 68.3 67.1 68.2 — ' 67.7
6 67.8 67.6 66.1 65.6 — 66.9
7 63.6 63.4 62.7 65.6 — 63.4
Overall 69.5 68.6 69.2 69.2 69.8 68.9
It is clear,  therefore,  that carcases  vary considerably  in value according  
to variations  in conformation  and fatness.  These  differences  in value are 
reflected  in prices obtainable  on open wholesale  markets.  In a study 
carried  out at Rungis  market  in Paris in 1978 (4) classification  data were
54
related to wholesale  price. The study showed  that conformation  and 
carcase  weight  are the most important  detriments  of price in this market.  
Fatness  is relatively  unimportant,  largely because  all carcases  sold in 
Rungis  are pre-selected  and trimmed  down to an acceptable  relatively  
uniform  level of fatness.  Mean  prices  for each conformation  weight  sub­
class are presented  in Table 3. An additional  category,  ‘X’, was created  
to cater for the double  muscled  carcases  found in Rungis.
The magnitude  of the premium  for heavy,  well conformed  carcases  is 
somewhat  surprising  and is certainly  greater  than justified  by the higher
Table 3
Effect  of weight  and conformation  class on wholesale  price (Rungis  1978)  
(price in pence  per Kg; N = 210)
Weight
RangeConformation  class
X 1 R E L
500 Kg + 257 207 186 166 —
460-500  Kg 257 — 182 161 —
420-460  Kg 239 189 166 160 157
380-420 — 186 172 155 144
Under  380 Kg — — — 153 144
Overall 243 193 174 160 154
yields of saleable  meat  (5). Whatever  the reason,  the implications  for 
Irish cattle production  are significant,  e.g. a typical  Irish steer carcase  of 
320kg and conformation  class E would  realise  a price of 153p/kg.  An 
improvement  of one class in conformation  (to R) and an increase  of 60kg 
in carcase  weight  would  realise  a price increase  of 19p/kg —a premium  of 
£164 per carcase.  However,  of the sample  of 57,000  carcases  classified 
during  Autumn  1979, only 150 carcases  could meet these requirements,
i.e. less than three container  loads from all plants  in the country  over a 
three  month  period.
From this study and from trials carried out in co-operation  with 
exporters  and continental  buyers  it is possible  to construct  a contin ­
ental carcase  specification —particularly  for the prime Paris and Belgian 
markets  (Table  4). The inner grouping  of subclasses  (IR 123) can be 
regarded  as ‘very suitable ’ and the outer range (IRE 4 and E 123) as 
suitable  but at a discount.
55
Table 4
Continental  steer carcase  specification
1 R ELAND
1 1 1
1 1 1
i > 1
- - - - - - - -i- - - - - - - - ' - J - - - - - - - - -
v e r y 1 r !
s u i t a b l e
( 3 5 0 K g )
1 1 !
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ i_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1_ _ _ _ _ _J_ _ _ _ _ _ _T- - - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - - - \
S u i t a b l e1 1 1 ^
( 3 2 0 K g . - F ) !______ •_______ 1___„J______
1---------- r , T
' 1 1 1 1 1' 1 1 1 1 1
1-------- 1----------- i-------- 1--------
1 1i'll
1 11 i 1 11
- - - - - - - - - - - - - ^- - - - - - - - - - - — 1——-I—
1 11 1 r1 11 1
1 11_ _ _ _ _ _ 1_ _ _ _ _ _ I- - - - - - - - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - -2
4
F r o m t h e r e s u l t s  s h o w n  i n T a b l e 1 t h e p e r c e n t a g e  o f o u r s t e e r c a r c a s e s  
meeting  these requirements  are :
Very suitable  : 
Suitable  :less than
11%1%
Currently  about  20% of our steer carcases  are shipped  to the Continent  
but are only accepted  at a discount  and following  extensive  trimming  of 
excess  fat.
Turning  to our principal  export  market,  the United  Kingdom,  the situa ­
tion is more satisfactory.  The premium  market  in the U.K. is the super ­
market  and retail butchers  sector. Preliminary  data from a study  into the 
marketing  of Irish beef in the U.K. facilitate  the construction  of a typical  
U.K. Supermarket  purchasing  specification  (Table  5).
56
Table 5
U.K. supermarket  steer carcase  specification
Approximately  25% of our steer slaughterings  can meet these require ­
ments. This seems  an adequate  number  to ensure  a significant  trade with 
supermarkets,  but when spread over all plants it means  that only the 
largest  plant can assemble  more than two containers  per week.
Differences  in market  value have not in the past been communicated  
to the producer  and so there has been very little incentive  to change  
production  methods or breeds  to produce  a more suitable  type of carcase.  
The Classification  scheme  facilitates  realistic  price schedules  with pay­
ments  based  on quality  differences.  It is gratifying  to report  that several 
p’ants are already  paying  on the basis  of classification.  Table  6 shows  the 
price schedule  currently  (December  1979) operated  by one plant.
While the premia  and penalties  do not reflect  the full extent  of the 
variation  in market  value,  nevertheless  this schedule  represents  a welconie 
first step in the right direction.  It is to be hoped that all plants will 
institute  realistic  price schedules  when the classification  scheme  is fully
57
Table 6
Actual  price schedule  (December  1979)  
(prices  in p/kg carcase)
N D
2
3+ 3p.
-2p.
Standard
quoted
priceat
valuation
-4p,
-8p,
operational  so that the Irish producer  will have the opportunity  and 
incentive  to improve  his product  and render  it more suitable  for current  
market  requirements.
References
1. Fresh Meat (Beef Carcase  Classification)  Regulations  1979. S.I. No. 274 of 
1979. Stationery  Office,  Dublin  2.
2. Beef  Carcase  Classification  Scheme,  Dept, of Agriculture.  Leaflet  1979.
3. Ryan, P. O. (1978). Classification  and Carcase  Value. CBF —Irish Livestock  
and Meat Board 6th International  Beef Symposium,  Dublin  1978.
4. O’Connell,  J. et al. (1979). The marketing  of Irish beef in France  with special  
reference  to price/quality  relationships.  Irish Agricultural  Trust 1979.
5. Mulvehill,  P. (1979). The importance  of conformation  in assessing  carcase  
quality  and value. Irish Farmers ’ Journal  1979.
58
a dairy  herd, feed  a pig, 
fertilise  afield  and fuel a tractor.
A Bank  of Ireland  cheque  book is a most  adaptable  piece  of farm  
equipment.
It allows  you buy what  you need quickly  and simply.  It provides  you with an 
accurate  record  of who you've  paid. It tells you how you stand.
Make  sure you've  got a Bank  of Ireland  cheque  book.  It's a piece  of farm  
equipment  no farmer  should  be without.
BanKcrlreiand.
The  bank  of a lifetime
59
Pushing  up
Ireland ’s stock  
worldwide
Through  our marts  and meatplants 
and our worldwide  penetration  of 
available  markets  we provide  an 
unrivalled  service  to Irish farmers.
Take last year, Cork Marts-IMP  
Group  handled  over 307o of all Irish 
beef exports!  Our reputation  for 
quality  and continuity  of supply 
enables  us to pay top prices  for top- 
quality  stock.  And in tne process  makes  
the Cork Marts-IMP  Group  Ireland's  
largest  producer-owned  livestock  and 
meat marketing  organisation.  With the 
support  of our shareholders  and 
thousands  of other  farmers  through ­
out the country,  we will continue  to 
push up Ireland's  stock worldwide.
CORK  MARTS  
IMP  CROUP
Head  Ofice,  Wilton,  Cork Tel (021)  
45733 Meat Division  Headquarters.-  
Bamhall,  Leixhp,  Co Kildare  
Tel. (01) 280771
60
Use of Grass  Varieties  in Inereasing  
Produetion  of Beef
M. RYAN
An Foras  Taluntais,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
There are presently  47 ryegrass  varieties  on the Department  of Agricul ­
ture ’s recommended  list (1). In the Department ’s assessment,  all varieties  
are tested for at least three years at five centres.  Mechanical  harvesters  
are used to determine  DM yields and persistency  is assessed  on a scale  
of 1-9. Varieties  are assessed  in maturity  groups. It is clearly  desirable  
but impractical  to have animal  performance  data on all of these varieties.  
Cost factors  and land limitations  preclude  evaluation  of such large num ­
bers via the animal.  A limited  number  of varieties  are being  tested using 
animal performance  as the measuring  parameter  in the Agricultural  
Institute.
Connolly  et al (2) evaluated  a small number  of ryegrass  varieties  both 
as grazed  herbage  and winter  feed silage. Evaluations  of these varieties  
using grazing  animals  was carried  out using extra carrying  capacity  over 
and above the standard  grass (S^j) as the measure  of superiority.  The 
model  used was the common  intercept  model  (3).
At Johnstown  Castle in the years 1977-79  inclusive  an evaluation  of 
six varieties  .sown in monoculture,  has been conducted.  No legume  was 
sown,  nitrogen  fertiliser  input was 250 kg per ha per annum  given in 5-6 
incremental  dressings.  A description  of the varieties  is given in Table 1.
Table I
Varieties  evaluated  at Johnstown  Castle  1977-79
Variety Heading  date Ploidy
s.. Early Diploid
Barpastra Late Tetraploid
Sabrina Early Tetraploid
Vigor (Melle) Late Diploid
Cropper Early Diploid
Oakpark Early Diploid
61
The mean  effect  of variety  on liveweight  gain is shown  in Table  2.
Table 2
Effect  of variety  on liveweight  gain (kg/ha)— mean 1977-79
Variety LWG Relative
s.. 846 100
Barpastra 819 97
Sabrina 700 83
Vigor 911 108
Cropper 840 99
Oakpark 808 96
Only Sabrina  and Vigor  results  were significantly  different  from S21.
Seasonality  effects  were shown  by the different  varieties.  Table 3 illus­
trates the effect of variety  and stocking  rate on liveweight  gain and 
percentage  of total liveweight  gain attained  between  April and July, 1977-  
79.
LVv'G f.g/hc SEASONALITY  OF GROWTH  1977-79
62
Table 3
Effect  of variety  and stocking  rate on liveweight  gain (kg/ha)  April to July-
mean 1977-79
Variety  — SR LWG % of annual  total 
by July
Sj4 low SR 577 62
Sj, high SR 490 55
Barpastra  low SR 502 55
Barpastra  high SR 414 47
Vigor low SR 452 47
Vigor  high SR 477 50
Cropper 552 59
Oakpark 465 53
The period  mid-April  to early July represents  40 percent  of the total 
grazing  season. The early varieties  achieved  53 to 62 percent  and the late 
varieties  47 to 55 percent  of total annual  production  in that period.
The relatively  good mid-summer  production  of Vigor  compared  to S2. 
at the high stocking  rate is shown  in Fig. 1. The sharp decline  in live- 
weight  gain in S12 from early June onwards  is notable.
Wl(l(g) Livewcighf  change  (kg) April - July \978
April
FIGS.  2 & 3lAay Juno July
63
There were contrasting  weather  conditions  in the three years of the 
experiment.  The spring  of 1977 was normal  but the 1978 and 1979 spring 
seasons  were poor for grass growth  with resulting  effects  on liveweight  
gain of the animals.  These effects  are shown  in Figures  2 and 3 for 
and Vigor.
In 1977 animals  on these treatments  gained  weight  without  interruption  
from date of turn-out.  However,  in 1978 negative  liveweight  changes  
occurred  in all treatments  over the first three weeks  after turn-out.  The 
cattle on the late-heading  Vigor  showed  the greatest  loss in performance.  
A month  elapsed  before  the live weights  returned  to the levels  at turn-out.  
These were fasted weights  and while they may not represent  actual loss 
of carcase  weight,  nevertheless  they indicate  restriction  in DM intake. 
Maximum  possible  gains  are not likely in these circumstances.  The 1979 
data are illustrated  in Figure  4 and they indicate  that the cattle on high 
stocking  rate (HSR)  treatments  lost weight  or gained  very little liveweight  
for two cycles, i.e. five weeks after going to grass. The cattle on low 
stocking  rate treatments  (LSR)  performed  better  with only the late variety 
Vigor  showing  restriction  for one cycle.
Botanical  changes  were monitored  over time to check  on persistence  of 
sown species. These  are given in Table  4.
Table 4
Effect  of management  on percentage  ryegrass  in swards  (%) 1978
Variety Grazed Silage  + Grazed
s.. 80 75
Barpastra 68 44
Sabrina 18 24
Vigor 91 87
Cropper 85 82
Oakpark 82 75
The poor persistence  of the teraploids Sabrina and Barpastra  is notable.  
Cutting  silage and then grazing  the plots adversely  affected  survival,  
notably  in Barpastra.  Vigor  showed  better  persistence  than other  varieties  
under  both management  systems.
A small winter feeding  trial comparing  the six cultivars  was also 
undertaken.  The results  are summarised  in Table 5.
Table 5
Effect  of variety on average  daily gain (kg) of steers  fed on silage + 2.3 kg 
beet pulp nuts
VarietyAverage  daily gain 
kg/day Relative
s.. .89 100
Barpastra .78 88
Sabrina .93 104
Vigor .82 93
Cropper .91 102
Oakpark .80 90
The results  indicate  that Sabrina  gave much better  results  as a silage-  
fed grass than as a grazing  grass. However  differences  shown  in Table 5 
were not significant.  Further  studies  on the silage feeding  value of these 
varieties  are in progress.
It is concluded  that there are a number  of new ryegrass  varieties  avail ­
able which have advantages  to offer in terms of good mid-summer  
production,  persistence,  silage yield and quality. It behoves  the farmer,  
adviser  and research  worker  alike to seek out these better varieties  and
65
to recommend  and use only those which have shown their superiority  
over the standard  varieties,  especially  in trials where measurements  of 
animal  production  were made.
References
1. Herbage  Varieties,  Recommended  List 1980, Dept, of Agriculture.
2. Connolly,  V., de Valle Ribeiro,  M., Crowley,  J. C. Potential  of grass and 
legume  under  Irish conditions.  Proc. Int. meeting  on Animal  Prod, from Temp.  
Grassld.  June 1977, Irish Grassld.  & Animal  Prod. Assoc,  and An Foras  Talun ­
tais, Dublin.
3. Connolly,  J. The design  of grazing  experiments  : 2. A simple  linear  model  for 
the gain-stocking  rate relationship.  Ir. J. agric. Res. 15, 365-374,  1976.
66
GOOD NEWS!
HELP CONTROL  
GRASS  TETANY
New Greenvale  Cal-Mag  Grass Nuts 
will help protect your animals  
against GRASS TETANY for as 
little as 4p a day for cattle and 2p 
a day for sheep.
Greenvale  Cal-Mag  Grass Nuts are 
formulated  to give the required  
daily amount  of Calcined  Magnes ­
ite. And the high nutritional  value  
of G.C.M. Nuts provide valuable  
nutrients  for the profitable  produc ­
tion of meat and milk.Easy to store . . . easy to handle  . . . 
easy to feed. Ask your Irish Sugar  
Co. man about the GOOD NEWS  !
2 ozs. of Calcined  Magnesite  per 
pound  of nuts :
Cattle 1 lb. per day per head.  
Sheep J lb per day per head.
CAL • MAG CRASS NUTS
Greenvale
The Irish Sugar  Company  Ltd.,
St. Stephen ’s Creen House,  Dublin  2. Tel. 767501Greenvak
CAL MAG 
GRASS  
NUTS
67
Premier  Meat  
Packers  (I) Ltd
Sallins,  Co. Kildare
We require large numbers
of
PRIME BULLOCKS  
and HEIFERS  
LEAN COWS
For Quotations  Please  Ring  
045-9871  (10) Telex  5301
68
A System  of Low Cost Production  in 
the United  Kingdom
J. C. WILCOX
Farm Director,  Trawsgoed  Experimental  Husbandry  Farm, Dyfed,
Wales.
The location  of Trawsgoed  Experimental  Husbandry  Farm on the edge 
of the coastal  belt of mid-Wales  plays an important  part in determining  
the type of farming  system  which  can be followed.  The climate  is relativ ­
ely mild due to the influence  of the Gulf Stream  and the rainfall  is 1200 
mm and is well distributed  throughout  the year.
The lower part of the farm, which is used predominantly  for dairying,  
is 30 to 100 metres  above sea level. The lower land is reasonably  level 
and can be used for grazing  and silage while the slopes  are steep  enough  
to limit their use to grazing. Perennial  ryegrass  and white clover  sown  
as semi-permanent  swards  are the basis  of all the grass  seeds  mixtures  and 
the favourable  climate  and high rates of fertilizer  used result in good  
yields. In recent years under various  systems  of grazing  management,  
yields  of dry matter  per hectare  have exceeded  12 tonnes.
One of the objectives  in setting up this system of production  some  
twelve years ago was to maximise  the amount  of milk produced  from 
grass and to minimise  the input of purchased  concentrates.  In order to 
do this a spring  calving  herd was established  and early work investigated 
stocking  rates and time of calving.  AHhough  higher  stocking  rates have 
been used,  experience  has resulted  in the 180 Friesian  cows being  stocked 
at 2.5 cows per ha of grass receiving  approximately  400 kg of nitrogen  
fertilizer  per ha annually.  Average  annual  milk production  for 1977-79  
was 4586 litres sold per cow and was supported  by 618 kg of concentrates  
per cow. To achieve  this level of performance  careful  investigation  of 
three main aspects  of management  has been necessary.  The date of 
calving  in relation  to the date of turnout  to grass has a large effect  on the 
amount  of milk produced  and was investigated  in an early series of 
experiments,  the results from which indicated  that January/February  
calving  was beneficial  from he aspecas  of v'cld. financial  return and 
ease of management.  Secondly,  to sustain  a high level of production  from  
grass some system  of grazing  management  must he nracticed  and there ­
fore since the spring  calving  herd was first established  three main systems 
of grassland  management  have been employed.
The first system  used in the early days of the unit was one of paddock  
grazing,  generally  with two days spent in individual  paddocks  and a 
rotation  of 24 days. This was managed  in coniunction  with an equal area 
of grassland  used mainly  for conservation.  The management  during  the 
grazing  season  was for early  grazing  of the conservation  area,  followed  by 
grazing  the paddock  area for most of the season,  but allowing  for sup­
69
plementation  of the paddock  area by grazing  part of the conservation  
area if shortages  of grass occurred  during  mid-summer.  In the autumn  
the conservation  area was again  grazed  after the third silage  cut had been 
taken. During  the years when this system  of grazing  management  was 
used, a stocking  rate of 3 cows per hectare  was maintained.
The second  system  of grazing  management  employed  was one of set 
stocking,  or more accurately  continuous  grazing,  as a grassland  area 
stocked  at 2.5 cows per hectare  was used for grazing  and the density  of 
stocking  controlled  by taking  conservation  from part of the area. For 
most  of the grazing  season  one half to three quarters  of the area was used 
for grazing  and the remainder for conservation.  During  the early  part and 
at the end of the grazing  season  the whole  area was used for grazing.  By 
this system,  although  part of the grassland  area was continuously  grazed,  
the area was adjusted  to ensure  that there was always  sufficient  grass  and 
also that the grazing  area was never  seriously  undergrazed.
The third grazing  system  consisted  of utilizing  five or six paddocks  in 
no strict rotation,  but always  ensuring  that the cows had plenty  of grass 
for grazing  with any surplus  taken as silage. During  the course  of the 
grazing  season all paddocks  were cut for silage at some stage. The 
stocking  rate on this system  of management  was also 2.5 cows  per hectare.
Although  these three systems  of management  were not run as a strict  
comparison,  all were on the farm during  some seasons  and apparently  
supported  very similar  levels  of production.
Because  of a swing away from paddock  grazing  to the apparently  
simpler system  of set stocking,  a critical  comparison  of continuous  grazing  
and paddock  grazing  was started  in 1977. The provisional  results  from 
three years of this experiment  have indicated  that rotational  grazing,  
although  giving less total DM production,  has resulted  in higher  milk 
production.  This appears  to be due to the better  rationing  of the grazing  
availab'e,  particularly  at times of grass shortage.  The results  for 1977 
and 1978 are given in Table 1.
Table 1
Comparison  of rotational  and continuous  grazing
Rotational Continuous
Total grass 1977 11.6 12.4
DM production  
tonnes/ha 1978 11.6 12.1
Total lactation 1977 4491 4076
yield kg 1978 5054 4718
In 1979 an investigation  into the level of production  from grass under  
a system  where ad libitum  good quality  grass was always  available  to 
cows, has indicated  that higher  milk yields  may be possible  throughout
70
the grazing  season. This feature  has yet to be combined  with a manage ­
ment system  to provide  adequate  returns  per hectare.
In a system  of milk production  where individual  cow yields  are rela­
tively modest  it is imperative  that levels  of concentrate  feeding  must not 
be high if good financial  returns  are expected.  If only a limited  amount  
of concentrate  is fed it is obvious  that careful  consideration  must  be given  
to the stage of lactation  when it is most profitable  to feed concentrates.  
Three main periods  of feeding  have been investigated,  feeding  at grass,  
steaming  up before  calving,  and feeding  in early lactation  between  calving  
and turning  out in early April.
For a period of seven years, half the cows on an intensive  paddock  
grazing  system  were fed a flat rate of 1.8 kg of concentrates  per day. The 
overall response  to this feeding  was 1 kg of milk for every 1.6 kg of 
concentrates  fed. In one year only, did the extra mi'k pay for the con­
centrates  fed. Access  to a feed dispenser  while grazing  in two years of 
another  trial produced  no extra milk in one year and an increase  of 1 kg 
of mi'k for every 1.7 kg of concentrate  fed in the second  year.
Silage is fed during  the winter  period and gives an adequate  rate of 
liveweight  gain in the dry period. An experiment  was run in the three  
years 1975-1977  in which two groups  of cows were fed good quality  
silage and one group received  in addition  3 kg of concentrates  per cow 
per day for 50 days before calving. The concentrate  feeding  did not 
produce  any extra mi'k in the subsequent  lactation.  A series of experi ­
ments  has been carried  out to measure  the response  to concentrates  fed 
in early lactation.  One experiment  for three years compared  two levels 
of flat rate feeding.  Cows  calving  in January/February  and in February/  
Aoril  were fed either  5 kgs or 10 kgs of concentrates  per day together with 
ad Ubitifm  silage. The results  are shown  in Table 2
Table 2
Response  to concentrates  fed in early lactation
Calving  periodSilage +
5 kg concentratesSilage +
10 kg concentrates
January  - February
Lactation  yield 4835 kg 5004 kg
Concentrates  fed 660 kg 1003 kg
February  - April
Lactation  yield 4318 kg 4395 kg
Concentrates  fed 471 kg 561 kg
With January/February  calving  cows the response  to doubling  the 
quantity  of concentrates  fed per day was to produce  an extra kilogram  
of milk for every 2.02 kg of concentrates  fed. With February/April  
calvers  a much smaller  increase  in average  yield was also uneconomic.
71
As a result  of this and other  experiments  it is now the practice  with the 
herd to restrict  concentrate  feeding  to the period  from 2-3 weeks  before 
calving  until mid-May.  During  the dry period  silage gives an adequate  
rate of gain and concentrate  feeding  in early lactation  is restricted  to 7.5 
kg per day  for Januaiy/February  calvers  and to 5-6 kg for March  calvers. 
Extra feed is only given if grass production  is seriously  reduced  when 
some extra concentrates  may be used to supplement  either grazing  or 
silage.
Nitrogen  fertilizers  have generally  been applied  at high rates, approx-  
irnately  400 kg per has is used per annum. Following  six years of high 
nitrogen  fertilizer  application  to a paddock  grazing  system,  half the area 
was top-dressed  with only 250 kg of nitrogen  per hectare  each year while  
the heavier  450 kg dressings  were maintained  on the other half. The 
results  are shown  in Table 3.
Table 3
Nitrogen  level on paddocks  — milk production  litres per ha
250 kg N 450 kg N
1974 2905 1 2968 1
1975 2659 1 2746 1
1976 2891 1 3082 1
At the end of the three year period  milk production  from the paddocks  
receiving  the lower level of nitrogen  had been reduced  by 7% and the 
amount  of time spient grazing  the paddocks  was considerably  reduced  
with correspondingly  more time spent grazing  the area allocated  for 
conservation.
One of the problems  of spring  calving  is the production  of heifers  for 
herd replacements.  Because  of the necessity  for batch calving  at a time 
to make maximum  use of the subsequent  grass production,  calving  can 
only be at two or three years old. Two year old calving  while relatively  
easy with autumn  calvers  is more difficult  with spring  calvers  which  do 
not reach an adequate  pre calving  liveweight  with the same ease. As a 
consequence  of this an investigation  was started  to compare  three  year old 
calving  with calving  a year earlier. It is intended  to carry out this investi­
gation through  the productive  life of the heifers  but preliminary  results 
are indicating  that the heifers  calving  at three  years  are over 75 kg heavier  
at first calving  and over 70 kg heavier  at the second  calving  than those 
first calving  at two year old. The three year old calvers  produced  868 kg 
more milk in the first lactation  and only 309 kg more milk in the second  
lactation.  This increase  in yield does not compensate  for the extra lac­
tation  obtained  from the two year old calving  heifers.
The overall herd performance  in 1979, despite  the late cold spring, 
follows  closely  on results in previous  years. The results  are shown in
72
Table  4. The price used in calculating  the output  was 10.62 p per litre 
for milk and the price of the home mixed  concentrates  £104 per tonne.
Table 4
Herd performance  1979
Average  number  cows 171
Milk sold per cow 4538 1
Milk sales per cow £482
Concentrates  fed per cow 635 kg
Concentrates  fed per litre milk 0.14 kg
Margin  over concentrates  per cow £416
Calving  date has an important  effect  on yield with much  reduced  yields  
for March/April  calvers  as compared  with the January/February  calvers. 
Later  calving  is associated  with much lower  levels  of concentrate  feeding 
but this is insufficient  to compensate  for the lower  yield and margins  are 
reduced.  The contribution  of grass to annual  milk production  is shown 
in Table 5.
Table 5
Contribution  of grass to annual  milk production
Calving  periodAnnual  concentrate  
use kgMilk yield 
kg/cow% total energy  
from grass
January/February 711 4779 80
February/March 456 4419 86
March/April 203 4083 93
Late calving  is associated  with the more efficient  use of grass but calv­
ing in January/February  which is now the general  pattern  in this herd 
combines  good grassland  utilization  with higher  milk yields and better  
financial  returns.
73
Leo
Y^low
Ireland ’s leading  
milking  cow 
injector
guaranteed
uIrish
cP
LeoLaboratoriesLEO  Veterinary  Division  •Dublin  12.
74
Economics  of Low and High Cost  
Dairying  Systems
S. J. AIMES
Farm Management  Services.  Milk Marketing  Board, United  Kingdom.
Last year the results of a comparison  of dairying  in our respective 
countries  were summarised  (reference  1). It may be argued  that the fig­
ures, referring  to the calendar  year 1977, have been overtaken  by events, 
but they serve to emphasise  some of the differences  between  low and high 
cost systems  (Table 1).
Table 1
Physical  and financial  performance  (£ per acre)
Ireland England  and Wales
Herd size 48 74
Milk yield (galls) 724 1100
Concentrate  use (cwts) 8.4 35.4
Stocking  rate (acres/cow) 1.4 1.3
Farm gross margin 159 143
Overhead  costs 54 99
Profit 105 44
By tradition  Irish dairying  can be regarded  as being  low cost in terms  
of all the major inputs, feed, fertiliser,  paid labour, equipment  and 
borrowed  money. So far as Britain  is concerned  the opposite  is true. 
The figures  show that while by conventional  measures  of efficiency,  such 
as herd size and milk yield the Irish levels are below the British  levels,  
they are higher  in terms  of the factor  that really  matters,  profitability.
At this point it is important  to consider  why the British  and Irish sys­
tems of dairying  differ to such an extent. Historically  Britain  has had a 
far higher  milk price than that prevailing  in Ireland  and profitability  has 
consequently  been greater.  At the same time there has also been a good 
deal of prestige  associated  with a high milk yield per cow. These two 
factors  in combination  have encouraged  expenditure  on commodities  
assumed  to help bring about  the desired  high yield, namely  concentrates  
and sophisticated  technical  equipment.  Such expenditure  has inevitably  
been encouraged  by commercial  organisations  selling  the various  products.
Such developments  are fine so long as the milk price is high enough  to 
support  them. A sophisticated  industry  is however  far more vulnerable  
to a reduction  in price such as that currently  taking  place.
For the British  farmer,  operating  his high cost system, the outlook  is 
bleak, especially  since there is currently  little improvement  in technical
75
performance;  milk yields in our FMS sample  being static around  1150 
gallons  and concentrate  use around  36 cwt. Thus  the anticipated  increase 
of 11 per cent in milk price for the year ending  March 1980 will be 
inadequate  to meet cost increases  in general  and the rise in overhead  
costs in particular  (Table  2).
Table 2
FMS 82 all-grass  farm sample —financial  results  (£ per acre)
Year ending  MarchPercentage
1979 1980 change
Whole  farm gross margin 187 208 -h 12
Overhead  costs 136 162 + 20
Profit 51 46 - 11
Reference  2
Reference  to profit is meaningless  unless  we consider  how it is used.  
The main demands  on profit are for loan repayment,  tax, capital and 
private expenditure.  In 1979 these amounted  to almost £20,000  and 
resulted  in an increase  in overdraft  of nearly  £4,000. The implication  of 
such figures  is that at current  performance  the existing  milk price cannot  
support  the present  levels of skilled  labour,  modern  technology  or bor­
rowed  capital.
The lesson for the Irish dairy farmer  is that even if current  levels of 
profitability  leave him with spare cash, he should be careful  not to use 
it to build an overhead  cost structure  such as that commonly  seen in 
Britain  unless  he can achieve  physical  efficiency  well in excess  of 1150 
gallons  from 36 cwt concentrates  when stocked  at 1.3 acres  per cow. This 
argument  is strengthened  when we consider  that with the current  surplus  
in Europe,  the milk price is unlikely  to be maintained  in real terms. 
Further  there is a possibility,  hopefully  remote,  that the current  disagree ­
ment amongst  EEC members  may lead to a breakdown  of the Common  
Agricultural  Policy. One of the consequences  of such a breakdown  may 
well be to force Irish milk back on to the depressed  world  market.
It would therefore  seem vital that the Irish dairy industry  moves  for­
ward in a manner  that, while not necessarily  showing  maximum  profit 
under  current  conditions,  maintains  a reasonable  level of profit in more 
adverse  circumstances.  That surely means  making  the most of Ireland ’s 
natural  advantage,  grass,  and being  wary of an over capitalised  industry.
It should perhaps  be remembered  that sophisticated  capitalisation  is 
not in itself a guarantee  of improved  physical  performance.  Indeed  the 
recent  ADAS  surveys  of ‘Complete  Diet Feeding ’, surely  the ultimate  in 
sophistication,  have shown no economic  advantages  over conventional  
systems. Indeed examination  of some of the conclusions  of the most 
recent  report  suggest  the opposite.
76
Summary  of economic  conclusions  (Reference  3)
1. There was no clear evidence  of complete  diet herds improving  yields  
faster  than other  herds;  indeed  the evidence  indicated  the reverse.
2. Complete  diet herds used considerably  more concentrates  per litre of 
milk produced.
3. Complete  diet fed herds  did not on average  achieve  a higher  margin  
over concentrates  than conventionally  fed herds.
4. There still appears  to be no direct financial  reward  from herds on 
complete  diet feeding.
Such conclusions  do not however  show that complete  diet feeding  never  
has a place in dairy herd management.  What they suggest  is that the 
system  should  be adopted  only for reasons  such as ‘ease of management ’ 
rather  than for expectation  of improved  performance.  I would  argue  that 
such ‘ease of management ’ reasons  are far more likely  to apply  in the east 
of England  where a farmer  has access  to countless  arable by-products  
than they are in the west of Ireland.
The merits  of the latest  ‘system ’ of cow feeding —Flat Rate Feeding  of 
Concentrates  — must be judged in a similar way. While the results  
achieved  by such as Fred Gordon  at Hillsborough  and Cled Thomas  at 
Hurley  are impressive,  it is likely that if the system  were adopted  by a 
large number  of commercial  farmers,  results  would show no advantage  
over existing  systems.  Thus flat rate feeding  must be judged  on a wider  
basis,  and it is by such a measure  that it seems  to hold attractions  for the 
Irish farmer.
The philosophy  of the system  meets  the ideals  outlined  earlier  namely,  
using the natural  resource  of grassland  and being a champion  of the 
simpler  approach.  In its simplest  form flat rate feeding  would  require  a 
clamp,  albeit large, of self-feed  silage,  a trough  for feeding  concentrates  
and an unsophisticated  milking  parlour.  So far as the cows  are concerned  
housing  would  be of little benefit,  but from the farmer ’s viewpoint  prob ­
ably essential.
Discussion  of flat rate feeding  tends to mix up two separate  issues,  
firstly the method  of feeding  concentrates  and forage to cows and sec­
ondly,  the absolute  levels  of each component.  Complete  diet and flat rate 
feeding  should be evaluated  on whether  they seem to be the correct  
method  of feeding  for the individual.  The wider question  of absolute  
amounts  of forage and concentrates  is one which all dairy farmers,  
irrespective  of system  of feeding,  should  be asking.
Considering  concentrates  first, where the FMS average  use is currently  
35 cwt per cow, there is no indication  that the use of anything  over about  
25 cwt per cow leads to an improvement  in gross margin  per acre (Table
3).
Table 3
Analysis  of performance  of 1005 FMS farms  by concentrate  use (Reference  2)
Concentrate  use per cow (cwt)  17 23 27 32 37 46
Gross margin  per acre 173 195 217 216 222 221
77
When  .examining  these figures  in the Irish context,  it should  be remem ­
bered that the majority  of the herds included  in the sample  above are 
autumn  calving  and that for spring  calvers  the optimum  use is likely to 
be lower.
When a similar  analysis  is made on the basis of nitrogen  use, some  
improvement  can be seen at the highest  levels, although  that rate of 
improvement  slows  down at about  200 units per acre, around  the current  
FMS average  (Table  4).
Table 4
Analysis  of performance  of 1005 farms  by nitrogen  use (Reference  2)
Nitrogen  use (units  per acre) 62 100 139 178 218 259 333
Gross  margin  per acre 157 193 212 239 238 252 262
The implication  of such figures  is that the average  farmer  is likely to 
get a better  financial  response  from additional  fertiliser  than from addit ­
ional concentrates.  Such analyses  are however  sometimes  misleading  in 
their application  in that the inter-relationships  of such as nitrogen  use 
and stocking  rate are ignored.
This problem  can be overcome  by multiple-regression  analysis.  A 
recent study (Reference  4) indicated  that the direct response  to 1 lb 
nitrogen  was about  0.5 gallons  of milk while  the response  to 1 lb concen ­
trates  was only about  0.1 gallons  milk.
In terms of performance  levels shown  in the Irish comparison  earlier  
in this paper,  it could be argued  that there is scope for increase  of all 
inputs. The weight  of evidence  does however  suggest  that effort should 
be concentrated  on grassland  improvement.  This development  should 
take place alongside  an attempt  to maintain  the traditional  low-cost 
approach  through  which  Irish dairying  can ensure  its future. Lest I be 
accused  of talking  abstractly,  I would  conclude  by suggesting  that target  
p)erformance  might  well be 1100 gallons  from 16 cwt concentrates  when 
stocked  at 1.2 acres  per cow with 250 units of nitrogen,  under  conditions  
prevailing  in much  of western  England.  In the best areas  of Ireland,  con­
centrate  use ;could  well be decreased  and stocking  rate increased  to make  
full use of the potential  of the land.
Such performance  while  not over taxing  the system,  be that the cow or 
the grassland,  is likely to show a good return in terms of both gross 
margin  and, more importantly,  profitability.
References
1. Hughes,  H. C. A comparison  of the economics  of milk production  in Ireland  
and Great  Britain.  Ir. Grassl.  & Anim.  Prod.  Assoc.  J. Vol. 14, p. 67, 1979.
2. Amies,  S. J., Craven,  J. A. and Surah,  M. S. An analysis  of FMS costed  farms  
1978-79.  Milk Marketing  Board. FMS Information  Unit Report  No. 22, Dec­
ember 1979.
3. MAFF.  Complete  feeding  of dairy cows —supplementary  report  on investiga ­
tions carried  out during  1978-79.
4. Hawkins,  S. W. and Rose, P. H. The relationship  between  the rate of fertiliser  
nitrogen  applied  to grassland  and milk production;  an analysis  of recorded  
farm data. Grass  and Forage  Science,  Vol. 34, No. 3, September  1979.
78
Brucellosis  — Strategy  for the Farmer
B. CUNNINGHAM
Department  of Veterinary  Pathology  and Microbiology,  Faculty  of 
Veterinary  Medicine,  University  College,  Dublin.
Although  the strategy  of controlling  Brucellosis  on the farm might be 
simply stated as the “hygienic  management  of every parturition ” it is 
always  helpful  to know why one is advised  to do one thing and not do 
another.  If one has an adequate  knowledge  of the disease  suitable  man­
agement  methods  can be easily  deduced  to suit one’s own farm.
For all practical  purposes  the route of infection  on the farm is via the 
mouth  (it is possible  to transmit  the disease  in other ways but these are 
not of any great importance  in the field).  Thus  we have to protect  animals  
against  eating,  drinking,  or licking  any food,  water  or other  materials  that 
may have become  contaminated.  For instance,  a cow can become  infected  
by licking  her legs after paddling  through  infected  mud or slurry. A 
simpler  approach  is to prevent  these materials  from becoming  contamin ­
ated.
When ingested  the organism  passes  through  the mucosa  into the lym­
phatic  system  where  it meets  the major  defence  system  of the body. The 
bacterial  cells are engulfed  by phagocytes  and carried  to the next lym­
phatic  gland. Some destruction  of the organisms  takes place (more or 
less depending  on whether  the animal  is immunised —vaccinated —or not). 
In the unvaccinated  animal some organisms  will survive  the passage  
through  the lymphatic  system and pass into the blood stream via the 
thoracic  duct — and then become  widely dispersed  through  the body 
tissues. What  happens  next depends  on the age of the animal,  its sex and 
whether  or not it is pregnant.
(i) The young  calf and non pregnant  heifer are very resistant  to infec ­
tion. After  exposure  to infection they  may show  transient  blood  titres  
(very few will develop  permanent  blood titres)  which  in a matter  of 
six months  or so will usually  return  to negative  levels. These  animals  
will have thus acquired  a very useful Natural  Immunity  which  will 
protect  them against  re-infection  in later life. A small percentage  of 
such exposed  animals  (1-2%)  may however,  become  Latent  Carriers  
—and show no sign of the disease  until their first pregnancy  ends in 
an abortion.
It is not a good idea to rely on Natural  Immunity  as this small 
number  of latent carriers  can keep the disease  going in cycles  for 
many years in any large herd.
It is better  to rear the replacement  heifers  away from the adult  herd,  
and when  they are about  a year old to vaccinate  them. At this stage, 
if the adult  herd has been cleared  of the disease,  it might  be prudent  
to carry out an Anamnestic  Test on the heifer replacements  and 
remove  any possible  latent  carriers.
79
Immunisation  — whether  natural  or by vaccination  is not 100%  
effective  . It will protect  70-80%  of females  against  reasonable  
challenge  during  pregnancy.  Hence,  we must arrange  our manage ­
ment  so that in even an accident  situation  heavy  exposure  of pregnant  
females  is not possible.
(ii) The preg;nant  female
If unvaccinated,  the pregnant  female  has no initial defence  against  
invasion  and some organisms  will gain access  to the uterus  and the 
developing  udder. These are the two important  predilection  sites in 
cattle.
In the uterus, the developing  foetal membranes  are particularly  
attractive  to brucella  abortus  and enormous growth  in numbers  takes  
place in them. The foetal cotyledons  are damaged  and abortion  
usually  follows  anytime  later than 37 days after infection —a usual 
interval  is about  6 to 8 weeks. At the time of abortion  enormous  
numbers  of brucella  are released  in the placenta,  the foetal fluids  
and in the foetus. All the aborted  materials  are highly  dangerous  to 
both animal  and human  health.
If no precautions  are taken to control  the spread  of infection  in a 
non-vaccinated  herd the likely outcome  is that 90-100%  of females  
will abort with a loss of 80% of the calf crop.
In unvaccinated  animals  an infective  dose of 15 million  organisms  
will cause 100% abortions.  But a dose as low as 1500 organisms  
can cause 70% of heifers  to abort. Under  normal  farm conditions  
15 million  organisms  would  be a very small dose —emphasising  the 
need for very careful  hygiene.
(iii) The vaccinated  pregnant  female,  although  still susceptible  to heavy 
challenge,  has a very useful degree  of immunity— sufficient  to cope 
with environmental  risks on a well managed  farm.
Subjected  to a challenge  of 15 million  organisms,  70-80%  of vaccin ­
ated heifers  will be completely  protected.  Of the 20-30%  of heifers 
which  will become  reactors  possibly  half of them would  have viable 
calves. This is in marked  contrast  to the case of the unvaccinated  
heifers.
(iv) The male calf is quite resistant  to infection.  At the age of puberty  
he becomes  more susceptible  and can become  infected  in the repro ­
ductive  tract. Infected  bulls sometimes  produce  infected  semen  and 
although  they usually  appear  to cause little harm in natural  service  
their semen  can be very infectious  if used in AI. Chronic  infection  
can cause sterility.
Animal  health
1) An infected  cow discharges  enormous  numbers  of organisms  at the 
time of parturition  (whether  full term or premature).  These  must not 
drain into areas  where  other  cattle  can come in contact  with them.
2) After the placenta  is passed the genital  tract rapidly  involutes  and 
even in a few days the amount  of infection  being passed may be
80
minimal  or nil. Any cow should thus be kept separate  from her 
comrades  at least until after she has cleansed.
3) The loose box should  be cleaned  out and disinfected  after each par­
turition —and the hind parts  of the cow should  be sponged  down  with 
a suitably  diluted  disinfectant  after cleansing.
4) The calf should  be left with the cow for 24 hours so that it will be 
licked clean and will also get sufficient  colostrum.  A “wet” calf put 
in a pen with other  calves  can spread  the disease  as its coat can carry  
heavy  infection.  Even if the mucous  is allowed  to dry into the calf ’s 
coat it is still infective.
5) Dead  calves and foetal membranes  must be buried. They must not 
be thrown  on a dung heap or slurry  tank. They are often lifted with 
a fork, and moved  in a wheelbarrow —both  of which should  then be 
cleaned  and disinfected.
6) Leave  a trough  of disinfectant  outside  each isolation  box— and disin ­
fect your boots when going  in and coming  out.
7) Infection  can survive  in manure  or slurry for 3 months. Thus the 
manure  from the isolation  boxes should  be stacked  in a safe-draining  
area and allowed  to ferment.  Ideally,  isolation  boxes  should  not drain  
into the main slurry tank. If they do, slurry must only be spread  on 
non-grazing  land.
8) An infected  udder  is not of any great importance  to animal  health — 
even to a calf suckling  it (but infected  milk is a great hazard to 
humans.
9) Good herding  every day is essential  during  the season  of calvings  or 
possible  abortions.
At any sign of impending  parturition,  or of abdominal  discomfort  or
uneasiness,  a pregnant  animal  should be isolated  — at least until it is
apparent  that she is not going  to abort.
Human  health
Humans  are often quite susceptible  to Brucellosis.
1) Ninety  per cent of infected  cows are infected  in the udder  and thus 
produce  infected  milk —at least intermittently.  The milk of such cows 
will give a positive  MRT result. Such milk should  never be drunk  
unless  effectively  pasteurised.
2) Assisting  at an abortion,  or even a full term infected  parturition  can 
be particularly  dangerous  as the level of infection  on the calf and in 
the fluids and placenta  can be enormous.  If so assisting  or handling  
any of these materials,  rubber  or plastic  gloves  should  be worn.  After  
use they (and any ropes  used)  should  be effectively  cleaned,  disinfected  
(or sterilised  by boiling) —or buried  with the calf and placenta.
3) Placentae  should  not be manually  removed  unless  the cow is clinically  
ill with metritis —a decision  for your veterinary  surgeon.
4) Before  removing  bedding  from an isolation  box it should  be sprayed  
with disinfectant —e.g. Halomid.
5) Any clothing  contaminated  with uterine  discharges  should  be steeped 
in disinfectant  and then washed.  Furthermore,  any parts of the body
81
similarly  contaminated  should be thoroughly  washed as soon as
possible.
The newborn  calf should not be handled  — except  with gloves. It 
should  be left with the dam for at least a day so that it will be licked  
clean by the dam.
In a vaccinated  herd the within-herd  spread of Brucellosis  can be 
completely  prevented  by using the information  given above.
The only time there is any significant  risk of spread  of infection  on the 
farm is at or near the time of parturition.  Almost  all the attention  should 
be focussed  on this.
For the present,  in the pre-intensive  area, it is most imjxirtant  to keep  
the spread of disease  to a minimum.  In doing so. Brucellosis  can be 
virtually  eliminated  without  too much financial  strain.
At the commencement  of 1981 it is expected  that compulsory  eradica ­
tion measures  will come into force. These can prove economically  
disastrous  if there is much  infection  left in the herd. Most herds  clear up 
rapidly  under  intensive  measures  but some,  particularly  the larger  herds,  
may experience  difficulties.
It is not a simple process  to finally get rid of the last pockets  of 
Brucellosis  infection  in a country.  But the means  to do so are available  
and with farmer  co-operation  they will succeed.  The total eradication  of 
Brucellosis  is worth  working  for—and it is something  that can definitely 
be achieved.
82
Mewgrowth.
If Irish farming  has one basic  strength, it is our ability  
to grow  grass  like nowhere  else in Europe.  And every  new 
growth of grass  is a promise  of more  fodder,  more  stock,  
more  income  for Irifeh farming.
AtGouldings,werelyon  basic  strengths  too.
Reliable  research, dependable  service,  
first class  products.  And  this 
year, as always,  we’re ; v 
workingtowards  
new growth  
in all of .
Gofdding  grows""S'
GoukJing
83
ORBENIN
Beecham  Animal Health, Ferry  House. Lr. Mount Street. Dublin 2 
Orbenin  contatna  500 mg cioxacillin  par syringe
84
Financing  the Dairy  Industry  in 
the Future
P. MacCANNA
Chief  Agricultural  Adviser,  Bank of Ireland,  Dublin,
In the recent  past, we have emerged  from a particularly  buoyant  period  
of credit sufficiency,  good prices,  unprecedented  windfall  gains, and a 
generally  favourable  investment  climate  which accommodated  and en­
couraged  an adventurous  investment  approach.
For those  who availed  of the opportunity,  it was a time which  projected  
farming  onto a new and higher  place of deserved  affluence.  It was a time 
which  the sector  needed;  it was a period  when farmers  were rescued  from  
even the most crude management  of their financial  affairs  by large and 
sometimes  unexpected  price increases.  There was little urgency  in the 
acquisition  of improved  farm or financial  management  skills.
By contrast,  we are now faced with :
— A climate  of credit  restraint
— Higher  interest  rates
— Static prices  and rising costs
— Some uncertainty  about  the shape  of future  agricultural  policies. 
These changing  circumstances  have shifted  the parameters  and have
made decisions  about future investments  more difficult.  The year 1979 
was a bad year for farming;  a year which,  from a borrowing  viewpoint,  
brought  home to farmers  and, indeed,  to lending  institutions,  the need  
for more control in the administration  and use of farm credit in the 
future.
(A) General  availability  of credit
It is relevant,  before we discuss investment  at farm level, to look 
globally  at the credit situation.  The total amount  of credit  made avail ­
able to agriculture  in the years ahead will be shaped  by three major  
factors :—
1. The European  Monetary  System  ; the stability  of our economy  and 
the degree to which the Central  Bank see control  of credit as an 
essential  component  in maintaining  that stability.
2. Agriculture  as a sector  within  the economy  : its importance;  the return  
on the investment  and its overall  stability.  In the last five years,  
agriculture  has clearly  been a priority  area in terms  of opportunities  
for justifiable  and profitable  investment.  The positive  response  by 
Government  and lending  institutions  in making  the necessary  invest ­
ment capital  available  was conditioned  by :
a) The undoubted  potential  which existed  and indeed still exists in 
the agricultural  sector  for increased  production.
b) Our comparative  advantages  in many  areas  of agricultural  produc ­
tion, particularly  in the context  of grassland  based enterpri.ses.
85
c) Price and market  stability  under the influence  of the Common  
Agricultural  Policy.
3. The repayment  capacity  of agriculture  and the security  which  it offers.  
There was considerable  surplus  repayment  capacity  in the sector to 
justify  a 100% increase  in borrowing  by this sector within the last 
7 years.
The credit restrictions  imposed  by the Central Bank, which were 
understandably  in the interests  of the econcmy  as a whole,  were com­
pounded  by other  factors,  particu'arly  the break in the link with Sterling 
and industrial  prob ’ems in the non-Bank  segment  of the financial  sector.  
These events posed particular  difficulties  in rearranging  availab ’e re­
sources  so as to ensure  an even  flow of funds  throughout  the year.
Current  indications  wou ’d suggest  little prospect  of a significant  easing 
in credit  restrictions  for 1980 and perhaps  for some time to come.  How ­
ever, despite  the overall  restrictions  to date, agricu'ture  as a sector has 
fared extremely  well. Despite  the 18% credit expansion  guideline  for 
the economy  as a whole in 1979, advances  to agriculture  increased  by 
25%. I confidently  expect  the sector  to remain  a priority  area for scarce  
funds in the future. Furthermore,  careful management  by lending  
institutions  should  ensure that essential  productive  needs can be satis­
factorily  met throughout  the year.
The Common  Agricultural  Policy is the foundation  for much of the 
increased  confidence  evident  in agriculture  in recent  years.  Its continuation  
is vital if the sector is to remain  a priority  area and justify  preferential  
treatment  and priority  access to scarce funds. Therefore,  I will refer  
briefly  to the Common  Agricultural  Policy  and my current  perception  of 
its likely  development  and impact  in the immediate  years ahead.
(B) Future  development  of the C.A.P.
Current  political  and media  comment  might tend to suggest  that com- 
p’ete disintegration  of the C.A.P.  is imminent.  However,  when looked  at 
dispassionately,  this viewpoint  gives a rather  imbalanced  reflection  of the 
real situation.
In reality,  external  political  issues  and frustration  with the lack of pro­
gress in developing  other Community  policies  play as important  a role 
in the current  controversy  as do any internal  deficiencies  in the C.A.P.  
as an institution.
A realistic  view of the future development  of the C.A.P. demands  
rational  assessment  of the many complex  interacting  issues, some of 
which  demand  change,  while  others  strongly  favour  retention  of the status  
quo.
I see the critical  influences  which  will determine  the future  development  
of the C.A.P.  as follows  :
(1) Negative  pressures
— Existing  limits of the Community ’s so called ‘own resources ’, as 
determined  by the current  ceiling  of 1 % VAT receipts,  are likely 
to be reached  later in 1980 or early in 1981.
86
The British  problem,  whereby  the UK is calling  for a contribution  
to the Community  Budget  more in line with its receipts  from the 
Community,  is exerting  significant  downward  pressure  on EEC  
expenditure,  particularly  in the agricultural  sector.
The European  Parliament  is engaging  in a degree  of muscle-flexing 
in an effort to gain more control  over Community  agricultural  
expenditure.  These tactics  are tending  to disrupt  the day-to-day  
financial  operations  of the C.A.P.
Community  enlargement  through  the accession  of Greece  in 1981 
and possibly  Spain and Portugal  at a later date could lead to a 
further  dilution  of the funds available  to meet the needs of an 
expanded  agricultural  sector  in the Community.
Current  international  developments,  particularly  the recent  deter ­
ioration  of the US/USSR  conflict,  have market  implications  for 
certain  food products.  Maintenance  of prices for these products  
may necessitate  increased  Community  support  in an already  
delicate  budgetary  situation.
Structural  surpluses,  particularly  in the dairy sector,  are absorbing  
an increasing  proportion  of dwindling  Community  resources.  
Growing  consumerism.
(2) Positive  influences
— The Common  Agricultural  Policy is central to the continued  
existence  of the European  Community  as a coherent  unit. At the 
present  time, the C.A.P.  is the most developed  and arguably  the 
only fully fledged  Community  Policy  in existence.
— The EEC Commission  accepts  the need for an agricultural  policy 
incorporating  a system of supports  and safeguards  for farm in- 
eomes  if the Community  ideal of efficient  family  farms is to be 
attained.
— Removal  of support  could mean the movement  of 3-4 million  
peop'e  off the land, adding  to an already  serious  unemployment  
problem.
— The dynamic  nature of agriculture  itse’f is likely to betray the 
transient  nature of current  market  problems.  Factors  such as 
disease,  the international  economic  and trading  climate  and in 
particular,  weather,  all have a significant  influence  on the nature  
of agricultural  production  so that within  three or four years,  the 
current  dairy surplus  is likely to be supplanted  by problems  of a 
totally  different  nature.
— Ireland  is by no means  alone in its defence  of the C.A.P. Other  
influential  Community  partners,  particularly  France,  have expres ­
sed solidarity  in the objective  of maintaining  the C.A.P.  more or 
less in its present  form.
— The stren^h  of the farming  lobby,  not alone here in Ireland,  but 
particularly  in Germany  and France must be recognised  as a 
formidable  force in promoting  the continued  existence  of the
C.A.P.  in its present  form. Farmer  power  and influence  is usually
87
disproportionate  to the numerical  strength  of farmers  in the overall 
population.
— The total commitment  of all our political  representatives  to the 
maintenance  of C.A.P.
Although  some modifications  are inevitable,  current  evidence  would 
suggest  that the essential  elements  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy 
will survive.  Future  modifications  are likely  to reflect  changes  in empha ­
sis and operational  details  rather  than in the fundamental  character  of the 
Policy  which  is likely to remain  more or less intact  as the cornerstone  of 
all Community  initiatives.
In the Irish situation,  possible  adjustments  to the Policy,  particularly  
in relation  to the dairy sector,  may have some effect on the repayment  
capacity  of existing  borrowers.  However,  I am satisfied  that at both the 
production  and processing  levels,  there is sufficient  scope for improved  
output  and efficiency  to offset the financial  effects  of any likely refine­
ments  in the C.A.P.
While the future environment  in the agricultural  sector will demand  
more stringent  loan appraisal  and financial  control,  I believe  that a com­
mitment  to the financing  of further  development  is fully justified  by the 
overall opportunities  for profitable  investment  which still exist in the 
industry.
As a Bank,  we are aware of the opportunities  that exist in the sector 
for additional  low risk investment  justifying  the sector as a priority  for 
allocation  of available  credit.
(C) Investment  issues  in dairying —taxation
Taxation  and other factors  are causing  some confusion  in farming  at 
the moment.  In relation  to the investment  options  that exist, recent  
surveys  by some Co-operatives  suggest  that some farmers  are thinking  of 
reducing  milk output,  other farmers  are considering  cessation  of milk 
production  altogether  and taking  advantage  of the Dairy Herd Conver ­
sion Scheme.
Income  taxation  is a new variable  in Irish farming  and is one which  
will continue  to exert an influence  on farm investment  decisions  through ­
out the 1980 ’s.
Table 1
Family  farm income  *
<£2000  £2000-£5000
All farms  50% 30%
Full-time  farms  24% 36%
* 1978 Farm Management  Survey£5000-£8000 >£8000
20%
18% 22%
Tab'e 1 shows the percentage  of farms in the various  income  cate­
gories  for 1978. The majority  of farmers  can intensify  without  taxation  
becoming  an issue. For farmers  for whom  taxation  is currently  an issue  
the following  points  are relevant.
88
(a) Income  will never be increased  by cutting back output while the 
value of marginal  (additional)  output  exceeds  marginal  costs.
(b) Taxation  will reduce the marginal  income from a given level of 
production  to an extent  which  varies  in accordance  with the marginal  
rate of tax which it attracts  but will never  eliminate  it.
This reduction  is more serious  for the larger,  higher  income,  higher  tax 
bracket  farm and gives rise to two separate  types of decisions  based 
purely  on utility  criteria :
(a) Decisions  in relation  to future  expansion.
(b) Decisions  in relation  to possible  contraction.
Decisions  to/not  to expand
It is important  here to repeat a point which I made at a meeting  of 
this Association  in 1975 ; “that from an economic  point of view a 
decision  not to expand  from say a 50 to a 70 cow unit and incur the 
capital  expenditure  involved  in reorganised  milking  facilities,  extra build ­
ings, extra stock, etc. is an absolutely  different  one to a decision,  once 
one has made the investment,  to reduce stock numbsrs  from 70 to 50 
and leave fixed investments  on which loan repayments  are being made,  
under utilised ”. 1 can think of no situation  where on strictly  economic  
grounds  such a cut-back  could be justified.
In considering  expansion,  the degree justified  will depend on the 
question  “At what point will the additional  effort and risk involved  in 
future expansion  not be justified  by the after-tax  return  to such expan ­
sion ?” Farmers  with an income  level being  taxed at the higher  rates will 
generally  reach that point at an earlier stage than those with lower  
income  levels  and lower marginal  rates of tax.
We must accept  that a tax regime,  by reducing  the marginal  return,  
will reduce the level of intensity  at which the more commercial  high 
income  farmer  will ultimately  farm.
Decision  to change  system  (Dairy  Herd Conversion  Scheme)
This Scheme  has a limited  application  to the Irish dairying  sector. Its 
application  is strictly for farmers  who have large acreages;  a tillage  
option;  mediocre  performance  or some particular  personal  circumstances  
which  might  justify  the decision.  For farmers  who do not have a tillage  
option  and who would have to rely on the substitution  of a low income 
drystock  farming  system,  the Dairy Herd Conversion  Scheme  has no 
place.
Again,  for the smaller  farmer  where the attainment  of an income  to 
provide  a reasonable  standard  of living is the objective,  the Dairy Herd  
Conversion  Scheme  is not an economic  option.
With the increase  in the number  of farmers  paying  tax on accounts  we 
should  be wary not to pursue  tax minimisation  as an end in itself through  
indiscriminate  or marginal  investments,  particularly  in elaborate  machin ­
ery and buildings.  The UK experience  has shown  that the introduction  
of taxation  on accounts  gave a boost to investment  in buildings  and
89
machinery,  obviously  with a view to minimisation  of tax. This false 
strategy  was pointed  out recently  by no less an authority  than Mr. 
Arnold  Christensen,  President  of the British  Grassland  Association.  He 
emphasised  the danger  of such a strategy.  His priorities  were investments  
not in depreciating  or wasting  assets but, rather investment  in wealth  
creating  assets, particu'arly  stock. One must however  in making  this 
statement  point  to the need for substantial  additional  investment  by many  
farmers  in basic building  structures.
Desirable  tax incentives
Whatever  the future shape of the taxation  regime,  there is a need for 
incentives  to encourage  investment  in stock as a priority.  A considerable  
proportion  of investment  over the last four/five  years has been infra ­
structural  with little direct impact  on direct output. Therefore,  special  
treatment  is required  for such investment  since stock is not a self- 
liquidating  asset like machinery  or buildings.  This characteristic  of stock 
tends to lead to constraints  if increased  investment  in stock is taxed as 
current  income.
(D) Cost of credit —minimising  annual  repayments
Current  high interest  rates are a major deterrent  to investment  in all 
sectors. Strategies,  which will minimise  the total cost of servicing  loans,  
can be adopted.
(1) Use of overdraft
The first facility  which should be used to the optimum  level is the 
overdraft.  Typically,  £1,000  which can legitimately  be transferred  from 
term loan to a justifiable  overdraft  reduces  annual commitments  by 
approximately  £120. This is due to a lower interest  rate and to the fact 
that the average  utilisation  of overdraft  is approximately  66%. However,  
the account  must revert to credit for at least 30 days in the year. The 
use of overdraft  to the limit justified  by cash flow can effect considerable  
savings.
(2) Length  of term loan
There is some scope for reducing  annual  repayment  commitments  by 
lengthening  terms of loan. However,  there is a limitation  to this and 
Table  2 shows  that at high interest  rates,  there is litt'e advantage  in going
Table 2
Repayment  of £10,000  term loan at present  interest  rates
Term  of 
loan 
yearsRate of 
interestAnnual
repaymentsTotal
repayments
5 17 3,048 15,250
10 18 2,191 21,910
15 m 1,968 29,520
20 m 1,929 38,580
90
beyond  a 10-year  term when one takes account  of the total repayments  
which  have to be made.
When the profile  of borrowings  are short term, say under five years,  
difficulties  can be alleviated  by adding  a few extra years to the term of 
the loan However,  where  borrowings  are already  re’atively  long term,  say 
8-9 years, little advantage  can be gained from further  lengthening  the 
term of loan.
(3) Leasing —relevance
Leasing  also has certain  attractions  for farmers  who cannot  utilise  their  
full capital  allowances.  The following  points  are relevant :
• The advantages  of leasing  are very sensitive  to the ultimate  tax regime 
for farmers  and each case has to be assessed  in the light of individual  
circumstances.• It enables  farmers  not in the tax net to benefit  from lower interest  
charges,  since leasing  agencies  can claim tax credits  through  depre ­
ciation  allowances.• If the notional  system  continues  in some form, farmers  under such a 
system  with total interest  payments  in excess  of the normal  interest  
allowances  (currently  £2,400)  cou'd benefit  in a similar  way to those 
not in the tax net.• Leasing  releases  capital  for alternative  uses.
(4) Foreign  currency
Foreign  currency  has censiderab'e  attractions  in terms of reduced  
interest  charges.  However,  this advantage  must be balanced  against  the 
exchange  risk inherent  in foreign  currency  borrowing.  This risk can be 
covered  or insured  against  in the case of exports  which provide  foreign  
eurrency  receivables.  This is a mechanism  which has been widely  used 
by agribusiness.  Bank of Ireland has written some £30m in foreign  
currency  loans for agribusiness  in 1980.
At farm level, the application  of foreign  currency  borrowing  poses  
some problems,  un'ess  the Government  is prepared  to underwrite  possible 
exchange  losses. However,  special  circumstances  do occur,  for instance,  
where  the risk of exchange  loss can be minimised  and substantial  savings 
in terms of interest  can be made. Linder the Cattle Over-Wintering  
Foreign  Currency  Scheme  introduced  in 1979, Bank of Ireland has 
advanced  the equiva'ent  of approximately  £IR10m  which is currently  
attracting  an interest  rate of 10|% as opposed  to 16% and over for 
domestic  currency  borrowings,  if available.
Foreign  currency  lending  is a relatively  new development  in Irish 
banking  and more widespread  adoption  will demand  further  adaptation  
and improvement  of current  lending  mechanisms.  In this competitive  
world we will be constantly  searching  for ways in which it can be used 
to benefit  the whole  economy  and particularly  the farming  sector.
(E) Investment  decisions  in dairying —efficiency
Repayment  capacity  in dairying  has been reduced  considerably  by the 
price/cost  squeeze  and the prospects  of a more rigorous  tax regime  on
91
GastoGrass
iscomerting  
Natural  Gas 
into
Ammonia  
tomanufacture  
fertiTisersto  
service  agricuiturai  ireiand
to benefit  the 
Nation's  economyi
NET
NmUGIN  EIREANN  TEORAN1A
92
some farms. The importance  of improved  technology  as the basis for 
maintaining  or increasing  repayment  capacity  has been stressed  many  
times. Table 2 which  shows  the vastly increased  repayment  capacity  of 
an 850-gallon  cow herd at a stocking  rate of 1.2 as against  the more  
traditional  herd of 600-gallons  with a stocking  rate of 1.5/1.8.
Table 3
Importance  of good technical  performance —60 acre dairy farm
Stocking  rate600 gallons/cow
1.1 1.5850 gallons/cow  
l.I 1.5
Available  to meet  
repayments £3631 £1368 £7459 £3652
Borrowing  capacity  
(10 yr. term loan @ 18%) £16500 £6250 £34000 £16500
The break-even  yield which is necessary  to justify a certain  level of 
borrowing  will depend  on the particular  investment  to be made. Dairy  
farm investments  fall into three broad  categories  :
1. Cases  where  buildings  and milking  facilities  are adequate  and expan ­
sion requires  investment  only in additional  stock.
2. Cases  where  expansion  requires  investment  in stock and buildings,  but 
milking  facilities  are adequate  for the larger  herd.
3. Cases where expansion  requires  investment  not only in stock and 
buildings  but also in new milking  facilities  to accommodate  the ex­
panded  herd.
Table 4 gives an indication  of the average  borrowings  per additional  
cow added to the herd in each of these three situations  and gives the 
approximate  yield per cow necessary  to justify  the investment,  assuming  
all funds have to be borrowed.  It highlights  once again the importance  
of a high technical  performance,  particularly  where substantial  levels of 
fixed investment  have to be made.
Table 4
Expansion  from 30 to 50 cows
Investment  required Yield required
A. Cows only 500-550  gals.
B. Cows + extra
Accommodation 650-700  gals.
C. Cows -t- extra  
accommodation
New milking  parlour 800-850  gals.
93
(F) Some guidelines  on borrowing —the implications  
For planning
Priorities  must be carefully  considered  and the emphasis  must be on 
productive  investment.  For people  with limited  repayment  capacity,  cash 
generating  investments  must be given priority,  e.g. too much of the 
limited  repayment  capacity  of under-stocked  farms should  not be used 
in servicing  loans for drainage  which will not increase  cash income  for 
three/four  years. One needs to differentiate  between  drainage  of very 
wet land which will not increase  cash income  for three/four  years and 
the rehabilitation  of land from which a crop of barley  can be harvested  
within  a year.
Building  costs must also be examined.  Investment  in fixed assets  must  
be matched  to the immediate  cash return,  not the anticipated  cash return  
three/four  years hence. For example,  modification  of existing  milking  
facilities  as a first step would,  for many,  be a priority  over building  of a 
new facility. This philosophy  has much relevance  today to many 
developing  dairy  farms.
Technical  performance
The importance  of technical  performance  and its relationship  with 
various  levels of repayment  capacity  has been emphasised  already. In 
planning  investment  requirements  and estimating  repayment  capacity,  
farmers,  advisers  and indeed lending  agencies  should not budget  on a 
high performance,  simply  because  of a high level of commitment.  In 
these situations,  the evidence  suggests  that calculations  which are based 
on these types of assumptions  are unlikely  to occur.
Records/financial  control
The disciplines  of planning,  of keeping  farm accounts  to ensure that 
priorities  are right, to support  assumptions  about expected  levels of 
performance,  and to monitor  achievement  of targets, are becoming 
essential  components  in the proper  use of own and borrowed  funds.
It is important  that farmers  do not become  obsessed  with keeping  farm  
records  for taxation  purposes  alone. Farm records  are of greatest  value  
in helping  to improve  the technical  and financial  management of  the farm.
(G) Repayment  difficulties
It is useful to refer to the difficulties  which were created  by the sub­
stantial  drop in farming  incomes  last year. This drop in incomes  pre­
cipitated  liquidity  problems  on some farms. The cattle sector had a 
particularly  difficult  year and there were many  cases  where  requests  were  
made to have loan repayments  deferred.  Our Bank was constructive  in 
dealing  with these cases.
For a small minority  who have more deep rooted  problems  which  are 
now becoming  apparent,  I wish to emphasise  the Bank ’s commitment  to 
be constructive  namely,  taking  all feasible  steps  to ensure  the maintenance  
and indeed  expansion  of the farm business.  Our commitment  is to keep  
the agricultural  sector  moving  as rapidly  as possible  and each individual
94
2.
3.farm within  it. Some hard decisions  may have to be taken in a small 
percentage  of cases. The client  who has a problem  should  use the services 
of his Agricultural  Adviser/Consultant  to analyse the situation  and 
develop  strategies  to alleviate  the problem.
Options  open to the bank in a difficult  situation
1. Where  hard core has built-up  in the current  account : convert  this to 
a term loan, provided  the farm can meet existing  and new term loan 
repayments.
Restructure  term loan — some borrowings  may lend themselves  to 
being  put on a longer  term. However,  as pointed  out previously,  there  
is little benefit  in extending  the term of loan for longer  than ten years. 
In addition,  the desirability  of the lengthening  of the term of the loan 
would  depend  on the particular  project  and the use of the funds. 
Deferring  repayment  of principal  for one year —this would be a 
reasonable  strategy  provided  there was hope that the farmer  could  
return  to meeting  full principal  and interest  repayments.  However,  I 
would  point  out here that we are operating  within  a very tight guide ­
line from the Cenral Bank and deferred  repayments  of principal  
reduce  the capacity  of the total lending  system  to make  money  avail ­
able for new development  which  should  take place. However,  despite  
this implication  in some situations,  the strategy  is justified.
The one situation  which  must be avoided  at all costs by the Bank  and 
indeed  by the borrower  is that the borrowing  should  start to run away  
from the client,  i.e. that the borrower  cannot  meet interest,  and finds  
himself  paying  interest  on accumulating interest  in the following  years. 
This is a recipe  for disaster.
Options  open to the farmer
1. Improved  husbandry  : In many  cases we find that within  the limits  of 
the present  farming  programme  there is considerable  scope for in­
creasing  income  and repayment  capacity  through  improved  manage ­
ment,  e.g. on the dariy farm, improved  milk yield per cow, lower  feed 
costs, better  quality  silage.
2. A change  of system  : the disposal  of some drystock  assets,  substitution  
with tillage thus reducing  total overall  borrowings,  substitution  of 
cows for drystock,  substitution  of high yielding  cows for low yielding  
cows in the herd. All these strategies  can be considered.
In many cases, it is the last increment  of borrowing  that is causing  
most trouble.  The nature  of agriculture  itself being cyclical,  a good year 
would  put most accounts  back on the straight  and narrow  once again.
(H) Some  pitfalls  to be avoided  in using borrowed  finance
It is perhaps  now relevant  to deal with some of the pitfalls  which 
farmers  can encounter  in dealing  with the financing  of their operations  :
1. With repayment  difficulties,  faee up to problems  immediately  and 
seek help from Advisers/Consultants;  keep the Bank Manager  in­
formed.
95
2. In making  a case for concession,  provide  supporting  background  in­
formation.  Peope short of £10,000/£15,000  on budget,  looking  for 
concessions  in 1980 and 1981, should  be able to explain  or prove  that 
the flaws in the system  which  caused  the loss in the first place can be 
controlled.
3. Do not finance  fixed investment  out of cash flow. In recent years 
when cash flow was good and credit  not restricted  farmers  commonly  
embarked  on investment  in machinery,  farm buildings,  etc., only 
seeking  loan facilities  when the project  was well underway  and a 
shortage  of cash became  apparent.  This is a highly  dangerous  prac­
tice. Repayment  capacity  may not exist and current  credit  restrictions  
may not allow  the degree  of flexibility  which  existed  in the past.
4. Do not exceed  your loan approval  without  first consulting  with your  
lending  institution.  People  have commonly  exceeded  their permission,  
particularly  in the case of land purchase.  These applications  are 
examined  very critically  and in many cases, loans approved  are the 
very upper  limit of the repayment  capacity  of the client. There is no 
scope for exceeding  it. It is extremely  imprudent  to exceed  a loan 
approval  without  discussing  the matter  with your Manager.
5. There is concern  about easier credit. When some farmers  find it 
difficult  to obtain  credit from the major institutions,  which  examine  
applications  professionally,  they tend to utilise less disciplined  forms  
of credit. When repayment  capacity  is tight, resorting  to sources  of 
credit which do not subject  the total farming  operation  to critical  
analysis  is dangerous.  The total repayment  capacity  of the farm must  
always  be taken  into account.
However,  the responsibility  for his actions  is ultimately  the borrower ’s. 
Entering  into substantiai  financial  commitments  without  checking  on 
repayment  capacity  is likely to result in trouble. We have often been 
rescued  from careless  management  of our financial  affairs  in recent  years  
by windfall  gains which  are unlikely  to recur in the future.
(I) Conclusion
Despite  the current  uncertainties,  farmers  should  continue  to expand  
stock  numbers.  Investment  in stock,  e.g. breeding  heifers,  is considerably  
more attractive  now than in 1979. A reduction  in the price of heifers 
by over £200 is the equivalent  of approximately  6p-8p  per gallon,  a 
point  which  should  be borne in mind.
Smaller  farmers  have no option but to continue  to expand.  Current  
EEC proposals  are not policy and, in my view, are unlikely  to be 
accepted  in their present  form. Already  a considerable  part of the EEC ’s 
objective  in curbing  expansion  has been achieved  simply  by the confusion  
that has arisen from the proposals.
Farmers  should,  where feasible,  continue  to expand  stock numbers.  
Considerable  surplus  land and building  capacity  exist on many  
farms.
I am satisfied  that the future  of the milk producer  is fairly secure. By 
1983/84  1 doubt very much if it will be the problem  issue. Agriculture
96
is a cyclical  industry  and based on my experience  of our 20 years in 
dealing  with dairy farming,  I would  have no hesitation  in recommending  
to the young  farmer  to undertake  expansion  of a dairy  enterprise.
Credit  is likely to be tight for the economy  as a whole,  but agricul ­
ture will remain  a priority  area for additional  investment  funds.
There were considerable  difficulties  last year in spreading  available  
credit  evenly  throughout  the year. We hojje to ensure  an adequate  avail ­
ability  of funds for investment  of a productive  nature  right throughout  
the year. The size of this availability  will depend  on the Central  Bank  
guidelines.  Funds  should also be available  to meet ordinary,  seasonal  
and stocking  needs.
The emphasis  for the future must be on the improvement  of our 
technical  skills. More attention  must be devoted  to planning  financial  
aspects  of the farming  business.
Finally,  my view of the early  eighties  is one of cautious  optimism.  The 
climate  for investment  is considerably  more attractive  than that which 
faced many of our best farmers  when they initiated  dairy expansion  in 
the mid-sixties.  Overall,  I would  advise  young  farmers  in similar  situa ­
tions to ‘have a go’ and we as a Bank will support  them to the greatest  
fjossible  degree.
97
ABSTRACTS
TILLERING  IN GRASS  SWARDS
A. J. BRERETON  and O. T. CARTON  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
N ewtiller  production  and tiller deaths  occur  continuously  through  the 
season. For a brief period  shortly  before  flowering,  new tiller production  
ceases  and the rate of tiller death increases  sharply.  Shortly  afterwards  
new tiller production  rates increase  dramatically  for a short period  and 
the rate of tiller death declines.  The new tillers produced  immediately  
after flowering  do not emerge  until late in summer.
Data were presented  illustrating  these processes.  Data were also 
presented  relating  these processes  with flowering.  The implications  of the 
data for herbage  production  were discussed.
EVALUATION  OF THE MACHINE  WASHING  OF HERBAGE  
SAMPLES  CUT AT TWO HEIGHTS
G. B. NICHOLL
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunscny,  Co. Meath.
Herbage  samp'es  cut to ground  level may contain  soil contaminants  
which  can lead to analytical  errors. The washing  of herbage  samples  cut 
to either  ground  level or approximately  2.5 cm above ground  level was 
evaluated  using  a domestic  washing  machine  with a counter-sunk  agitator.  
Within  the two cutting  levels,  samples  were either  not washed,  or washed 
in cold water  for 2 minutes  with the excess  water  removed  by spinning. 
All samples  were dried, ground  and analysed  for percentage  ash and 
in vitro dry matter  digestibility  (DMD)  and organic  matter  digestibility  
(OMD).
Washed  samples  had a lower dry matter  (DM) content  and the same  
OMD as unwashed  samples.  Cutting  height  did not affect DM content  
of the samples,  but a difference  in favour  of cutting  above ground  level 
was found for OMD. Both organic  matter  (OM)  content  and DMD  were 
higher in washed  samples  but this depended  on cutting  height,  where 
larger differences  were generally  found in favour  of washed  compared  
with unwashed  samples  cut to ground  level. Samples  cut to 2.5 cm above 
ground  level were not adversely  affected  by washing.
It was concluded  that the machine  washing  of ground-level  cut herbage  
samples  was an effective  means  of removing  soil contamination  without  
adversely  affecting  analysis  of herbage  quality  components.
98
BREEDING  RYEGRASS  FOR IMPROVED  PRODUCTION  
AND PERSISTENCE
B. S. AHLOOWALIA
Plant Breeding  Department,  Agricultural  Institute,  Oak Park, Carlow.
Cultivars  of Italian  ryegrass  (Loliuin  multijloruni  Lam.) have earlier  
growth  in spring  and give higher  yield than those of perennial  ryegrass  
(Lolium  perenne  L.). They are, however,  less persistent  and have shorter  
life span than the perenials.  In order  to combine  the better  characters  of 
the two parents,  tetraploid  hybrids  were produced  by crossing  colchicine  
induced  polyploids  (2n=28,29,30)  of perennial  ryegrass  with the tetra ­
ploid cultivar  ‘Tetrone ’. One hundred  and fifteen populations  of such 
hybrids  were tested  for their yield and quality  in small plot (4.5 x 1.2 m^) 
trials and compared  with the cultivars  ‘Lemtal ’ (2x), ‘Tetila ’ (4x), ‘Tet­
rone ’ (4x), ‘Barmultra ’ (4x), ‘Sabalan ’ (4x) of Italian ryegrass  and a 
hybrid cultivar  ‘Sabel ’ (4x). The check cultivars  ‘Lemtal ’ and ‘Sabel ’ 
were replicated  three times  each; all the other  treatments  were unreplica ­
ted. The plots were sampled  during  1974- ’76 by cutting  four times each 
year.
The cultivars  ranked  as Lemtal  = Tetilia  > Barmultra  > Tetrone  
> Sabalan  = Sabel in their annual  dry matter  yield and digestible  dry 
matter  production,  the difference  between  the highest  and the lowest 
yielding  cultivars  being 10%.
The hybrids  (in their mean  performance)  produced  4% less annual  dry 
matter  (P>0.05),  and 5% less digestible  dry matter  (P>0.01)  and had 
1.3% lower  dry matter  content  than the mean of the six cultivars.  How ­
ever, the hybrid mean performance  was equal to that of the cultivars  
‘Sabalan ’ and ‘Sabel ’. The hybrid mean quality  i.e. digestibility,  crude  
protein  content,  crude protein  yield and seasonal  production  up to mid-  
June equalled  that of the cultivars.  Ten hybrids  were selected  on the 
basis of their individual  yield and quality  assessment,  which  out-yielded  
the parental  cultivar  ‘Tetrone ’ by 2-13%  in dry matter  yield.  Two hybrids  
out-yielded  the control  cultivar  ‘Lemtal ’ by 2% and 5% in dry matter  
and 3% and 9% in digestible  dry matter. Five of these hybrids  had 4 to 
14% more dry matter  up to mid-June  and 3-10% more protein  yield. 
These hybrids  rated between  6.5 and 7.0 for persistence  on 1-9 scale as 
compared  to 4.9 of ‘Lemtal ’, the cultivar  with the highest  persistence  
and 3.3 for Tetrone ’, the parental  Italian  cultivar.  The selected  hybrids  
headed  2-5 days later than cv. ‘Lemtal ’.
It is concluded  that hybridization  between  Italian  and perennial  rye­
grass at tetraploid  level is an efficient  technique  for combining  high yield  
and quality  with high persistence.
99
CULTIVAR  EVALUATION  USING  BEEF  CATTLE  
M. RYAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
Over three years,  6 ryegrass  cultivars  were compared  in terms  of carry ­
ing capacity,  DM yield,  DMD,  content  of live and dead material.
Vigor (Melle)  was 8% better in carrying  capacity  than the standard  
S24 while Sabrina  was only to 80% of S24. Vigor plots on botanical  
analysis  showed  higher tiller numbers  than the other grasses  with the 
highest  content  of ryegrass  in them. Ground  cover measurements  taken  
at the time of quadrat  sampling  for DM yield showed  that Vigor  had the 
highest  percent  ground  cover.  The tetraploid  Barpastra  had lower  values 
in November.
The regression  of total animal  LWG  on DM yield gave an R- value of 
74 for the equation  LWG (kg/ha)=284.3  -i- 0.07C6  DM (kg/ha).
In the silage evaluation  there was no significant  difference  in LWG  
between  the silages  made  from the 6 cultivars  which  were S24, Barpastra,  
Sabrina,  Vigor,  Cropper,  Oakpark.
EFFECTS  OF CATTLE  DUNG  PAT  ON PASTURE  DRY MATTER  
PRODUCTION  AND QUALITY
T. NOLAN,  J. F. CONNOLLY  and FRANCOISE  RONNEL  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Creagh,  Ballinrobe,  Co. Mayo.
Most studies  of mixed  grazing  have indicated  that the benefits  to pro­
duction  are associated  with the complementary  grazing  patterns  of sheep  
and cattle. This relates  especially  to sheep consuming  the high grass  
areas around  the cattle dung pats, which are refused  by cattle. Under  
cattle only grazing  approximately  10% of the area can be covered  by 
dung pats, 40% of the area can be under  high grass and between  35 and 
75% (depending  on season)  of available  herbage  DM can be in the high 
grass areas.
This study was devoted  to identifying  the characteristics  of the high 
grass areas. It was found that between  May Ilth and July 25th (which  
included  3 or 4 grazing  cycles)  these areas had two and a half times  
(excluding  dung pat areas) greater  pasture  growth  rate compared  with 
low grass areas. The area apparently  affected  (high grass with greener  
colour)  was about 0.2m “ on average  which was almost six times the 
average  dung pat area. The N P and K contents  in high grass DM were 
11% to 19% greater  than in low grass DM but the effect on N content  
was only for a short period. With average  contents  of 3.19% N, 0.50% 
P and 3.52%  K in high grass DM compared  with 3.08%  N, 0.44%  P and 
2.95% K in low grass DM it was found that 24% of N, 25% of P and 
26% of K in available  total DM can be concentrated  in one tenth of the 
area. Under  cattle only grazing,  ‘high grass ’ represents  10% to 18% of 
the area and about 36% of available  DM and could provide  37% of N, 
39% of P and nearly  40% of K.
High  grass  DM Ca content  was on average  14.5% lower  compared  with 
low grass. Mg levels  were similar  in both herbages.
100
THE EFFECT  OF WILTING  AND FORMIC  ACID  TREATMENT
ON SILAGE  INTAKE  AND MILK  PRODUCTION  BY COWS
J. J. MURPHY  and P. A. GLEESON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moore  park Research  Centre,  Ferinoy.
Co. Cork.
The effects  of wilting  herbage  up to 30% dry matter  before  ensiling  and 
the effects  of applying  85% formic  acid to direct cut material  on sub­
sequent  silage intake and milk yields by dairy cows were examined  in 
previous  experiments.  The effect of wilting  to higher  dry matter  levels 
or applying  acid to wilted herbage  before  ensiling  had not been investi ­
gated. Thus,  in this experiment  unwilted  and 36h wilted  silage both with 
and without  formic acid treatment  were studied together  with a 60h 
wilted silage.
An area of 17 ha of perennial  ryegrass  was divided  into five equal  
portions,  mown  and harvested  with a precision  chop forage  harvester  as 
follows;  (1) immediately  after mowing;  (2) immediately  after mowing  
treated  with 85% formic  acid (approx.  2.3 1/t); (3) following  36h wilting; 
(4) following  36h wilting  treated  with formic  acid (approx.  2.3 1/t); (5) 
following  60h wilting. These  silages  were fed ad libitum  over a six week  
period  to five groups  of 9 early calving  spring  cows selected  on calving  
date and blocked  on milk yield. They  were supplemented  with 5.0 kg/day  
of a 16% crude protein barley-soyabean  meal concentrate.  The pH, 
DM%  and resulting  animal  performance,  milk yield ,kg/day),  silage  DM 
intake  (kg/day)  and partial  feed conversion  efficiencies  (kg milk/ 1000 kg 
silage DM intake)  were as follows:  (1) 3.76, 21.2, 17.69, 1.76, 2009; (2) 
3.71,20.5,  17.98. 1.65, 2140;  (3) 3.97. 28.8 17.46.2.15,  1576; (4) 4.11, 31.4, 
16.92, 2.14, 1519; (5) 4.26, 39.2, 18.28, 1.99, 1806. All the silages  were 
well preserved.  Wilting  increased  the dry matter  content  from about  21% 
up to 30 and 39%. Milk yield on silage (4) was significantly  lower  than 
that on silage (5). There  were no significant  differences  between  the milk 
yields on the other silages. Wilting  significantly  increased  silage dry 
matter  intake  but since resulting  milk yields  were not significantly  chan ­
ged the partial  food conversion  efficiency  on these silages  was significantly 
lower  than on unwilted  material.  The application  of 85% formic  acid to 
the unwilted  or wilted herbage  did not improve  animal performance  
probably  because  in both cases  the control  silages  were well preserved.
101
THE EFFECT  OF WILTING  GRASS  SILAGE  AND MONENSIN  
SODIUM  ON THE INTAKE  AND PERFORMANCE  OF BEEF
CATTLE
R. W. J. STEEN
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough.
Co. Down.
In several  experiments  wilting  grass prior to ensilage  has increased  the 
dry matter  intake  of unsupplemented  silage but has not resulted  in any 
improvement  in animal  performance,  providing  a good fermentation  has 
been achieved  in the unwilted  material.  An experiment  has therefore  
been carried  out to examine  the effects  of wilting  on silage intake and 
animal  performance  and also to investigate  the interaction  between  wilt­
ing and the feed additive  monensin  sodium  when the silages  are supple ­
mented  with barley.
A perennial  ryegrass  dominant  sward  was cut in early August  and late 
September,  1979 after regrowth  intervals  of 8 and 7 weeks  respectively. 
Half of the material  was ensiled immediately  and the remainder  was 
wilted for 3-4 ways. At ensiling  the unwilted  and wilted herbages  con­
tained 160 and 266 g kg“^ of dry matter  respectively.  The silages  were 
offered  cd libimrn  to 48 aarolals-cross  cattle (32 steers and 16 heifers,  
mean initial fasted liveweight  350 kg) for a period  of 21 weeks. Twelve 
of the 24 animals  on each silage  treatment  received  a supplement  of 2.2 
kg of fortified  barley  per head per day while the other 12 received  the 
same supplement  plus 200 mg of monensin  sodium  per head per day. 
Silage dry matter  intake,  animal  liveweight  gain and carcase  gain data 
were presented.
A NOVEL  LABORATORY  APPROACH  TO STUDY  SILAGE
D. SEALE,  C. M. QUINN,  P. A. WHITTAKER  and R. K. WILSON  
Departments  of Biology  and Chemistry,  St. Patrick ’s College,  Maynooth.
The conservation  of grass  for winter  feed is a major  comjxment  of Irish 
agriculture.  About 12 x 10' tonnes are made annualyy.  Laboratory  
analyses  suggest  that about one third or 4 x 10' tonnes  are poorly  pre­
served. The reasons  for this are obscure.
The silage  process  is a very complex  fermentation.  In a study  involving 
152 grass cuts each ensiled  in triplicate  relationships  between  grass con­
stituents  (dry matter,  water soluble  carbohydrate,  glucose,  fructose  and 
sucrose  levels, nitrate,  buffer capacity  and fibre contents)  were poorly  
related  to final silage pH, with “r” values  all less than 0.4.
It is proposed  to study the microbiological  and chemical  changes  dur­
ing silage fermentation  using a novel approach.  Silage  will be made in a 
70 1 Mecaplex  “glovebox ” which  will allow control  of atmosphere,  con­
tinuous  sampling  through  entry ports and study of a larger  sample.  It is 
considered  that this approach  offers advantages  over the usual test-tube  
“batch ” system.
102
RED CLOVER  VERSUS  RYEGRASS  SILAGE  AS A SOURCE  OF 
WINTER  FEED  FOR STORE  LAMBS
S. FITZGERALD
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Three swards  namely,  a ryegrass  sward  (Agresso/Spirit),  a mixed  Red 
Clover/ryegrass  sward and a pure red clover  sward (Hungaropoly)  were 
established  in 1976 and cut twice a year over a period  of three years  for 
silage and fed to store lambs  ad libitum. The swards  were grazed  by 
weaned  lambs  in autumn  of 1977 & 1978. The ryegrass  sward received 
65-100  kg N/ha per cut while the red clover  sward received  none and 
the mixed sward received  65 kg N/cut  only in the third year due to its 
low clover  content  at that stage.
Silage dry matter  yields  for all three swards  averaged  over the three  
years for both cuts were 9.2, 8.7 and 7.8 tonnes DM/ha/year  for the 
ryegrass,  mixed and red clover  swards  respectively.
Results  show that red clover  silage when properly  preserved  can be a 
very useful source of winter  feed when fed to store lambs,  resulting  in 
high intakes  e.g. 2.5% - 3.0% of body weight  and producing  satisfactory  
lamb gains on silage alone. Ryegrass  silage would  require  supplementa ­
tion with 300-450  g barley/lamb/day  to achieve  a similar  level of per­
formance.  While it has a shorter  growing  season and consequently  a 
lower yield than ryegrass,  a significant  saving  in N fertiliser  and energy  
conservation  is achieved.  In a mixed sward the contribution  from red 
clover  can be substantial,  in terms  of high intakes  and lower  N fertiliser  
requirements  without  any significant  reduction  in yield.
STUDIES  ON THE MODE  OF ACTION  OF TBA AND RAL  
IMPLANTS  IN GROWING  CASTRATE  MALE  CATTLE
T. W. GRIFFITHS
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.
Two metabolism  and slaughter  experiments  using  24 Friesian  castrated  
male cattle were carried  out to investigate  the mode of action of the 
combined  implants  of Trenbolone  acetate  (TBA)  and Resorcylic  acid 
lactone  (RAL)  over the weight  range  250-400  kg liveweight.  Control  and 
implanted  (x 2) animals  were pair-fed  diets of differing  protein and 
energy levels. Responses  to implantation  were (kg/day  LWG):  Low 
protein  diets, 0.21; Normal  protein  diets, 0.24; Medium  energy  levels, 
0.25; High energy  levels,  0.34. Nitrogen  retention  was improved  in im­
planted  animals  in both experiments.  Implanted  animals  also gave lower  
fat and higher  meat yields  and chemical  analysis  of the edible  portion  of 
the carcass  showed  significantly  more water  and protein  and less fat.
These  results  are consistent  with the view that implantation  with TBA  
and RAL modifies  the metabolism  of the animal in the direction  of 
increased  protein  synthesis  and decreased  fat deposition.
103
PELVIC  SIZE AND SHAPE  IN BEEF  AND DAIRY  BREEDS
OF COWS  
O. H. LANGLEY
The Af’ricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
M. )J. DRENNAN
The Agricultural  Institute.  Grange.  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
D. HARRINGTON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Sandy  mount,  Dublin  4.
In Ireland  a high proportion  of calves  destined  for the beef herd come 
from cows in daily herds. With increasing  emphasis  on beef quality  some  
of these calves  will be sired by beef bulls. This is known  to cause some  
increase  in calving  difficulty,  and so it is important  to understand  more  
clearly  the factors which  contribute  to this increase.  An experiment  being 
carried  out at Grange  comparing  Friesian  cows,  Hereford  Friesian  crosses 
and Charolais  Friesian  crosses  as mothers  for single suckled  beef calves 
provided  an opportunity  to study the ease of calving  in these breeds. In 
the first year all first calf heifers  were mated  to a Limousin  bull; in the 
second  year one Simmental  was used on all second  calving  animals  and 
in the third another  Simmental  bull was used. In the month prior to 
calving  pelvic measurements  were made which recorded  the height  and 
the width of the internal  pelvic  opening.  The ease of calving  was then 
monitored  according  to the scale 1 for easy calving,  2 for slight  assistance,  
3 for difficult  calving  and 4 for very difficult  calving.
Both pelvic  height  and pelvic  width increased  in each breed from first 
calving  to second  calving  and from second  to third calving.  Whereas  the 
Charolais  had the highest  pelvic dimensions  in all years, the Hereford  
crosses  had the second  highest  pelvic  dimensions,  and the Friesians  had 
the least high pelvic dimensions  in all years. In contrast,  the Friesians  
had the greatest  pelvic  width  on average  in each year. The Charolais  had 
the second  widest  pelvis  and the Herefords  the least wide pelvis in each 
year. Thus, the ratio of the height to width varied between  breeds  of 
dam. The jDelvic height  divided  by pelvic  width  in the Friesians  always 
gave a ratio of less than 1 indicating  a pelvis  which  was slightly  wider  
that it was high, whereas  in both the Charolais  crosses  and Hereford  
crosses  the ratio of height  to width  was 1.1 in each year.
The ease of calving  is most easily  assessed  by investigating  the relation ­
ship between  the calf size and the pelvic  area. The most effective  way of 
achieving  this is to obtain  the ratio of the calf weight  compared  to the 
pelvic area (which  is obtained  by multiplying  the pelvic height by the 
pelvic  width). When  this ratio is greater  than 0.14 calving  is likely  to be 
more difficult.  When all animals  with a ratio of greater  than 0.14 were 
examined  it was found  that less than 50% of the Charolais  and Hereford  
cows had difficulty  calving,  whereas  more than 50% of the Friesian  cows  
had difficult  calving. It might be suggested  therefore  that the differ ­
ence in pelvic  shape may indicate  breed differences,  and that the Friesian  
calves  sired by Friesian  bulls might  be expected  to be a different  shape 
than calves sired by beef bulls. If this hypothesis  is correct  it might  
partially  explain  why greater  difficulty  was experienced  in Friesian  cows  
bred 'to beef bulls. ^ :
104
SUPEROVULATION  IN THE COW
M. P. BOLAND,  L. G. KENNEDY,  T. F. CROSBY  and I GORDON
U.C.D.,  Department  of Agriculture,  Lyons Estate,  Newcastle,
Co. Dublin.
The success  of egg transfer  in the cow depends  on a predictable  supply 
of fertilized  eggs for transfer.  PMSG  has normally  been used for super ­
ovulation,  but results  have been variable.  A crude  horse pituitary  extract  
(HAP)  has been used with success  for superovulation  in the sheep  in this 
laboratory.
In this study PMSG  has been compared  with HAP for superovulation.  
Forty-four  heifers  were given a single i/m injection  of 2,5C)0 i.u. PMSG  
during  the luteal phase of the cycle (days 8-12) and 39 heifers  received 
300 mg HAP  as a single  i/m injection  during  the same period.  Forty-eight  
hours  later animals  were injected  with 500 A^g Cloprostenol.  Donors  were 
inseminated  twice at oestrus  and egg recovery  attempted  3-8 days post 
oestrus. Mean ovulation  rates of 16.5 + 9.1 and 12.7 ± 10.6 were found  
for PMSG  and HAP,  and 7.5 and 5.1 fertilized  eggs respectively.
Slightly  higher  ovulation  rates and numbers  of eggs were found  in the 
summer  months. Extending  the interval  from PMSG  to prostaglandin  
injection  from two to three days increased  the ovluation  rate (16.3 vs. 
18.7) and number  of fertilized  eggs (7.9 vs. 9.0).
105
STUDIES  RELATED  TO EGG TRANSFER  IN SHEEP  
T. F. CROSBY,  M. P. BOLAND, A. A. AL-KAMALI  and I. GORDON
U.C.D.,  Department  off Agriculture,  Lyons  Estate,  Newcastle  P.O.,
Co. Dublin.
In the first of three experiments  39 Texel  ewes were heat synchronised  
with intravagina  sponge  pessaries  (30 mg FGA)  for 12 days. 200 mg/ewe  
of horse anterior  pituitary  extract  (HAP)  was administered  to induce  
superovulation.  The ewes were allocated  to one of three treatment  reg­
imes (a) 50 mg HAP on each of 4 days, (b) 100 mg HAP on each of 2 
days, (c) mg HAP as a single dose. The animals  were bred by uterine  
insemination  at 36-48  hrs. Mean  ovulation  rates of 15.0, 12.6 and 9.7 and 
egg recovery  rates of 6.8, 5.5 and 2.2 respectively  were obtained.  The 
percentage  of eggs fertilised  was 47.7, 56.3 and 75.0 respectively  and was 
significantly  different  between  treatments.  The fertilised  eggs were trans ­
ferred  to recipient  ewes and by 7 weeks  66% had not repeated.
In the second  experiment  27 crossbred  ewes were used to evaluate  the 
influence  of method  of synchronisation  on superovulation  and recovery  of 
fertilised  eggs. The four treatments  employed  were (a) 12 day intravag-  
inal sponge,  (b) 12 daily progesterone  injections,  (c) 12 day sponge  sup­
plemented  with four daily progesterone  injections,  (d) natural  cycle.  HAP  
was administered  over a 4 day period and breeding  was by uterine  
insemination  using pooled  semen.  Mean ovulation  rates of 10.6, 8.9, 8.9 
and 18.2 respectively  were recorded  and 85.7%,  76.2%,  75.0%  and 51.9%  
of eggs recovered  were fertilised.
In the third trial, 21 cull ewes were used to compare  uterine  insemina ­
tion with repeated  cervical  insemination  on egg recovery  and fertilisation.  
Pooled  semen  from Texel rams was used in breeding.  Significant  differ ­
ences were found in the percentage  of eggs recovered  (46.0%  v 78.9%)  
and in the percentage  of eggs fertilised  (77.3%  v 55.3%).
106
SYNCHRONIZATION  OF OESTRUS  AND A.I. IN GILTS
M. P. BOLAND,  J. CRAIG  and D. L. KELLEHER
U.C.D.,  Department  of Agriculture,  Lyons Estate,  Newcastle,
Co. Dublin.
A practical  method  of controlling  the cycle in the gilt would be of 
considerable  economic  importance.  In this trial a new synthetie  proges ­
tagen (Regumate)  was evaluated  as an oral synchronization  agent. Fifty-  
eight cyelic  gilts were fed one of three levels  (0, 15, 20 mg) daily for 18 
days. At the termination  of treatment,  half the animals  in each group  
received  either  0 or 500 i.u. PMSG. Gilts were bred at the first oestrus  
using one of three methods : (a) natural  service,  (b) A.I., (c) A.I. and 3 
minute  teasing  with a sterile  boar after A.I. Progestagen  treatment  had a 
significant  effect (P<0.05)  on the interval  to heat. Overall  PMSG  treat ­
ment had no influence  on the interval  to oestrus  onset.
A slightly  higher but non-significant  increase  in ovulation  rate was 
observed  with progestagen  treatment  and with PMSG.  The proportion  of 
gilts yielding  fertilized  eggs was 89%, 74%, 56% for nil, 15 mg and 20 
mg respeetively.
Results  would  indicate  that regumate  can be effective  a sa synchroniza ­
tion agent.
107
FERTILIZATION  AND EMBYRO  LOSS FOLLOWING  
ARTIFICIAL  INSEMINATION  IN THE COW
M. G. DISKIN  and J. M. SREENAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Fertilization  rate in the cow following  the use of natural  service  or 
artificial  insemination  using fresh extended  semen  is normally  estimated  
at about  90%. Calving  rates,  however,  are reported  to be closer  to 50%.  
There are few reports  on the timing  of embryonic  mortality  in the cow. 
A total of 256 beef heifers  was used in two experiments  to establish  
fertilization  and subsequent  embryonic  survival  rates following  the use 
of frozen-thawed  semen.  Fertilization  rate was estimated  at 90%. Embryo  
survival  rates were high (93%) up to and including  Day 8 but were  
reduced  at Days 12 (56%; P<0.001,  16 (66%; P<0.001)  and 42 (58%;  
P<0.001).  This study indicates  that fertilization  failure accounted  for 
10% of overall  reproductive  failure  while embryo  death accounted  for 
30%. The major portion  of this embryo  death occurred  between  Days 
8 and 16.
A further  146 heifers  were used in two experiments  to study  the effects  
of progesterone  supplementation  (100 mg daily)  or HCG administration  
(1500 i.u. daily) during  the luteal phase on CL weight and number,  
circulating  progesterone  levels and embryonic  survival. Progesterone  
supplementation  only slightly  increased  progesterone  level (P>0.10)  and 
had little effect on luteal tissue weights  (P>0.10).  HCG administration  
induced  accessory  CL numbers  (Mean ± SE, 2.18 ± 0.13) and weight 
(P<0.001)  and increased  progesterone  level (P<0.05).  Pooled  embryo  
survival  rates for control,  progesterone  and HCG  groups  were 54%,  71% 
and 64% respectively.  In a further  experiment  with 141 dairy cows,  
calving  rates of 65%, 73% and 57% were recorded  for similar  control,  
progesterone  and HCG treatments,  respectively.
108
THE DELETERIOUS  EEFECT  OF ENVIRONMENTAL
CONTAMINATION  ON FERTILITY  IN THE DAIRY  HERD
P. J. HARTIGAN
Physiology  Department,  Trinity  College,  Dublin.
It is well-recognised  that contamination  of the environment  of pregnant  
cows is a crucial  factor in the pathogenesis  of bovine  abortion.  Conse ­
quently,  control  measures  are designed  to break the ‘cycle of infection ’, 
largely  by secregation  of infected  animals,  disinfection  and vaccination.  
By contrast,  little attention  has been given to the possibility  that environ ­
mental  contamination  may lead to colonization  of the genital  tract of the 
non-pregnant  cow by pathogenic  microorganisms  with deleterious  effects  
on fertility.
In this communication  two episodes  are described  which indicate  that 
this does occur,  at least when the environment  is very heavily  contamina ­
ted. In one herd, infertility  in six cows was associated  with chronic  
inflammatory  lesions  in the reproductive  tract  due to Aspergillus  fumigatus.  
Transfer  of one affected  animal  to a new location  was followed  by elim­
ination  of the infection  and resolution  of the lesions. In another  herd,  
there  was massive  contamination  of the environment  by Corynebacterium  
pyogenes  in discharges  from purulent  sinusitis  in a number  of recently  
dehorned  cows. The organism  invaded  the reproductive  tract causing  
severe  inflammatory  lesions  and a marked  reduction  in herd fertility.
Segregation  of cows with purulent  discharges  and disinfection  should  
be an integral  part of any programme  of management  for improved  
fertility.
109
SILAGE  EFFLUENT  AS A PIG FEED
D. C. PATTERSON  and N. WALKER
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  
Co. Down,  Northern  Ireland.
Silage  effluent  is normally  an unavoidable  by-product  of ensiling  grass  
in our climate.  The quantity  of effluent  from a silo is primarily  deter ­
mined by the quantity  of grass and its dry matter  content  but some  
additives  can have an effect on effluent  yield. Collection  and storage  of 
silage effluent  can be accomplished  at low capital  cost and the material  
normally  of pH 3.8-4.2  can be preserved  with the addition  of formalin  
(3 1/1000  1 effluent)  in open tanks or by ensuring  anaerobic  conditions  
of storage.
In feeding  experiments  carried  out with pigs, effluent  was substituted  
on a dry matter  basis for 150 g/kg of a baconer  diet. The production  
results  obtained  in five experiments  involving  almost  400 animals  indicate  
that the digestible  energy : protein  ratio of effluent  and the amino acid 
balance  meet approximately  the nutrient  requirements  of growing  pigs. 
In five digestibility  studies  it was found that the mean digestible  energy 
content  of effluent  was 16.5 MJ/kg  organic  matter. Voluntary  intake  
studies  have shown  that intake  of effluent  dry matter  can be depressed  
when  the dry matter  content  is less than 400 g/kg. Although  some min­
erals in effluent  can exceed  the requirements  of the pig, there was no 
depression  in animal performance  when effluent  was given as a sole 
source  of liquid.
Silage  effluent  has been used successfully  in feeding  trials on commer ­
cial farms. Feeding  silage effluent  can increase  the fattener ’s margin  by 
over £3 per pig and since enough  silage effluent  is produced  in Northern  
Ireland  to feed all of the 1.2 x 10“ baconers  produced,  the potential  sav­
ing for the region  approaches  £M4.
no
PROBLEMS  ASSOCIATED  WITH  FEEDING  WHEY  AND  
DELACTOSED  WHEY  TO PIGS
T. J. HANRAHAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Whey and delactosed  whey are good sources  of nutrients  for pigs. 
Their  physical  composition  6.5% and 30% total solids  respectively  means  
that they are of little interest  to the provender  milling  trade.
When transferred  to pig farms the storage  life of whey can be very 
short especially  in unclean  tanks during  the summer  months.  Microbial  
degradation  by streptococci,  Clostridia  and yeasts  can release  50% of the 
molecular  weight  of lactose  as carbon  dioxide.  An experiment  at Moore ­
park showed  that poorly  stored whey contained  less than 50% of the 
nutrient  value of fresh whey.
Feeding  experiments  with whey demonstrated  that it has a depressing  
effect on appetite  as the quantity  fed increased  from 25% to 33%. Pigs 
on the higher level consumed  10% less feed (P<0.01).  There was no 
effect on feed conversion  efficiency  (P>0.05).  This result cannot  be 
attributed  to a higher  liquid intake since a similar  effect was observed  
when dried whey or whey concentrate  was used.
A number  of scientific  papers  have suggested  that the salt content  of 
whey can suppress  appetite.  Experiments  with delactosed  whey which  
has twice the salt content  of whey substantiate  this viewpoint.  Adding  
25% delactosed  whey  to the diet of individually  fed pigs suppressed  feed 
intake by 15% (P<0.01).  With group feeding  (10 pigs/pen)  a similar  
diet resulted  in 7 out of 80 pigs dying  from salt poisoning.  In the dietary  
regime,  these pigs were allowed  3.5 kg water  per kg of meal equivalent.  
The Na+Cl  content  of the diet was 1.95%. A similar  feeding  regime  did 
not cause mortality  in individually  fed pigs or in group  fed pigs with an 
ad libitum  water supply.
Ill
^ iti . ■: ' '''^■,:v:i;;
Irish Grassland 
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal  
1980
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol 15 1980
edited  by 
Sean Flanagan
Printed  by Lithographic  Universal,  Dargle  Vale, Bray
ICI FERTILISER  
PAYS
FOR ITSELF  
TIME  AND  
TIME  AGAIN
You can be confident  that 
having  invested  your 
money  in the right 
fertiliser  you will get results.
ICI put the right  balance  of 
Phosphate,  Potash  and Nitrogen  
into every  granule  in every  
bag you buy.
It's this consistency  which  helps  
give an even spread,and plenty  of good grass  for 
grazing  or silage.
Use ICI fertilisers  as part of 
your farming  system.
You'll  see the difference  in 
liveweight  gain or extra  
gallons  of milk.
So buy the fertiliser that pays 
for itself. Buy ICI.
W. Sheehan 
T. Nolan
B. Kilkenny  
W. Hartley  
M. G. Keane
P. O. Ryan
M. Ryan
C. J. Wilcox
S. J. Amies
B. Cunningham  
P. Mac CannaPage
15CONTENTS
Energy requirements  of pregnant  and 
lactating  ewes
Grazing  management  for mid-season  
lamb production
Sheep  production —components  of success 21
Sheep  and cattle on Wexford  farms  39
Factors  affecting  carcase  composition  in 
beef cattle  43
Beef carcase  classification  and market  
requirements  53
Use of grass varieties  in increasing  pro­
duction  of beef 61
A system  of low cost milk production  in 
the United  Kingdom  69
Economics  of low and high cost dairying  
systems  75
Brucellosis —strategy  for the farmer  79
Financing  the dairy industry  in the future 85
Abstracts  98
COUNCIL  1980/1981
President : J. Dardis  
Vice-President : P. Gleeson
Council  Members :
M. Barlow,  S. Brophy,  D. Browne,  D. Cashman,  M. Drennan,  D. Fay, 
V. Flynn,  J. Jennings,  J. Leeson,  P. MacCanna,  P. McFeely,  W. Murphy,  
J. O’Grady,  P. O’Keeffe,  M. Ward.
Hon. Secretary  / Treasurer  :
Dr. S. P. Flanagan,
Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam, Co. Galway.
3
tt’strue  what  they  say^ in Irdand  the  grass  egreen^
When  it comes  to the quality  of<lairy  pasture,  there ’s no 
other  country  in Europe  that  Irish  farmers  need  envy.  Irish 
pasture  land,  Irish  grass,  is ideal  for the production  of the milk 
from  which  the  world ’s best  dairy  products  are made.
As a result,  Irish  dairy  products  are  bought  and enjoyed  
the  world  over-many  of them  bearing  the world-famous  
Kerrygold  label.  They  accountfor  one-sixth  of  our  total  exports-  
an impressive  £600  million  plus-and  because  the import  
content  is low,  the economic  contribution  is huge.
But  ourworld-wide  marketis  steadily  increasingand  so 
we must  mairttain-and  increase-our  productivity  to match  that 
demand.
And  if we do, that  expansion  will  be matched  by sales;  
sales  of Irish  butter,  cream,  powders,  cheese  and other  dairy 
products.
So remember,  we have  the  land,  we have  the climate,  we 
have  the people.
Letis  make  the most  of them.B
miSH  DiVIRy  BQUtD
Energy  Requirements  of Pregnant  
and Lactating  Ewes
W. SHEEHAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Creagh,  Ballinrobe,  Co. Mayo.
The yield of lambs  from a breeding  flock is one of the principal  factors  
determining  the success  of a sheep  production  system.  The feeding  of the 
ewe during  the main phases  of its production  has an inevitable  bearing  
on her lambs.  The bodyweight  and nutritional  status  of the ewe at mating  
will have an important  bearing  on the number  of lambs  born to each ewe. 
The level of nutrition  during early pregnancy  may effect the level of 
embryo  mortality.  The later stages of pregnancy  are vitally influenced 
by maternal  nutrition  and the ewe becomes  progressively  more vulnerable  
to nutritional  stress  as pregnancy  proceeds.  Birthweights  of the lambs  and 
their subsequent  viability  are affected  by the level of nutrition  in the latter  
part of pregnancy.  High birthweights  as a result of good feeding  gives  
the lambs an initial weight  advantage  which,  other things being equal,  
will be maintained  till weaning.  Conditions  favouring  adequate  ewe 
nutrition  will also favour  milk yie’d and consequently  lamb growth  rates  
in early  life.
The critical requirements  of ewes during late pregnancy  and early  
lactation  are described  at some length in this paper. But firstly,  let us 
summarise  briefly the importance  of nutrition  prior to mating  and ifi 
early pregnancy.
Nutrition  prior  to mating
The practice  of improving  the nutrition  of the ewe prior to mating  is 
commonly  called ‘flushing ’. While the practice  has been widely  adopted  
in most of the sheep producing  countries,  surprisingly  little is known  of 
how its influence  is exerted.  Because  of the lack of a clear definition  of 
what constitutes  flushing  the methods  used by different  research  workers  
have varied greatly  and as a result the available  evidence  is somewhat  
conflicting.
Despite  the difficulty  in interpreting  the results  of the literature  there is 
no doubt  that, under certain conditions,  flushing  will result  in an increased  
lambing  rate due principally  to an increased  twinning  rate. There also 
appears  to be good agreement  that the observed  differences  in fertility  
are due to the increased  incidence  of multiple  ovulations  rather  than to a 
decrease  in the number  of barren  ewes. The effect  of ewe body condition  
at mating  on ovulation  rate is shown  in Table 1.
It is widely  accepted  that liveweight  per se of the ewe at mating  has an 
important  effect on fertility. Experiments  involving  different  planes  of 
nutrition  from weaning  to 3 weeks after mating have shown higher
Table I
Effect  of ewe body condition  at mating  on percentage  of ewes with 0-2 ovulations*
No. of ovulationsBody condition
Good Poor
0 0 12
1 50 88
2 50 0
*Gunn,  R. G., Doney,  J. M. and Russel,  A. J. F. J. agric. Sci., Camb.  79, 19-25,  
1972.
twinning  rates of approximately  6% for each 4.5 kg increase  in liveweight 
of the ewe. However,  claims  have also been made for a specific  flushing 
effect. In ewes of the same liveweight  at mating,  those which  are gaining  
weight  will have more twins  than those maintaining  weight  which  in turn 
will have more twins  than those losing  weight. More recently,  however,  
experiments  have shown  that ovulation  rate was not depressed  by poor  
nutrition  prior to mating.
In summary  there is good evidence  to suggest that high levels of 
fertility  are obtained  from ewes in which  the level of nutrient  intake is 
high,  from ewes gaining  in weight  if originally  in moderate  body  condition  
and from ewes in good condition  at mating  even though  they may be 
losing  weight.
Nutrition  in early pregnancy
Experimental  evidence  indicates  that most embryo  deaths  occur in the 
first 3-4 weeks  of pregnancy.  TTiis is the period  in which  the developing  
embryo  becomes  attached  to the wall of the uterus by the developing  
placenta.  Both high and low levels  of nutrition  immediately  after mating  
have been shown  to cause embryonic  mortality.  The apparent  disparity  
between  research  findings  may possibly  be due to the levels of nutrition  
imposed.  Plane  of nutrition  can mean  different  things  to different  people. 
It would appear,  therefore,  that in the absence  of precise  experimental  
data the level of feeding  should  not be altered  greatly  during  the first 3-4 
weeks  after mating.
The growth  rate of the foetus  proceeds  slowly  during  early pregnancy  
and by the end of the third month  the weight  of the uterus  and its con­
tents is only about one quarter  of the ultimate  uterine  weight before  
parturition.  Consequently  nutrient  demands  during  this period are not 
critical  but severe underfeeding  is to be avoided  since it can adversely  
affect lamb development  even when nutrition  is adequate  in late preg­
nancy. A modest  loss in liveweight  of about  6-7% in fat ewes during  this
♦Thompson,  W. and Aitken,  S. C. (1959.  Sheep Bur. Anim.  Nutr. Aberdeen.  Tech.
Commun.  No. 20.
p)eriod  will have no detrimental  effect  on ewe performance.  Furthermore,  
It is well reco^ised  that, if the feed intake  of fat ewes is for any reason  
suddenly  restricted  in late pregnancy,  these animals  are more susceptible  
to disorders  such as pregnancy  toxaemia  than ewes in a leaner body  
condition.
Nutrition  in late pregnancy
Approximately  75% of foetal  growth  occurs  during  the final 6-8 weeks  
of pregnancy  as shown  in Table  2. This results  in a considerable  increase  
in the ewes ’ requirements  for nutrients  and particularly  for energy.
Table 2
Mean  liveweight  increase  (kg) of ewes during  pregnancy*
Ewes with singles Ewes with twins
Total
L.W.G.Gain  of 
Gravid  UterusTotal
L.W.G.Gain  of 
Gravid  Uterus
Mating  to 28 days 0.77 0.09 2.82 0.14
Mating  to 56 days 3.10 0.19 5.86 1.64
Mating  to 84 days — — 9.04 4.18
Mating  to 112 days 10.14 4.27 15.32 8.86
Mating  to 140 days 16.36 11.36 22.00 20.23
♦Wallace,  L. R. .J. agric .Sci., Camb.  38, 93-153,  1948.
In the pregnant  ewe the foetus  obtains  its energy  from maternal  glucose 
mainly  from propionic  acid from ingested  nutrients.  The foetal demand  
for glucose  is high and if the proportion  of dietary  energy  available  as 
glucose  is insufficient  to meet this demand  then in order to maintain  
glucose  levels the ewe begins  to draw on her own body reserves.  The 
degree  to which  she does this depends  on (1) nutrient  intake,  (2) the stage 
of pregnancy  and (3) the weight  of foetus(es)  she is carrying.  Inadequacy  
of feed during  late pregnancy  adversely  affects lamb birthweights  and 
chances  of survival  and may lead to losses of ewes. The reaction  to 
undernutrition  during  late pregnancy  may result  in two situations.  Firstly  
the growth  rate of the foetus(es)  may be reduced.  This wou'd  appear  to 
be the most comon  reaction  resulting  in poor lamb birthweights,  reduced  
Vigour  and high mortality.  The second  reaction  may be that foetal  growth  
rate continues  at the expense  of maternal  tissue and thus exposing  the 
ewe to pregnancy  toxaemia.
Various  estimates  of requirements  of ewes in late pregnancy  are avail ­
able. For example,  it is estimated  that to prevent  loss of maternal  weight  
during  late pregnancy  a ewe wou'd need to consume  2-3 times as much  
feed as a non-pregnant  animal. In feeding  practice,  in order  to achieve 
such intakes  it would  be necessary  to supplement  the basic roughage  diet
with liberal quantities  of cereals. While cereal prices remain  at their  
present  levels this will result in a considerable  addition  to production  
costs and will therefore  affect  the profitability  of the enterprise.
Ideally  the ewe shou'd  gain sufficient  weight  during  late pregnancy  to 
allow optimum  development  of the reproductive  tract and of the udder  
without  loss of weight  in other tissues. While this condition  may be of 
great importance  in systems  such as those based on accelerated  rates of 
reproduction,  the aim of a more practical  production  system  might  be to 
allow ewes to mobilize  some of their own body reserves  to meet any 
deficit  in her intake. Provided  the resulting  loss in maternal  weight  is not 
too severe it will be quickly  recovered  on spring pasture  during  the 
subsequent  lactation.
We have recently  concluded  a series of studies  at Creagh  to examine  
the effects of a range of energy levels during late pregnancy  on the 
reproductive  performance  of the ewe, the aim being to determine  the 
minimum  amount  of food required  by the ewe during  late pregnancy  
consistent  with good reproductive  performance.  In view of the fact that 
roughages  make up the greater  proportion  of the ewes ’ diet during  preg­
nancy  and because  of the increasing  use of silage  as a feed for sheep,  an 
exjjeriment  was also carried  out to study the adequacy  of silages of 
varying  digestibilities  in terms  of meeting  ewe requirements.  In a further  
experiment  we studied  the effects  of energy  supplementation  of silage in 
late pregnancy  on ewe performance.
For the purpose  of this paper I have selected  one experiment  to 
illustrate  our findings  on the energy  requirements  of twin bearing  eweS  
in late pregnancy.  The energy levels studied  together  with the birth ­
weights  of the lambs and the bodyweight  changes  of the ewes are given  
in Table 3.
Table 3
Mean  daily nutrient  intakes  during  late pregnancy  and iamb birthweights  and 
ewe bodyweight  changes
Treatment
Low Medium High
Dry matter  (g) 608 1004 1256
Metabolisable  energy  (Mj) 6.5 9.8 11.9
Birthweight  (kg) 4.0 4.6 4.4
Ewes :
Liveweight  gain 1.3 10.5 12.8
Net bodyweight  change -10.2 -3.7 -0.8
In these experiments  we used a pelleted  roughage-concentrate  diet. The 
results  show that lamb birthweights  were highest  on the medium  energy 
level of 9.8 MJ ME (0.42 MJ/kg  W*’ ’^’). Rather  curiously  there was no 
significant  difference  in birthweights  between  the extreme  low and high
levels of nergy. While this might suggest  that the energy  requirements  
may be closer  to the lower  level this is clearly  not so when lamb  mortality  
(31, 12 and 10% of the Low, Medium  and High energy  levels respec ­
tively)  and ewe bodyweight  changes  are considered.
In farming  practice  and particularly  in the extensive  situation  it is 
difficult  to judge whether  the level of feeding  is excessive  or inadequate.  
Ewe bodyweight  changes,  despite  the limitation  of not knowing  the num ­
ber of foetuses  the ewe is carrying,  will serve as a useful guide to 
nutritional  adequacy.  In a review  of the literature  on the effect  of plane  
of nutrition  during  pregnancy  on reproduction,  Thompson  and Aitken*  
adopted  absolute  gain or loss of bodyweight  of the ewe as the major  
criterion  of plane of nutrition.  They concluded  that weight  increases  less 
than the weight of the products  of conception  are still adequate  for 
satisfactory  reproductive  performance.  They suggested  that a liveweight 
gain of 6.4 kg during  the final 8 weeks  of pregnancy  is sufficient  for a ewe 
carrying  singles. These weight  changes  apply to ewes of about 60 kg. 
The results  of our studies  (Table  3) show than an ME intake  of 9.8 MJ 
would  satisfy  these criteria.  The net bodyweight  loss associated  with this 
level of gain was low (4 kg) while the birthweights  of twin lambs  were 
excellent.
A major  question  in translating  the estimated  energy  requirements  into 
feeding  practice  is the extent  to which the intakes  of a roughage,  such 
as silage,  satisfy  these requirements.  A summary  of the results  showing 
the in vivo digestibility  and intakes  of four different  silages  together  with 
the calculated  energy  intakes  of twin bearing  ewes are given in Table 4. 
The birthweights  of single  and twin lambs  are also included.
Table 4
Mean  daily dry matter  intakes  (g/kg WO-75)  of silages  by ewes and the birthweights
of single  and twin Iambs
DMD  %Intake Birthweights  (kg)
Single  bearing Twin  bearing Singles Twins
58 52.1 (0.45)* 45.6 (0.40) 4.2 3.2
68 36.9 (0.38) 41.2 (0.42) 4.4 3.7
63 39.9 (0.40) 30.9 (0.31) 4.8 3.1
52 42.7 (0.33) 43.8 (0.35) 4.3 3.5
♦ MJ ME/kg  WO-75
The results  show clearly  that silage intakes  were variable  and were not 
related  to digestibility.  The results  also show that silage as a sole feed 
in late pregnancy  does not in most instances  meet the estimated  energy  
requirements  of twin bearing  ewes. It is also clear that, in terms of actual
* Thompson,  W. and Aitken,  S. C. (1959).  Sheep  Bur. Anim.  Nutr. Aberdeen,  Tech.  
Commun.  No. 20.
9
energy  intakes,  the digestibility  of the silage  is of major  importance.  This 
IS very obvious  if one compares  the intakes  and qualities  of the first two 
silages  m Table  4. A further  consideration  in regard  to silage feeding  is 
the tendency  for silage intakes  to decrease  with advancing  pregnancy  
when  the energy  requirements of the ewe are increasing.  Thus  a computed  
mean intake  over the final 6-8 weeks  of pregnancy  can be misleading.  It 
is for this reason that supplements  are fed with roughages  during  late 
pregnancy.
The effects  of supplementing  silage (D.M.D.  % 58) with barley on 
birthweights  and growth  rates of twin lambs  is shown  in Table 5. These 
results  show a significant  response  in birthweights  to supplementing  with 
13.5 kg rolled barley  in late pregnancy.  Increasing  the barley  level to 27 
kg did not further  improve  performance.
Table 5
Birthweights  and growth  rates of twin lambs  to 8 weeks  of age (kg)
Birthweight Weight  at 8 weeks
Silage ad libitum 3.2 16.8
Silage ad libitum + 4.0 18.4
13.5 kg rolled barley
Silage ad libitum + 3.9 18.0
27 kg rolled barley
Nutrition  in lactation
Any consideration  of nutritional  adequacy  in late pregnancy  cannot  be 
limited  to ewe bodyweight  changes  and lamb birthweights.  The subse ­
quent  rearing  ability  of the ewe and growth  rate of the lambs  in relation  
to birthweights  must be considered.  This is of paramount  importance  in 
relation  to twin lambs  when it could well be argued  that economies  of 
nutrition  in late pregnancy  may impair  their subsequent  growth  rates. 
There is no doubt that the level of nutrition  in late pregnancy  and the 
body condition  of the ewe at lambing  will act as a buffer  between  nutrient  
intake  and nutrient  requirements  of ewes during  lactation.  It is also true 
that provided  nutrition  during  pregnancy  is adequate  in terms  of lamb  
birthweights,  milk yields  and lamb growth  rates will depend  on the level 
of nutrition  during  lactation.  In the extensive  situation  there should  be 
sufficient  feed available  to the lactating  ewe, nevertheless,  in the context  
of twin bearing  ewes the first 2 to 3 weeks  are of particular  impiortance  
since it coincides  with pieaking  lactation  of the ewe and the critical  piost-  
natal period  for lamb survival.
The effects  of nutrition  in this critical  post-lambing  pieriod  were studied  
by continuing  the pregnancy  energy  levels for 2 weeks in lactation.  It 
must  be noted  that these levels  are much  lower  than recommended  energy 
levels  for lactation.  The lowest  level (6.5 MJ) is less than that estimated
10
Table 6
Mean  lamb birthweights  and performance  to 6 weeks  of age G(g)
Liveweight
Birthweight 2 weeks 6 weeks 0-6 weeks
Low 4.0 6.9 14.8 0.26
Medium 4.6 8.3 15.2 0.25
High 4.4 8.6 14.9 0.25
for maintenance  of a dry non-pregnant  ewe of similar  bodyweight  to 
those in the present  experiment.
The effects  of these levels  on lamb growth  are shown  in Table  6. Lamb  
growth  rates were directly  related  to energy  intake and to milk yields  
which  were 1.03, 1.48 and 1.99 kg per head per day on the Low,  Medium  
and High energy  levels respectively.  The ewes were then fed ad libitum  
and the results  show that lamb growth  rates were the reverse  of those in 
early lactation.  Milk yields averaged  2.0, 2.2 and 2.6 kg on the Low,  
Medium  and High treatments.  These results  indicate  that despite  low 
levels of energy in late pregnancy  and early lactation  that ewes will 
respond  to increased  nutrition  at a point in time before  they would  have  
attained  normal  milk yields.
Table 7
Ewe bodyweight  changes  (kg) in early lactation
Low Medium High
Post lambing
0-2 weeks -8.40 -6.95 -1.48
0-6 weeks 1.35 1.37 2.14
The rate of mobilisation  of body reserves  in early lactation  is shown  in 
Table 7. Ewe weight  loss during  the period of restricted  feeding  was 
directly  related  to energy  intakes. When  fed cd libitum  the ewes on the 
high energy  treatment  gained  less weight  than those on the lower  levels.  
The remarkable  recovery  of liveweight  during  early lactation  is due to 
the rapid expansion  of appetite  of ewes which fed ad lib (Fig. 1).
The results  in terms  of lamb  growth  rates and ewe bodyweight  changes  
further  support  the conclusions  that an energy  intake  of 9.8 MJ ME/day  
or 0.42 MJ/kg is adequate  for the pregnant  ewe even in situations  
of moderate  undernourishment  in early lactation.
While  this experiment  does not pinpoint  the actual  energy  requirements  
of twin bearing  ewes during  lactation,  from other work carried  out on
11
O)
v
a
"c
i
Q
DQ2-■ Low
1 ■ I I I
2 3 4 5
Week of lactation
Fig. 1: Voluntary  feed intake of ewes in early lactation.  
Table 8
ME allowance  (MJ/day)  required  by twin bearing  ewes in late pregnancy  
and early lactation
Ewe liveweight  
(kg)Late pregnancy Early lactation
50 7.89 15.78
60 9.05 18.10
70 10.16 20.32
80 11.23 22.46
lactation  requirements  it was concluded  that the energy  levels must be 
close to twice the estimated  pregnancy  levels.
A comparison  of the energy  requirements  of twin bearing  ewes in late 
pregnancy  and early lactation  is given in Table 8.
The approximate  estimated  theoretical  quantities  of various  feeds 
needed  to meet these requirements  for a 60 kg ewe are given in Table  9. 
The requirements  for silage  and hay are based on a digestibility  value of 
65 for both roughages.  The ME requirements  for dried grass,  swedes  and 
barley are calculated  from published  estimates  of their energy  concen ­
trations.  It must be emphasized  that, while these quantities  of feeds will
12
satisfy  the energy  requirements  of the ewe in late pregnancy,  protein  and 
minerals  may be deficient  particularly  in the case of swedes  and barley.  
It is also evident  that silage  intakes  during  late pregnancy  would  not meet  
ewe requirements  and it is therefore  necessary  to supplement  with con­
centrates.
Table 9
The quantities  required  of various  feeds required  by twin bearing  ewes during  late 
pregnancy  and early lactation
Feed (kg as fed) Late pregnancy Early lactation
Silage 5.85 11.70
Hay 1.23 2.46
Dried grass 1.00 2.00
Swedes 6.36 12.72
Barley 0.82 1.64
Cheveley  Johnston  & Company
Agricultural  Consultants  & Land Agents
Farm Reports  and Feasibility  Studies  
Management  Accounts  and Enterprise  Costings  
Farm and Estate  Management  
Staff Selection
Budgetary  Control  and Cash Flow Forecasts  
Land and Stock  Valuations —Farm Sales  and Purchases
26/27 WELLINGTON  ROAD,  CORK  
(Cork  501109)
13
Where  
there ’s growth  
—there ’s 
Grcissland  
I^rtilizers
Grassland  
covers  Ireland.}
Grasslan
f.it..  Mi
Grassland  Fertilizers  Ltd. The Pound Road, Slane Tel. (041) 24124"  & 24160
14
Grazing  Management  for Mid-Season  
Lamb  Production
T. NOLAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Creagh,  Ballinrobe,  Co. Mayo.
Mid-season  Iamb production  in Ireland  is associated  with lambing  ewes  
at a date when pasture  growth  is expected  to meet the nutritional  needs 
of the flock. With the exception  of tillage areas,  over 95% of the total 
annual  food supply  consists  of grazed  or conserved  herbage.  Due to the 
economic  necessity  to intensify  mid-season  lamb production  from pasture  
the most important  immediate  objective  is to ensure  good pasture  pro­
duction  and its efficient  use through  the application  of high stocking  rate.
More specifically  the aim is to achieve  an integrated  efficient  balance  
between  pasture  production  and utilisation  and sheep husbandry  and 
management  practices  which will secure sustained  acceptable  levels of 
individual  sheep  performance,  output  per unit area and economic  return.  
Institute  research  has developed  and tested relatively  simple integrated  
whole package  systems  which are practically  workable  and require  com­
paratively  low cost and labour  inputs.
Research  has shown  that on developed  lowland  permanent  grassland,  
using moderate  fertiliser  inputs  (about  77 lb N per acre per annum)  and 
concentrate  feed to ewes in late pregnancy  (40 lb per ewe) an all year 
stocking  rate of six ewes per acre for mid-season  fat lamb production  is 
possible.  Adequate  fencing  and good husbandry  are essential  for the 
suecessful  management  of these systems.  In this paper,  firstly the basic  
requirements  for intensive  mid-season  lamb production  from grassland  
are emphasised,  secondly  the more important  grassland  and sheep 
components  are outlined,  and thirdly  the integration  of these components  
in the whole system  are examined.
The basis
Planning  and general  organisation  are the basic requirements  for suc­
cess. This includes  the choice  of a particular  system,  an understanding  
of the target individual  sheep  and per unit area outputs  required,  and a 
suitab'e  husbandry  and management  programme.  Existing  weaknesses  
must be corrected.  Handling  and wintering  facilities  should  be provided  
to facilitate  efficient  production  and ease of operation.  The inclusion  of 
a programme  for disease  prevention  and control  should  be an essential  
feature  of the plan.
Grazing  management  is an important  component  because  it influences 
the efficiency  with which  a given  quantity  of food is apportioned  through ­
out the year in order  to meet the nutritional  requirements  of the flock.  An 
understanding  of the following  three fundamental  factors  is essential :
Firstly,  the rate of pasture  growth  varies  at different  periods  of the year 
and therefore,  for a given all year stocking  rate in the context  of inten ­
ts
sification,  the supply  of food can be expected  to be greater  than or less 
than flock requirement  according  to season. Secondly,  the food require ­
ment of the flock varies  in association  with the different  ewe and lamb  
physiological  states  throughout  the year and do not match  the pattern  of 
food supply  from pasture.  Thirdly,  the patterns  of food requirement  by 
ewes and lambs in the same flock are not the same throughout  the year 
and this can be exploited  to improve  grazing  management  efficiency.
Number  of paddocks
A 6-paddock  rotational  grazing  layout is considered  adequate  for a 
flock size of up to 200 ewes. Rotational  grazing  is recommended  as it 
facilitates  a better  appreciation  of how the food supply  and demand  ratio  
is progressing.  This in turn provides  confidence  and gives the operator  
a better opportunity  to sub-divide  flocks when necessary  as well as an 
improved  ability  to apportion  available  herbage.
Date  of lambing
The effects  on lamb  growth  rate of turning  out ewes to pasture  at three  
different  dates  in Spring,  each at three stocking  rates,  are shown  in Table
1. These results  indicate  that the stocking  rate could be increased  by
Table 1
Effects  of date of Spring  grazing  and of stocking  rate on lamb growth  
rate to 12 weeks
Date to pasture Stocking  rate 
(ewes  + lambs/acre)Lamb  growth  rate 
(Ib/lamb/day)
March  20 3.25 ± 4.3 0.78
4.00 ± 5.3 0.71
4.75 + 6.3 0.68
April 9 4.00 ± 5.3 0.74
4.75 ± 6.3 0.76
5.50 ± 7.3 0.62
April 29 4.75 ± 6.3 0.72
5.50 ± 7.3 0.71
6.25 ± 8.3 0.66
about 18% at each of the later dates without  reducing  lamb daily live- 
weight  gain below about  0.71 lb. There  appears  to be little justification  
for commencing  lambing  earlier than the 10th March or delaying  it 
beyond  the 20th March  where the stocking  rate is at or greater  than 5 
ewes per acre.
If an earlier  lambing  date is chosen  either the stocking  rate must be 
reduced  or extra feed must be brought  into the system  to maintain  in­
dividual  lamb growth rate. Reducing  the stocking  rate can only be
16
effective  in situations  where  the sheep  enterprise  is integrated  with some 
other  enterprise  to avoid  poor utilisation  later on in the season.
Thus the correct  choice of lambing  date is an important  factor in 
attempting to achieve  a suitable  fit between  pasture  food supply  and flock  
food requirement  in the context  of a low cost grassland  based  system.
Lambing  to weaning
During  this period  the aim is to obtain  a mean  daily lamb growth  rate 
of about  0.7 lb. This level of performance  corresponds  to a mean daily  
growth  rate of about  0.6 lb from birth to drafting  or mid-August.  Table  
2 shows  the effects  of five all year stocking  rates on lamb  growth  rate and
Table 2
Effects  of stocking  rate on lamb growth  rate and outputs  of Iamb meat and
wool per acre
Stocking  rate 
(ewes/acre/annum)*Lamb  growth  rate 
(Ib/day)Lamb  meat output  
(Ib/acre)Wool  output  
(Ib/acre)
3 0.61 145 23
4 0.61 181 28
5 0.59 228 36
6 0.57 269 39
8 0.38 — 147
* Mean growth  rate to slaughter  or mid-August.
Proportion  of lambs finished  varied  from 3 to 25%.
the outputs  of lamb meat and wool per acre. The important  point in 
relation  to grazing  management  from lambing  to weaning  is that when  
the stocking  rate approaches  the level required  to achieve  high output  
and efficient  use of herbage  the total area must be allocated  to grazing.
There is little information  to indicate  the correct  speed of rotation,  
pasture  height  and severity  of defoliation  which give best results  during  
this period. The present  state of knowledge  suggests  that height  of herb ­
age has no effect  on lamb growth  rate provided  there is ample  availability.  
It also indicates  that dry matter  intake begins  to fall when the post 
grazing  pasture  dry matter  residues  is less than about 1000 lb per acre 
or when the amount  of herbage  available  is lower than 3 times their  
daily intake. In at least one study  a slower  rotation  which  is associated  
with a longer  rest period  and higher  herbage  gave better results. These  
results  as well as more recent  findings  at Creagh  (which  were not direct  
comparisons)  indicate  that both ewe intake and milk production  are 
higher  when pasture  is high. As pasture  height  and density  affect  the size 
of bite and rate of biting,  sheep are forced to increase  their time spent  
grazing  when pasture  availability  is lower  to maintain  their intake.
There is a need for much more information  on all of these pasture  
characteristics  and associated  sheep responses  under Irish conditions
17
before a definitive  grazing  management  programme  can be advocated.  
The main points  are that after lambing  the aim is to provide  an adequate  
supply  of food to meet the greatly  increased  nutritional  requirements  of 
the ewe and to realise  that lamb  growth  rate during  the first 10 weeks  or 
so of life is closely  related  to the milk yield of the ewe.
A 2-year  experiment  at Creagh  compared  lamb weaning  ages of 8, 12 
and 16 weeks  at a standard  high stocking  rate of 7 ewes + 9 lambs  per 
acre. The results  showed  that during  the period April 12th to August  
16th the daily growth  rate (0.68 lb) of lambs  weaned  at 12 weeks  of age 
was greater  than in those weaned  at 8 (0.60 lb) or 16 (0.62 lb) weeks  of 
age. The earlier  weaning  ages resulted  in a greater  amount  of total her­
bage being available  for winter  feed conservation  (Table  3).
Table 3
Conservation  (fresh  cwt/acre)
Age at weaning June 19 Oct. 5 Total
8 57 107 164
12 23' 129 152
16 20' 85 105
' Amounts  of herbage  available  but not cut.
There is no advantage  in retaining  ewes and lambs  together  beyond 
the stage at which  ewe milk yield is so small as to have no effect  on lamb  
growth  rate. It appears  from this study that after about 12 weeks  the 
ewes are competing  with the lambs for available  feed. It will now be 
shown that the benefits  of weaning  at the correct  age cannot  be fully 
realised  unless  the post weaning  management  is correct.
Post weaning  management  and winter  feed
During  this period  the aims are to obtain  adequate  winter  feed for the 
ewes and to secure  continued  good growth  rate in lambs. Ewes  should  be 
stocked  at 15 to 18 per acre from weaning  to flushing  (i.e. 1st July to the 
20th September).  This means  that ^ of the farm is grazed  by weaned 
ewes. Experience  has shown  that ewes will lose about 7 lb liveweight 
under these conditions.  Whether  this is mainly  due to a change  in gut 
fill or body condition  is not clear. The imfxjrtant  considerations  are that 
this tightening  up of ewes which are not pregnant  or lactating  gives an 
opportunity  to obtain  adequate  winter  feed and to finish  remaining lambs.
It was stated  earlier  that at the higher  stocking  rates the total area must  
be allocated  to grazing  from lambing  to weaning.  After  weaning  half of 
the farm should  be closed  for early September  cut silage. About  11 cwt 
of silage por ewe is required.  Under the intensive  grassland  plan the 
conservation  date must be postponed  to about  early September  and the
18
question  of whether  hay or silage is better does not arise due to the 
obvious  risks associated  with hay at this late date.
Table  4 shows  the results  of a 2-year  experiment  which  compared  post 
weaning  stocking  rates of 12. 18 and 24 lambs  per acre. The results  are 
intended  to give guidelines  as to which stocking  rate would be chosen 
depending  on the amount  of liveweight  gain required  to achieve  the final 
target  liveweight  which  will be referred  to later in the section  dealing  with
Table 4
Effect  of stocking  rate on growth  rate in weaned  lambs
Stocking  rate♦Total  liveweight  gain per lamb  (lb)
(lambs  per acre) 1970 1971
12 19.5 13.1
18 16.8 10.0
24 10.5 6.5
* From  July 15th to August  31st in1970 and from July 5th to August  25th in 1971.
drafting  of lambs. It is recommended  that, in the whole system  context,  
the \veaned  lambs  be allowed  access  to the silage area up to the time of 
drafting  or mid-August.  At 6 ewes per acre and a weaning  percentage  of 
150 the lamb stocking  will be approximately  7 lambs or 5^ lambs  per 
acre depending  on whether  50% or 60% of them have been drafted  by 
weaning  time.
These  relatively  low lamb  stocking  rates  will ensure  that not alone  have 
the lambs  a plentiful  food supply  but also they will have an opportunity  
to exercise  their preferences  for preferred  plant species  or portions  of 
plants  or geographic locations  all of which  tend to contribute  to improved  
intake  and liveweight  gain.
Draftii^  of Iambs ’
Part of planning  a system  is concerned  with setting  target liveweight 
and degree  of finish at which lambs  will be drafted.  It is important  to 
adhere  to these targets  as closely  as possible  as every draft reduces  the 
stocking  rate thereby  giving  a better  opportunity  to finish  the remaining  
lambs. Where  the objective  is to produce  a 40 lb carcass,  for example.  
It should be remembered  that a liveweight  of approximately  85 lb is 
required  up to weaning  whereas  95 lb is required  later on due to a drop  
m killing  out percentage  from approximately  47% to 42%. This aspect  
is so important  that one should  not wait for even a slightly  greater  num ­
ber to be finished  before  drafting  the few which  are ready.
In an intensive  mid-season  fat lamb system  it is recommended  that all 
lambs  remaining  in mid-August  be drafted  out whatever  their liveweight. 
otherwise  they may seriously  affect the amount  of winter  feed obtained!
19
The temptation  to hold on to some ewe lambs  for breeding  must also be 
resisted  as this practice  belongs  to a ewe replacement  system.
Flushing
The post weaning  management  described  showed  that ^ of the farm is 
grazed by weaned  ewes, \ of the farm is fertilised  for silage and that 
lambs  are grazed  on f of the farm. This allows  ^ of the farm to be rested  
from mid-August  (i.e. after the lambs  are drafted)  which  will give a good 
start to flushing  about  3 weeks  before  mating  date. The regrowth  on the 
silage area will then give an adequate  supply of herbage  to continue  
flushing.  The j of the farm grazed  by weaned  ewes from early July to 
late September  is then rested to provide  a good start to grazing  in the 
following  spring.
Winter  management
This is the period  for which  there is the most clear-cup  management  
practice,  i.e. remove  sheep altogether  into wnter quarters  and rest the 
pasture.  The general  recommendations  to achieve  a good spring  pasture  
growth  is to rest the pasture  from not later than the third week of Nov­
ember,  apply P and K an apply 45 lb of N about 6 weeks before  spring  
grazing.
Conclusion
I hope that this paper  has shown  how the more important  sheep and 
grassland  management  practices  should  be integrated  to satisfy  the basic 
objective  of ensuring  an adequate  supply  of nutrients  which  will sustain  
the desired  outputs  per sheep and per acre. Clearly  the selection  of the 
correct  stocking  rate, lambing  date and lamb age at weaning  is important  
to achieve  the target  levels  of production.  These aspects  must be integ ­
rated with suitable  grazing  management,  conservation  and ewe wintering  
practices  in the context  of an efficient  whole system.
Further  research  is required  but at the present  time it is considered  that 
the adoption  of practices  outlined  here could at least double  the output  
from the grassland  area presently  devoted  to sheep  in Ireland.
20
Sheep  Produetion  — Components  
of Success
B. KILKENNY
Meat and Livestock  Commission,  United  Kinftdom.
The Meat and Livestock  Commission  in Britain  has been operating  a 
commercial  flock recording  scheme  since 1969. This paper  draws  on the 
results  from these recorded  flocks and concentrates  in particular  on the 
variation  in performance  levels —both physical  and financial—achieved,  
and attempts  to explain  some of the variation  in terms of management  
practices.
But firstly  let us review  the profitability  of sheep  production  in Britain  
over recent  years.
Gross  margins  unadjusted  for inflation  showed  a dramatic  increase  in 
the 1970 ’s, nearly  doubling  between  1970 and 1975, and again between  
1975 and 1978. This increase  was due almost  entirely  to lamb price 
increases  keeping  well ahead  of cost increases.  Physical  performance  per 
ewe hardly  changed,  but there was some increase  in stocking  rates. How ­
ever, when the gross margins  are adjusted  for inflation  the real value of 
the increased  gross  margin  was very small,  the averages  for 1976-78  being  
about the same as those between  1971 and 1973. The average  gross 
margins  in 1979 are likely to be slightly  lower than 1978 in real terms,  
and to be slightly  higher  again in 1980, but generally  not very digerent  to 
the last three-year  average.
One reason  for the increase  in lamb prices  not being fully reflected  in 
increased  margins  is the increase  in flock replacement  costs which has 
occurred  over the period. As lamb prices  have increased  so have the cost 
of replacements,  a’most in parallel.
Another  factor has been the increase  in fixed costs. It is always  
problematical  to allocate  fixed costs on an enterprise  basis but it is 
important  to do so if the real costs of production  are to be determined.  
In a sample  of MLC recorded  lowland  flocks  for 1977 and 1979, fixed  
costs accounted  for 60 per cent of total costs; they increased  by 24 per 
cent between  1977 and 1979.
Clearly  then there has been no ‘bonanza ’ period for British sheep 
producers  over recent  years,  the superficial  large increases  in lamb  prices  
has largely  been a reflection  of inflation  or has been absorbed  by higher  
costs. Nevertheless  sheep have probably  fared better than any other  
livestock  enterprise  over this time period,  and margins  have undoubtedly  
been higher  in real terms  in the 70’s than they were in the 60’s.
One of the clearest  messages  to emerge  from recording  is that good 
performance  always  pays best whatever  the general  cost/price  situation.  
Table 1 shows  the relationships  between  performance  and gross margins
21
Table 1
Relationship  between  performance  and gross margins
Extra  gross margin for extra  ;
0.1 lambs 0.1 ewes/hectare
reared/ewe stocking  rate
£/ewe £/hectare
1978 -1-2.17 + 2.01
1977 + 1.90 + 1.79
1976 + 2.15 + 5.14
1974 + 1.26 + 2.03
1972 + 1.02 + 2.15
(Average  lowland  and upland  flocks)
over a number  of years. The benefits  of improved  performance  have 
always  been substantial.  The general  cost/price  situation  within  which 
flockmasters  have to operate  their flocks  cannot  be changed  in the short ­
term —if it is not satisfactory  in the long-term  producers  will go out of 
sheep  production.  The best buffer  against  the general  cost/price  situation  
is good performance.  Improvement  of physical  performance  is important  
in both lowland  and hill flocks;  the difference  lies in the level of perform ­
ance at which improvement  is aimed.
Improving  performance
So far reference  has only been made  to average  results,  but in practice  
there is tremendous  variation  between  flocks  in both physical  and financial 
performance  (Table  2).
Table 2
Recorded  lowland  flock performance  levels  (5-year  average)
Range*
From  To All flocks
Number  of lambs  born per ewe lambed  
Number  of barren  ewes as % ewes to ram 
Number  of ewe deaths  as % ewes to ram 
Number  of lambs dead or died at birth  
as % of all births
Number  of lambs died subsequent  to birth  
as % of lambs survived  birth  
(♦ 95 % of range)1.0 1.91 1.41
0 20.0 8.4
0 17.2 4.2
1.0 34.5 8.0
1.0 14.1 5.5
22
Table 3 shows the difference  between  the average  and the top third  
flocks  (based  on gross  margin  per hectare).  The latter  provide  a basis  for 
setting  tough but realistic  targets  for lamb production.  The top third  
flocks sell more lambs at higher  than average  prices,  have lower costs 
despite  this higher  output  and achieve  better  ewe performance  with above  
average  stocking  rates.
Table 3
Difference  in performance  between  top third flocks  and average  (%) 1978
Lowland Upland  flocks
Lamb sales + 15.8 + 13.5
Output + 19.0 + 15.1
Concentrate  costs - 1.3 + 4.7
Lambs  born alive per 100 ewes to ram + 9.9 + 10.2
Lambs  reared  per 100 ewes to ram + 12.9 + 12.4
Overall  stocking  rate (ewes per hectare) + 19.8 + 20.9
The results  of MLC  fixed cost surveys  of sheep  production  shows  that 
there is a very close relationship  between  gross and net margins,  so that 
good physical  performance  does relate  to higher  profitability  too (Fig. 1).
CROSS MARGIN 
I/HA
60 75 90 ^ 105 120
ME'I' MARGIN C/1IA
Fig. 1—Relationship  between  gross margins  and net profitability.
23
The components  of success  in the breeding  flocks  are then :
* More lambs  reared
* Lower  costs
* Higher  stocking  rates
* Higher  lamb values
The contribution  of these to higher  gross margins  is shown  in Table  4.
Table 4
Components  of top third gross margins ______________
% contribution  to top third superiority  in
Gross  margin  per ewe Gross  margin  per hectare
Lowland  flocks
Lambs  reared 71
Lamb value 21
Flock replacement  cost 3
Feed and forage  costs 5
Stocking  rate
100
Upland  flocks
Lambs  reared 71
Lamb value 26
Flock replacement  costs 5
Feed and forage  costs -2
Stocking  rate
10033
10
2
2
53
100
41 
15
3
-1
42
100
The two major  physical  factors  affecting  gross  margins  are the number  
of lambs  reared  and the stocking  rate. The effect  of different combinations  
of stocking  rate and the number  of lambs  reared  per ewe are shown  in 
Table 5. Four categories  of flock were considered  ;
Above  average  stocking  rate — above  average  lambs  reared
— below  average  lambs  reared
Below  average  stocking  rate — above  average  lambs  reared
— below  average  lambs  reared
The highest  gross margin  per ewe occurred  in the high lambing  per­
formance.  low stocking  rate group  of flocks. Not surprisingly,  the lowest 
was for the low lambing  performance,  low stocking  rate group. 1 he 
highest  average  gross margin  per hectare  was the high stocking  rate, high 
lambing  performance  group.  The high lambing  performanre,  low stocking 
rate group gave the next highest  gross margin  above the low lambing  
performance,  high stocking  rate group. The differences  ’".S^ss  mar^ns  
per hectare  between  the four groups  were similarly  variable  for both
24
Table 5
The effect  of the number  of lambs  reared  and stocking  rate on gross  margins  
(Ave. of 1977 and 1978)
No. lambs  reared  per ewe 
High  Low
No. lambs reared per ewe 1.49 1.26
Overall  stocking  rate (ewes/hectare) I2.I 12.5 STOCKING
Concentrates  (kg/ewe) 60 55 RATE
Lamb price (£/lamb) 23.6 24.1 HIGH
Lamb sales (£/ewe) 35.2 30.4 A
Flock replacement  cost (£/ewe) 5.4 4.6 —
Total feed and forage  costs (£/ewe) 10.3 9.6 12.3
Gross margin  per ewe (£) 20.4 17.9 —
Gross  margin  per hectare  (£) 245.2 222.9
No. of lambs reared  per ewe 1.57 1.31
Overall  stocking  rate (ewes/hectare) 9.2 8.7
Concentrates  (kg/ewe) 51 50 LOW
Lamb price (£/lamb) 24.6 24.9 A
Lamb sales (£/ewe) 38.6 32.6 —
Flock replacement  cost (£/ewe) 5.3 4.2 8.9
Total feed and forage  costs (£/ewe) 9.0 8.7 —
Gross  margin  per ewe (£) 25.5 21.0
Gross  margin  per hectare  (£) 237.3 183.3
gross margin  per ewe and per hectare. Lamb  prices were lower in the 
high stocking  rate group.
The components  of success  are the same whatever  the type of flock — 
up'and,  lowland,  grass finishing,  forage  finishing,  store lambs  or hoggets.  
Changing  the system  of production  might be the right management  de­
cision in individual  farm situations  to better suit the whole farm plan.  
But, having  changed  the system,  the need to achieve  good performance  
will still be as strong  as ever; the change  might  however  allow this to be 
more readily  achieved.  Average  results  for contrasting  production  systems 
are very similar  (Table  6).
Table 6
Gross  margins  for different  sheep  systems —5-year  average  1974-78  (adjusted
for inflation)
Early lambing  
flocksGrass lamb  
flocksForage  lamb  
flocksHogget
production
Gross margin
per ewe (£) 17.7 19.6 20.5 21.1
Gross margin
per hectare  (£) 221.3 205.8 203.0 200.5
25
Lambs  reared
The number  of lambs  eventually  reared  is the combination  of a number  
of factors,  all of which have a major  effect on the rearing  percentage.  
These are the number  of empty ewes, number  of ewes dying before 
lambing,  number  of lambs born, the number  of lambs bom dead or 
dying at or around  birth, and finally  the number  of live lambs which 
subsequently  die.
Results  from MLC flocks show that although  the number  of lambs  
born per ewe lambed  is the biggest  single source of variation  in the 
number  of lambs reared,  each of the separate  wastage  factors  has a 
significant  effect. Individual  flocks may have a problem  with a single  
factor  but it is more often  the case that a low level of performance  in one 
factor  is associated  with an equally  poor performance  in several  others.  
Whilst  differences  between  breeds  and crosses  account  for some of the 
variation  between  flocks  in these vital performance  factors,  differences  in 
the management  and feeding  of the ewes are more important  and it is to 
these that individual  producers  must direct  their main attention.
Table 7
Commercial  ewe performance  in average  and top third flocks  (6-year  average)
Per 100ewes to ram
Some major Management* Lambed Total Reared Live lambs
crosses level lambs born per
born ewe lambed
Dorset  Horn Average 92 147 132 1.51
crosses top third 95 168 140 1.58
Greyface Average 93 174 153 1.75
top third 96 198 168 1.86
Mash  am Average 92 172 152 1.77
top third 95 196 167 1.87
Mule Average 93 176 154 1.76
top third 96 201 168 1.89
Scotch Average 92 171 150 1.73
Halfbred top third 95 195 165 1.88
Suffolk  X Average 93 173 152 1.72
Masham top third 96 197 162 1.82
Suffolk  X Average 93 169 151 1.71
Mule top third 96 193 161 1.83
Suffolk  X Average 91 163 143 1.66
Scotch  Halfbred  top third 94 186 155 1.78
(* Top third —-performance  in flocks  in the top third on grass margins  per hectare).
Table 7 summarises  the performance  of several  types  of British  cross ­
bred ewes in commercial  flocks and highlights  the disparities  in ewe
26
performance  between  the average  flocks  and those achieving  the top third  
gross margins  per hectare. The range in average  performance  between  
different  ewe types of similar  bodyweight  is smaller  than the variation  in 
performance  of individual  breed types in flocks  of different  management  
levels. There are naturally  exceptions  to this generalisation.  The Finish  
Landrace  produces  many  more lambs  than would  be deduced  for its size. 
The impact  of the Finish  Landrace  in crossing  in Britain  has been very 
marginal— it contributes  an insignificant  quantity  of genes into the final 
meat lamb. Thus, for most situations  in Britain  the generalisation  that, 
taking  account  of body size, lamb rearing  percentage  differences  between  
crosses  are relatively  small,  holds  good. Producers  should  concern  them ­
selves  with choosing  a type of ewe to suit individual  farm and marketing  
requirements  rather  than stock them according  to body size. Differences 
in output  per hectare  at the same level of management  will generally  be 
small.
Inadequate  or inappropriate  feeding  is often a major contributor  to 
losses  at each stage,  but health/disease  aspects  are also important.  What ­
ever the reason  for losses,  it is important  to keep some simple  records  of 
numbers  so that the reasons  for a low lamb rearing  percentage  can be 
ascertained.
Body  condition  scoring
A considerable  research  effort over the last 10 years has provided  a 
much clearer  insight  into the feed requirements  of the ewe at different  
times of the year. The problem  in practice  is the application  of this 
information  in the flock situation  where  there are ewes of varying  body  
size, with different  requirements  and with a spread  of lambing  dates.  The 
methodical  evaluation  of the body condition  of ewes using a scoring 
system  is a useful  indicator  of the nutritional  status  of a flock and allows  
more precise  feeding  practices  to be applied.
It has been clearly  demonstrated  by MLC and others  that there is a 
close relationship  between  body condition  and performance —lambing  
percentages,  and spread  of lambing  (Table  8). The scoring  system  is based
Table 8
Relation.ship  between  flock condition  score and flock performance
Percentage  of ewes in flock at different  
condition  scores
Breed  or
cross
Scotch1 li 2 21 3 4 41Flock No. of 
average lambs Spread  
body per 100 of 
-condition  ewes to lambing  
score ram (days)
Flalfbred 1* 000 12.1 25.5 50.4 6.0 6.0 0 3.3 174 44
flocks 2** 0.54.0 33.5 30.5 17.5 12.0 2.000 2.2 128 69
Masham 1* 00.5 3.6 6.534.7 26.2 20.0 7.6 1.0 3.4 169 39
flocks 2** 0.5 3.5 18.7 29.9 30.4 15.1 1.900 2.1 126 67
* Flock 1—good condition  at mating  
** Flock 2—poor condition  at mating
27
on a standardised  handling  technique  and the allocation  of a score in the 
range from 1 (very thin) to 5 (very fat). Target  scores  have been estab ­
lished for ewes at different  stages  of production  and in different  environ ­
mental  situations.  Target  scores for lowland  flocks  at different  times in 
the production  year are shown  in Table 9. Most flocks  (Table  8) contain
Table 9
Target  body condition  scores  for lowland  ewes
6 weeks  pre-mating 2i
Mating 3-31
Mid-pregnancy 21
Lambing 2-21
Weaning 2
a significant  group  of ewes which do not achieve  the appropriate  target  
scores  and which benefit  from specific  management.  If ewes are in the 
right body condition  and the results  are still low then a more detailed  
investigation  as to the reasons  will be necessary.  Again, some basic 
physical  records  will help with this type of evaluation.
In many  flock situations  better  lamb  survival  is a more urgent  problem  
than the increase  of litter size. The results  of a lamb loss investigation  in 
a sample  of MLC lowland  flocks are shown  in Table 10. Clearly  most
Table 10
Lamb deaths  in lowland  flocks
Proportion  of lambs  dying at different  ages (%) :
0-7 days 8-30 days 30-1- days 1
64 12 3
Causes  oflamb deaths (%) ; M ismothering/starvation 41
Physical  damage 3
E Coli scour/septicaemia 15
Pneumonia 2
Abcess/peritonitis/navel  ill 4
Miscellaneous 16
No cause found 2021
lamb losses occur within the first seven days of life and starvation  and 
rnismothering  are the biggest  single cause of loss. This again reflects  
directly  on management,  proper  lambing  facilities,  skilled  supervision  and 
the strategic  tube feeding  of colostrum  all make major  contributions  to 
lamb survival.  Improved  control  of microbic  and parasitic  disease  has 
greatly  reduced  wastage  but improvements  in the timing  of prophylactic
28
and therapeutic  programmes  could reduce  losses  further. Medicines  and 
veterinary  costs comprise  on average  almost  10 per cent of the variable  
costs per ewe, but there are flocks  in which  these costs are considerably  
higher  without  any complementary  increase  in the gross  margins  per ewe.
Sale value  of Iambs
The value of the slaughtered  lamb and consequently  the gross output  
per ewe is affected  by the date of sale, due to seasonal  variation  in prices. 
The ratio between  feed and forage  costs and lamb sales differs  between 
systems  of production  and is most sensitive  in the early lamb production  
systems  (2.7 ; 1) with their higher  feed and forage  costs (average  3.8 : 1 
in hogget  systems,  see Table 13). Quick  growth  to slaughter  weight  is an 
important  factor  in determining  the returns  from the production  of early  
out-of-season  lambs  and lambs  off grass.  Growth  rate is of less importance  
in late lamb and hogget  production  off forage  crops where  the final car­
case weight obtained  is relatively  more important.  Growth  rate is in­
fluenced  by breed and also by stocking  rate. It is important  that a 
decision  on the optimum  system  of production  is made on an individual  
farm basis. Then,  breeds  and stocking  rates can be adapted  to best meet 
the objectives.
Market  requirements  for lamb differ markedly,  but the two major  
variables  are weight  and fatness.  Differential  prices  between  top third  and 
average  producers  have increased  markedly  over recent  years and now 
account  for about 12 per cent of the superiority  in gross margin  per 
hectare  or the top third (Table  4). Regional  and time of sale differences 
between  the average  and top third units do not account  for all of this 
large difference  which reflects  real differences  in marketing  skills of the 
top third producers.
Carcase  weights  for different  types of lambs  can be predicted  within  a 
reasonable  degree  of accuracy  from their parent  bodyweight  (Table 11).
Table 11
Predicting  lamb carcase  weight  (kg)
Breed weight  of ram (Suffolk)
Breed weight  of ewe (Clun Forest)91
73
Slaughter  weight  of lamb  
Carcase  weight164 -F
41
20.5
Liveweight  can also give a guide to the average  fatness  of batches  of 
lambs within a breed type. Lambs  slaughtered  at the average  for the 
parent  breeds  will typically  fall into fat class 3 on the MLC  scale. Lambs  
slaughtered  about 10 per cent above or below the average  slaughter  
weight  of a particular  breed or cross will classify  as 4 or 2 for fatness.
29
These can only be guides;  they can be refined  further  by, for example,  
slaughtering  wether  lambs  5 per cent above and ewe lambs 10 per cent 
below  the average  liveweight  derived  from the adult body weights  of the 
parents  in order  to achieve  the same level of fatness.
The only precise  way of assessing  the market  requirement  and sending 
back the information  to the producer  is some form of carcase  classifica­
tion system. Having  established  a system  it must then be transformed  
into a method  that farmers  can use on the farm to predict  from the live 
animal  the likely  carcase  classification  of the dead lamb. Such a system  
depiends  on the handling  and methodical  scoring  of lambs  for subcutan ­
eous fatness.
Practice  in handling  is essential  to assess  accurately  the fatness  level of 
individual  lambs  before  slaughter  and, until experience  is acquired,  the 
carcases  should  be examined  after weighing  and classification.  If a visit 
to the abattoir  is not possible,  then carcase  classification  results  will show  
the level of accuracy  attained  in the selection  of lambs.
Some 14 per cent (1 in 7) of British  lamb carcases  fall into fat classes 
4 & 5. This means  that such lambs  are overfat  in terms  of most whole ­
salers ’ requirements.  At least nine per cent of the weight  of fat class 4 
carcases  and 13 per cent of the weight  of fat class 5 carcases  are likely 
to be trimmed  before retail sale. Additionally,  not all of the excessive  
fat can be assessed  from a fat trim percentage  alone; the extent  of un- 
trimmable  fat in joints is just as important  because  of its influence  on 
consumer  satisfaction.  It is apparent  from the rapid  decline  in sheepmeat  
consumption  in Britain  over the last decade  (from 11 kg per head/year  
in the early 1960 ’s to 7 kg/head/year  currently)  that the quality  of the 
product,  compared  with other meats,  is unable  to satisfy  demand.  Pro­
ducers should not consider  that the high lamb prices created  by the 
Continental  market  reflect  general  consumer  satisfaction  in their product.  
A major  challenge  facing the British  sheep industry  as a whole is the 
reduction  of fatness  in lambs. Lamb  will find it increasingly  difficult  to 
compete  with other  meats  if this problem  is not overcome.
Where  wholesalers  are paying  different  prices for lambs of different 
fatness,  it is important  for the flock owner  to assess  carefully  the advan ­
tage of increasing  weight  against  the penalty  which may be incurred  
through  the carcase  being  too fat.
Costs
Reference  has already  been made  to the fact that in the MLC surveys, 
fixed costs account  for 60 per cent of total costs. Labour  is the highest 
single item of costs accounting  for nearly  40 per cent of fixed costs. A 
high proportion  of the labour  figure  in this specific  survey  in both lowland  
and upland  flocks  was accounted  for by family  labour  costs. Fixed  costs  
by their very nature  are more a reflection  of the whole  farming  situation  
rather  than specific  to a single enterprise,  but clearly  the level of labour  
costs are uneconomically  high in some situations.
30
Table 12
Production  variable  costs —% of total
Lowland
Average Top thirdUpland
Average Top third
Flock replacements 33 30 29 25
Concentrates 28 30 26 29
Forage  costs 28 28 31 32
Vet and medicine 8 8 9 9
Others 4 4 5 6
100 100 100 100
Table 12 shows the proportion  of variable  costs accounted  for by 
different  items in both lowland  and upland  farms. The contribution  to 
total variable  costs is similar  in lowland  and upland flocks, and for 
average  and top third flocks  within  each category.  Between  them replace ­
ments, concentrate  and forage costs account  for about 85 per cent of 
total variable  costs.
Flock  replacement  costs
On the variable  cost side there are opportunities  for useful reductions  
in most sheep  flocks  and the first to be considered  is the flock replacement  
cost. Flock replacement  costs account  for about a third of the direct  
costs of production.  The factors  which control  the cost of maintaining  
the breeding  stock are the number  of replacements  required  annually  and 
their purchase  price in relation  to the price received  for culled  breeding  
stock. The number  of replacements  required  is determined  by the normal  
length of breeding  life of ewes and their mortality  rate. In practice,  
replacement  and selling  policies  are flexible,  varying  with circumstances  
particularly  with market  prices. The length  of breeding  life in the flock  
can be increased  by breeding  from ewe lambs  and by reducing  the rate 
of premature  culling. The true extent of premature  culling may be 
partially  masked  by economic  opportunism  in disposing  of cast ewes in 
a favourable  market.  Careful  attention  to the health and feeding  of the 
flock could allow a high proportion  of the ewes in many  flocks  to pro­
duce an extra lamb crop, providing  the over-age  ewes do not suffer an 
abnormally  high death rate or cause the value of the cull ewes to drop  
too markedly.  The practice  of mating  ewe lambs  reduces  flock  costs since  
the average  breeding  life is normally  increased  and it also increases  the 
number  of lambs  available  for sale. A more planned  approach  to replace ­
ment policies  could undoubtedly  bring about important  economies  in 
many  flocks.
Feed and forage  costs
Feed and forage costs account  for over half of the direct costs of 
production.  There is a wide range in feed and forage costs between
31
recorded  flocks in similar  systems  of sheep production.  Results  from 
recorded  flocks  show that there is no direct  correlation  between  the value 
of feed inputs  and the gross  output. The more efficient  ffocks  have lower 
feed costs  than average,  largely  because  less concentrates  are used. In the 
top third ffocks the feeding  of concentrates  is more precisely  related  to 
the ffocks ’ requirements  by ensuring  compact  lambing  groups  for feeding 
^ Table 13. As the fertility  .level of the flock rises it becomes  increasingly  
important  to adjust the feeding  levels to the requirement  of the ewe at 
key stages of production.  This is an area where practical  methods  of 
applying  technical  knowledge  on the nutritional  requirement  of the ewe 
can be improved  and will yield much benefit.
Table 13
Feed inputs  and production  for different  sheep  systems
Lowland —Spring  lambing  flocksEarly
lambing
flocksUpland
flocks
Grass lambs Forage  Iambs  
Ave. Topi Ave. Topi Ave. Top iAve. Topi
Spread  of lambing  (days) 63 42 64 41 51 36 59 40
Concentrates/ewe  (kg) 52 51 60 56 94 96 33 35
Grass requirements/  
head (ha) 0.09 0.08 0.10 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.12 0.10
Lambs  reared/ewe 1.40 1.60 1.38 1.53 1.35 1.50 1.25 1.45
Return  of lamb sales to 
feed and forage costs 3.8;1 4.5:1 3.2:1 3.9:1 2.7:1 3.1:1 4.7:1 5.3:1
Table 13 shows  how sensitive  the early lambing  systems  are to changes  
in feed and lamb prices. The average  ratio of lamb sales to feed and 
forage  costs over the last five years has been only 2.7 : 1, this compares  
with about  3.5 : 1 in other  lowland  systems  and 4.7 : 1 in upland  systems.  
Even^  in the top third early lambing  flocks  the ratio has only averaged
Stocking  rate
Despite  the very close relationship  between  stocking  rate and gross  
margin  referred  to earlier  the overall  usage of fertiliser  nitrogen  is low in 
sheep production  in relation  to the economic  response  that can be ex­
pected,  particularly  in the case of permanent  pasture.  Less than 10 per 
cent of recorded  flocks  on permanent  pasture  receive  more than 150 kg N 
per hectare,  for flocks  on leys less than 15 per cent fall into this category  
(Table 14).
32
Table 14
Distribution  of fertiliser  nitrogen  usage  in recorded  lowland  flocks
Fertiliser  N usage (kg/ha)Per cent of recorded  flocks 
Permanent  pasture  Leys
0 20 5
1 - 50 24 13
50- 100 32 54
100-150 15 16
150-200 7 7
200 plus 2 5
Average  N usage per ha (kg) 62 90
The distribution  of gross margins  per hectare  in lowland  flocks by 
stocking  rate and fertiliser  N levels is shown  in Table 15. Between  the 
top third and the average  there is about a 30 per cent difference  in fer­
tiliser  N usage and a 20 per cent difference  in stocking  rate. Between  the 
average  and the bottom  third a 30 per cent difference  in fertiliser  N usage 
is associated  with a 30 per cent difference  in stocking  rate.
Table 15
Distribution  of gross margins  per hectare  by overall  stocking  rate—lowland  flocks  
(average  of 1977 and 1978)
Stocking  rate ewes/ha Below  6 6-8 8-10 10-12 12-14 14-16 Over 16
Gross  margin/ha  (£) 154.2 170.2 205.2  247.6 291.2 321.9 338.4
Distribution  of gross margins  per hectare  by fertiliser
N usage per grass hectare
Fertiliser  N kg/ha Below  30 30-60  60-90 90-120 120-150 150-1-
Gross  margin  per ha (£) 210.5 218.5 234.6 236.5 277.4 313.38
Results  from recorded  flocks also show that there is a close average  
relationship  between  fertiliser  N usage and utilised  output  (expressed  as 
LU(jD, livestock  unit grazing  days*). This is shown in Fig. 2. This 
relationship  is best explained  by a curve which flattens  off appreciably  
above  200 kg N/hectare,  well below  the jxjint at which  grass production  
in relation  to fertiliser  N usage ceases  to be linear. This suggests  that 
sheep producers  find it difficult  to make the most efficient  utilisation  of 
grass growth  at high fertiliser  N levels. Associated  with this average
• 1 LUGD  = Amount  of grass consumed  in 24 hours by a 500 kg cow yielding  
3640 litres.
33
FIGURE  2. RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  FERTILISER  N LEVELS  S LVGD ’a/HECTARE
relationship  there is considerable  variation  in stocking  rate at each level 
of fertiliser  N usage. Differences  between  farms due to factors  such as 
weather,  location  and soil do not account  for a substantial  proportion  of 
the variation  which  reflects  wide differences  in the efficiency  of utilisation  
of the grass produced.
Guide-line  stocking  rates have been produced  by MLC. These are 
based on estimates  of grass production  for different  quality  sites (based 
on the National  Grassland  Manuring  Trial, GM20),  and the nutritional  
allowances  for ewes of different  body size and prolificacy.  Examples  of 
these guide-line  stocking  rates are shown  in Table 16. They have been 
expressed  on the basis of weight  of ewes and lambs because  of the wide  
range of body size and fertility  that exists between  different  breeds  and 
crosses  of ewes. In commercial  practice  there is only a limited  relation ­
ship between  size of ewe and stocking  rates; the theoretical  advantages  
of small ewes in relation  to lower maintenance  requirements  are by no 
means  fully taken into account.  Total ewe and lamb weights  per hectare  
can be converted  into stocking  rates for different  types of ewe according  
to the breed weights,  fertility  and predicted  lamb slaughter  weights.  These 
guide-lines  form a reliable  basis for planning.  They will require  modi ­
fication  in individual  farm situations  but unless  grass production  and flock  
requirements  are approximately  in balance  any further  refinement  of 
grassland  management  is of limited  value.
A closer  look at the relationship  between  gross margin  per hectare  and 
stocking  rate reveals  a distinct  fall in gross margin  per ewe despite  the
34
Table 16
Example  guides  to stocking  rates at different  levels  of fertiliser  N and different
quality  sites
Kg N/ha Poor Average Good
0-75 Ewe  weight/ha  (kg) 650 750 850
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 500 600 700
Total 1150 1350 1550
75-150  Ewe  weight/ha  (kg) 750 900 1050
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 650 750 850
Total 1400 1650 1900
150-225  Ewe weight/ha  (kg) 900 1050 1200
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 750 850 1000
Total 1650 1900 2200
225-300  Ewe weight/ha  (kg) N/A 1200 1350
Weight  of lamb produced/ha  (kg) 950 1100
Total 2150 2450
higher  gross  margin  per hectare.  This is almost  entirely  due to a reduction
in the number  of lambs reared  per ewe and reduced  value of the lambs
reared —lower  weights  and fewer  finished  off grass (Table  17). If the level
Table 17
Analysis  of recorded  flock results  by overall  stocking  rate
Stocking  rate (ewes/ha)  6-8 8-10 10-12 12-14 14-16 Over 16
Gross  margin  per ha (£) 170.2  205.2  247.6 291.2 321.9 338.4
Gross margin  per ewe (£) 23.9 22.8 22.2 21.6 20.7 19.7
Lamb sales per ewe (£- 36.3 34.9 33.8 33.1 31.8 30.2
Lamb value (£) 25.2 24.4 23.8 23.6 22.7 21.7
Lambs  reared  per ewe 1.44 1.43 1.42 1.40 1.40 1.39
Costs per ewe 15.5 15.8 14.7 14.7 14.2 13.8
(inc. replacement  cost)
of ewe performance  (number  and value of lambs reared)  achieved  at 
moderate  stocking  rates (6-8 ewes per hectare)  were achieved  by the 
intensively  stocked  flocks  (16-17  ewes per hectare)  then this would  have 
a major  effect on the gross  margins  per hectare.  Alternatively,  the highest
35
gross margins  per hectare  could be achieved  with fewer  ewes per hectare  
if lamb performaice  was maintained —over the last three years 14 ewes  
per hectare  would have given the same gross margin  per hectare  as 17 
ewes per hectare  if lamb performance  was equivalent  to that in the lower  
stocking  rate flocks. This is of increasing  importance  as the value of 
breeding  stock and consequent  working  capital  requirements  continue  to 
increase.  The lower stocking  rate situation  in the example  just given 
would  produce  the same gross  margin  with an 18 per cent lower  require ­
ment for working  capital  per hectare.  The gross margin  expressed  as a 
percentage  of the working  capital  would  have been 45 instead  of 37. The 
main reasons  for the lower  individual  lamb performance  levels  are herb ­
age shortage  during  the second half of the grazing  season with com­
petition  from ewes and lambs and parasitism.  Management  practices  
required  to overcome  this involve  the integration  of grazing  with conser ­
vation areas, choice of lambing  date, early maturing  ram breed,  mid­
season  forage crops, use of a lower sheep stocking  rate by bringing-in  
cattle, preferential  grazing  for ewes with multiples,  choice of weaning  
date and judicious  use of supplementary  feed. The appropriate  package  
of management  practices  needs  to be carefully  tailored  to the individual  
farm situation.
Parasitic  worms  are a major  problem  in many situations,  the sensible  
use of anthelmintics  can reduce  worm  infection  but the most  effective  way 
of reducing  worms  in lambs  is to graze ewes and lambs  on clean  land ie, 
pastures  which have been free from lambs or ewe hoggs during the 
previous  12 months.  The problem  is how to find clean  grazing  when  and 
where it is required.  MLC records  show that many producers  spend a 
considerable  amount  of money  on worm drugs but often they are used 
inappropriately  and are not built into a grazing  strategy.  To operate  a 
clean grazing  system  it is essential  to plan ahead  to ensure  that sheep  do 
not graze  the same land between  breeding  and weaning  two years running.  
The grazing  history  of the pasture  is essential  information  for the planning  
of a cattle programme.  The clean  grazing  approach  in its entirety  cannot  
be applied  on farms  where  cattle  are not also kept other  than in the case 
of one-year  leys.
36
There ’s ,
great  grou/th
inanAIBsavtm  acmtu
Like  fertile  land,  an AIB 
Savings  Account  yields  
rich dividends.
In fact  you can earn  a good  
return  on your  deposits  
which  gives  you that  extra  
spending  power  when  you 
need  it
An AIB  Savings  Account  
Think  of it simply  as good  
husbandry.
And  start  saving  with  
Allied  Irish  Banks.
Allied  Irish  Banks
Banking  for  a betterfuture
37
NO OTHER  PAPER  
gives the Farmer  so much  
as THE
farmers
journal
Week after week over 100,000  farmers  read through  the pages 
of the Journal.  They find it full of up-to-the-minute  
facts,  features,  prices  and market  trends. It employs  the 
finest feature  writers,  leading  farming  experts,  skilled 
vets and legal and income  tax brains  to give Irish farmers  
a first-class  Newspaper.
Nowadays,  no wise farmer  would  be without  it . . . that’s why 
more and more you’ll hear the Journal  quoted  in farming  
circles. If you are not a reader  you ’re missing  a lot.
ONLY  2Sp EVERY  THURSDAY
38
Sheep  and Cattle  on Wexford  Farms
W. HARTLEY
A.C.O.T.,  Enniscarthy,  Co. Wexford.
Whilst  the emphasis  in this paper  is on sheep  production  it is appropriate  
that cattle should also be included  because  there are no farms in Co. 
Wexford  with sheep  only, and 97% of farms  have cattle  as an enterprise.  
Of the farms that have a sheep enterprise,  all have tillage crops and 
practically  all have a cattle enterprise.  It is against  this background  that 
we examine  the sheep  industry  in the county,  which  has much  in common  
with other lowland  sheep  production  areas in the south east.
Sheep  production  is an enterprise  on approximately  35% of the 5,500  
farms in the county. The sheep industry  in Co. Wexford  competes  with 
alternative  enterprises  in a thriving  agricultural  industry.  The soil has a 
wide use range and hence farmers  have options  in choosing  profitable  
enterprises.
About  30% of the total area of the county  is devoted  to tillage. In 
those areas which carry the greatest  number  of ewes about 45% of the 
land is tilled.  Sheep  enterprises  have competed  favourably  for profitability  
with other enterprises.  About  60% of the 3,100 farmers  in the Farm  
Modernisation  Scheme  are categorised  as Development  and Commercial.
In Co. Wexford,  tillage has been complementary  to sheep enterprises  
such as early lamb production,  mid-season  lamb production  and particu ­
larly the finishing  of store lambs over the winter  which was the most  
eommon  sheep enterprise  until recently.  Thus, there is a tradition  of 
sheep farming,  combined  with tillage and cattle, on dry tillage soils of 
the county.
Ewe numbers  and breeds
The number  of breeding  ewes in the county  did not fluctuate  markedly  
in the 1970 ’s, when lowland  ewe numbers  in the country  as a whole 
decreased  very significantly.  The fact that ewe numbers  were maintained  
in the county  was due to :
(a) A tradition  of sheep  farming.
(b) The enterprise  dovetailed  neatly  with the farming  pattern.
(c) Sheep  production  competed  financially  with other enterprises  on the 
farm.
Of the 107,000  ewes in the county  in 1977, about 70% were Suffolk  
Crosses  and the remaining  30% were mainly.  Cheviot  types. The Suffolk  
is the predominant  sire breed and some Dorset  Horn rams are used for 
early fat lamb production.  More recently  the Texel has been introduced  
as a sire breed.
Production  systems
The Suffolk  cross  ewe is commonly  used for the production  system  best 
suited to Wexford  farmers,  namely,  mid-season  fat lamb production.
39
Many  flock owners  are now concentrating  on producing  more mid-season  
fat lambs,  with some early  lambs  mainly  on the smaller  holdings.  This is 
a change  which has occurred  in the past two years from the traditional  
finishing  of store lambs  on turnips.
A mid-season  fat lamb production  system fits in very well with the 
grass growth  pattern  of the county  and with seasonal  labour  demands.  
With young  leys and the geographical  position  of the county,  grass  growth  
is reasonably  early but the maintenance  of a good sward of grass in 
July-August  on the dry type of soil in the county  can be difficult.  A 
production  system  of weaning  in mid-February  to March  and selling  fat 
lambs  in June-July  certainly  has much to offer in the county.
Physical  factors  and returns
The average  flock size in Co. Wexford  is 65 ewes per farm. The 
stocking  rate for the country  is the equivalent  of 3 ewes per acre with the 
better  farmers  carrying  the equivalent  of 4 ewes per acre. It is estimated  
that only to ^ of the area under  grassland  on the average  sheep  farm in 
the county  is devoted  to sheep. Cattle utilise the greater  portion  of the 
grassland  on the dry stock farms.
In early 1978, when the bilateral  agreement  with France  came into 
operation,  the county  Advisory  Service  examined  the economic  prospects  
for sheep in the county. Farm accounts  from 30 selected  farms were 
studied  before  the new agreement  was reached.  Selection  of farms  was 
on the basis of good performance  in tillage,  cattle  and sheep  output. The 
results  on income  are summarised  in Table 1.
Table 1
Gross margin  from farm enterprises  on 30 selected  farms in Co. Wexford  in 1977.
Gross margin  
per acreSheep
£100Cattle
£78Malting  Barley  
£134
Some effieiency  factors  in flock performance  on these 30 farms are 
shown  in Table 2.
Table 2
Flock  performance  on 30 selected  farms 1977
Average Average Stocking  rate % Lambs
farm size flock size ewes/acre weaned
acres equivalent
150 105 4 1.25
In 1978 gross margins  in a range of farm enterprises  were compared.  
The opportunity  for such comparisons  arose when  economic  returns  from 
sugar beet growing  were being examined  on a random  sample  of farms
40
classified  as low, medium  or high yields namely,  13 tons, 17 tons or 20 
tons/acre.  Table 3 summarises  the gross margins.
Table 3
Gross margins  (£/acre)  for enterprises  on farms with low, medium  or high yields
of sugar beet in 1978
Low Medium High Average
Sugar beet 132 230 309 224
Wheat 116 136 135 129
Malting  barley 115 155 139 136
Feed barley 137 127 140 135
Dairying 250 227 269 240
Cattle 80 99 100 90
Sheep 121 119 172 137
Although  Wexford  has the second  highest  stocking  rate in the twenty-  
six counties,  Wexford  sheep farmers  have the capacity  to increase  ewes  
to 150,000  and at the same time increase  the stocking  rate of cattle by 
approximately  J of a livestock  unit p)er acre by the adoption  of better  
management  practices.
(1) A System  of Production
The management  skills required  to carry out efficiently  any one system  
of production  are numerous,  be it early, mid-season  or store lambs.  
Having  more than one system  of sheep production  on the farm, in my 
opinion,  may result in the key management  factors  of production  being 
overlooked.  Farmers  should  adopt  a system  of production  which  fits into 
the farming  pattern  as well as giving  economical  returns.
(2) Wintering
Sheep  wintering  at present  is mainly  outdoor  on grass,  sugar  beet tops 
and swedes,  but over the past three years  there is an increased  interest  in 
the housing  of ewes on straw and feeding  them on hay and meals. This 
system  would  seem to be much more acceptable  to the Wexford  farmer  
than other wintering  systems  like slats and silage. The cost of straw 
bedded  housing  is approximately  £30 per ewe after grant,  or £40 gross.  
This type of housing  has a flexibility  that the tillage/dry  stock farmer  
likes.
Wintering  facilities  must be acceptable  to the shepherd  as well as being 
tailored  to the production  system. It should be noted that the family  
members  are frequently  the shepherds  at weaning  time. In the future,  
when larger  flocks  may be a necessity,  hired supervision  will be required  
at yeaning  if mortality  is to be reduced.
41
(3) Better  fencing
After  lamb price,  fencing  is probably  the most important  management  
factor  that will affect  ewe numbers  on farms. This is particularly  true on 
tillage  farms.  Fencing  must  facilitate  the ever increasing  width  of combine  
harvesters  and at the same time be stock proof and give an efficient  
grazing  system. One must ask why, in a county  such as Wexford,  are 
there so few farmers  practising  mixed  grazing  ? I would  suggest  that ;
(a) Farmers  believe,  contrary  to research  findings,  that cattle and sheep 
grazing  the same pasture  have an adverse  affect on the daily live- 
weight  gain of both cattle and sheep,  particularly  on cattle perform ­
ance.
(b) On the majority  of farms  only 2 or 3 fields are reasonably  fenced  for 
sheep,  hence those fields are kept for sheep.
If we are to increase  the numbers  of sheep and cattle on tillage  farms,  
fencing  is a priority.
42
Factors  Affecting  Carcass  Composition  
in Beef Cattle
M. G. KEANE
A f>riciiltural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
The objective  of a carcass  classification  scheme  is to classify  carcasses  
according  to economically  important  characteristics  and thereby  facilitate  
payment  to producers  on the basis of these characteristics.  The value of 
a carcass  depends  mainly  on its meat yield but carcass  weight,  shape and 
muscle  thickness  are also important.  The objective  in beef production  
should be to produce  meat which is highly  acceptable  to the processor  
and consumer.  High percentages  of fat or bone in a carcass  reduce  its 
meat yield and consequently  its value.
Within  sexes, payment  to date has largely  been at a flat rate per kg 
carcass,  but in future  the price paid to producers  will be more related  to 
the carcass  meat yield. Therefore  it is important  to understand  how 
several  different  factors  affect meat yield so that producers  can aim to 
optimize  meat production  rather than simply carcass  production.  This 
paper  attempts  to summarize  the present  state of knowledge  on the main  
factors  which affect  carcass  meat yield.
Carcass  development
Before discussing  differences  between  carcasses  in meat yield, it is 
necessary  to understand  firstly how the carcass  develops  in terms of its 
composition  (i.e. percentage  of bone, muscle  and fat). In the young  ani­
mal the percentages  of bone and muscle  are high and there is very little 
fat. With increasing  weight, bone percentage  declines  gradually  to 
maturity.  Muscle  percentage  first increases  for a period,  the remains  
relatively  constant  for a further  period and subsequently  declines.  Fat 
percentage  remains  low until the onset of the fattening  phase and there ­
after increase  rapidly. Thereafter,  once fattening  commences,  muscle 
percentage  and consequently  meat percentage  declines  with increasing  
weight. While this general  pattern  or development  is common  to all 
cattle,  the relaive  rates of change  for the three tissues  are influenced  by 
a number  of factors,  the most important  being (1) sex, (2) breed type,  
(3) slaughter  weight,  (4) plane of nutrition,  (5) type of diet, (6) growth  
promoters.
Sex effects
Three sex categories  are recognized  in commercial  beef production — ■ 
bulls,  steers  and heifers.  Compared  with steers,  bulls  grow faster,  use feed 
more efficiently  and have a higher percentage  of meat in the carcass.  
Table 1 shows  the average  carcass  composition  of bulls and steers from  
seven experiments  at Grange  (Harte,  1969a). Because  bulls grew faster,
43
Table 1
Carcass  composition  of bulls and steers —average  of 7 experiments  
(Harte,  1968)
Bulls Steers
Carcass  weight  (kg) 239 211
% Meat 71.2 67.1
% Bone 18.6 18.8
% Fat 9.3 13.3
they had heacvier  carcasses  and in addition  they had lower  fat and higher  
meat percentages.  As a result, every 14 kg of bull carcass  yielded  the 
same quantity  of meat as 15 kg of steer carcass.  When account  is taken  
also of their greater  carcass  weight,  five bulls yielded  as much as six 
steers.
The difference  in meat yield between  bulls and steers is not the same  
at all slaughter  weights  because  their main tissues  grow at different  rates. 
Relative  to overall  carcass  growth,  the rate of muscle  growth  is higher  
and the rate of fat growth  is lower in bulls than in steers. Consequently,  
the difference  in meat percentage  between  the two increases  with increas ­
ing weight. This was illustrated  in an experiment  in which  both bulls and 
steers were slaughtered  at two ages and consequently  at two different 
weights  (Harte,  1969b). The results  are shown  in Table 2. At the lower 
carcass  weights,  the bulls had only 2.8 percentage  units more meat than 
the steers  whereas  at the higher  weights  the difference  was 7.7 percentage  
units in favour  of the bulls.
Table 2
Carcass  composition  of bulls and steers  at two slaughter  weights
Low slaughter weight High slaughter  weight
Bulls Steers Bulls Steers
Carcass  wt. (kg) 220 201 320 278
% Meat 69.0 66.2 71.8 64.1
% Bone 20.4 20.5 15.7 16.3
% Fat 9.3 12.0 10.7 18.6
Although  bull beef production  has been extensively  studied  in this 
country,  it has not been adopted  in commercial  practice.  This contrasts  
with the situation  in many other European  countries  where bull beef 
production  is common.
There is less information  on tissue growth  patterns  of heifers. The 
main difference  between  heifers and steers is that heifers commence 
fattening  at lower  weights.  Once fattening  has commenced  relative  rates
44
of fat and muscle  growth  are about  the same in heifers  and steers (Berg 
et al. 1979).
Although  there are clear differences  in carcass  composition  between  
breed  types,  the size of the difference  depends  on the basis  of comparison.  
Ccmparisons  are usually  made  at either  the same age, the same slaughter  
weight  or the same level of fatness  (finish).  The data in Table  3 are taken  
from a United  States study (Germ Plasm Evaluation  Programme,  1974)
Table 3
Carcass  composition  of different  breed  crosses  slaughtered  at the same  age
Sire breed Charolais Simmental Limousin Hereford Angus
Carcass  wt. (kg) 324 315 301 294 296
% Meat 69.3 68.4 69.8 65.8 65.5
% Bone 12.9 13.3 12.6 12.2 11.9
% Fat 17.8 18.2 17.5 22.2 22.8
in which  the steer progeny  of bulls from different  breeds  mated  to Here ­
ford and Angus  cows were slaughtered  at the same age. In addition  to 
having  heavier  carcasses,  the continental  crosses  had on average  3.5 per­
centage  units more meat and 4.7 percentage  units less fat than the 
Hereford  and Angus  types.
An experiment  in France  (Geay,  1976) compared  pure bred Charolais,  
Limousin  and Friesian  bulls slaughtered  at the same carcass  weight  (312 
kg). The data, which are in Table 4, show that the Charolais  had 6.3 
percentage  units more meat and 6.2 percentage  units less fat than the 
Friesians.  The main difference  between  the Charolais  and Limousin  
breeds was that the latter had more fat and less bone. These results  
emphasise  the superiority  of the continental  breeds  over Friesians  in 
carcass  quality  and indicate  the type of carcasses  with which Irish beef 
must compete  in European  markets.
Table 4
Carcass  composition  of pure bred bulls slaughtered  at the same weight^a)
Charolais Limousin Friesian
% Meat 70.3 71.2 64.0
% Bone 18.0 14.5 18.6
% Fat 9.7 12.8 15.9
la) 312 kg carcases
In Britain,  the Meat and Livestock  Commission  have compared  the 
carcasses  of different  breed types slaughtered  at the same level of fatness  
(MLC,  1978). The data in Table 5 refer to the steer progeny  of dairy  
cows and a number  of different  sire breeds.
45
Table 5
Meat percentages  of ditferent  breed crosses  at the same level of subcutaneous  fat
(finish)  (a)
Breed  type Charolais Simmental Friesian Hereford Angus
Carcass  wt. (kg) 290 265 241 221 201
% Meat 71.2 70.9 70.0 70.5 71.4
(a) Average  for 18 and 24 month  old production  systems.
When fat level was standardised  the differences  between  the various  
breed  types  in meat percentage  were small but there were large differences 
in the carcass  weights  at which  these similar  meat percentages  occurred.  
The carcasses  of Charolais  crosses  were almost  50 kg heavier  than those 
of the Friesians  which  in turn were 40 kg heavier  than the Angus  crosses.  
These data show that continental  type cattle can be taken to much  
heavier  weights  than Friesians  and still have high quality carcasses  
whereas  the traditional  British  beef breeds  must be slaughtered  at lighter  
weights  in order to achieve  high carcass  meat percentages.  It should  be 
noted that the carcass  weights  in this MLC study were much lower than 
commercial  carcass  weights  in Ireland  generally.
Slaughter  weight  effects
Since the weight  at which  cattle are slaughtered  is completely  under  the 
control  of the producer,  it is important  that the influence  of slaughter  
weight  on carcass  composition  and meat percentage  be fully understood.  
Results  show that when animals  reach  a certain  weight,  the percentage  of 
fat in the carcass  increases  and the percentage  of meat decreases  with 
increasing  weight.  The rate at which  this happens  varies  with sex, breed,  
level and type of feed. For a similar  increase  in carcass  weight  there is 
a greater  increase  in fat percentage  and a greater  decrease  in meat per­
centage  in steers than in bulls. Similarly  the late maturing  continental  
breed types fatten less rapidly  than the early maturing  traditional  breed  
types.
The effects  of increasing  slaughter  weight  on the carcass  composition  
of Friesian  steers are shown  in Table 6. Fat percentage  increased  with 
increasing  carcass  weight  while meat and bone percentages  decrea.sed.  
Over the carcass  weight  range of 260 to 340 kg, meat yield declined  by 
0.65 percentage  units for every 10 kg increase  in carcass  weight.
Table 6
Carcass  composition  of Friesian  steers  at ditferent  slaughter  weights
Carcass  weight  (kg)
150 260 300 340
% Meat 73.4 69.6 65.5 64.4
% Bone 21.6 19.5 19.0 17.9
% Fat 5.0 10.9 15.5 17.7
46
Plane  of nutrition  effects
As in the case of slaughter  weight,  plane of nutrition  is also controlled  
by the producer.  Thus, it is equally  important  to know how it affects 
carcass  composition.  Opinions  differ among research  workers  on the 
extent to which nutrition  influences  composition.  Some studies have 
shoyvn only small effects  of nutrition  on composition  whereas  in other  
cases quite large effects  were recorded.  In an experiment  carried  out in 
the United  States  (Keane  et al, 1979) the effect of nutrition  on the com­
position  of Charolais  and Simmental  cross steers fed from 208kg to
Table 7
Average  composition'a)  of Charolais  and Simmental  cross steers fed 
two levels  of nutrition
Level  of nutrition High Medium
Daily gain (kg) 1.47 1.34
Carcass  wt. (kg) 330.8 331.3
% Meat 60.9 62.1
% Bone 16.4 16.3
% Fat 22.7 21.6
<a) of round  + rump
slaughter  at 550kg  liveweight  was negligible  (Table  7). Other  studies  in 
the United  States  (Prior'et  ai, 1977) also found that level of feeding  had 
little effect  on the composition  of continental  breed  types but in the small 
breed types,  high planes  of nutrition  resulted  in increased  fat and reduced  
meat percentages.
The effects  of plane of nutrition  on the carcass  composition  of Friesian  
steers was investigated  in an experiment  at Grange.  The cattle were fed 
high, moderate  or low levels  of nutrition  and slaughtered  at 230, 285 and 
340 kg carcass  weights  to separate  the effects  of nutrition  and slaughter  
weight. Table 8 shows the percentage  carcass  subcutaneous  fat in the 
various  treatment  groups. Fatness  increased  with increasing  slaughter  
weight  on all planes  of nutrition.  In addition  increases  in the level of 
nutrition  increased  fatness  at all slaughter  weights.  Of course,  the cattle
Table 8
Percentage  subcutaneous  fat in Friesian  steers  fed different  levels  of nutrition
Level of nutritionCarcass  weight  (kg)
230 285 340
High 8.5 12.1 14.2
Moderate 7.7 9.7 13.0
Low 5.9 7.3 10.7
47
fed on the higher  levels  of nutrition  grew faster  and reached  their slaughter  
weights  earlier.  Therefore,  although  they had more fat they had less bone  
and as a result there were only small differences  in meat percentage  
between  the different  nutritional  levels. In Ireland,  where grazed and 
conserved  grass are the main feeds for beef cattle and where  high levels  
of concentrate  feeding  are generally  uneconomic,  the possibilities  for 
influencing  carcass  meat percentage  by manipulating  nutrition  levels  are 
limited.
Diet type effects
The dry matter  content  of conserved  grass  affects  the carcass  composit ­
ion of cattle. Work  at Grange  some years  ago (McCarrick,  1966) showed  
that cattle fed silage  were fatter  than those fed hay. More recently  it has 
been shown  that animals  fed unwilted  silage were fatter than those fed 
wilted  silage (Flynn,  1978). Cattle  being  finished  for slaughter  on silage  
are generally  fed concentrate  supplements.  An experiment  was carried  
out in which  a commonly  used diet of unwilted  silage supplemented  with 
rolled barley  was compared  with a prepared  diet based on concentrates  
(mainly  rolled barley) and chopped  straw. Both diets had adequate  
protein,  minerals  and vitamins  and had the same estimated  energy  value 
(11 MJ ME  / kg DM). Friesian  steers  were used in the experiment.  They  
had similar  rates of gain on the two diets and were slaughtered  at 260, 
300 and 340 kg carcass  weights.  The effects  of the diets on fat and meat  
percentages  are shown  in Table 9.
Table 9
Fat and meat percentages  of cattle  fed silage/barley  or concentrate/straw  diets
Carcass  weight  (kg)
260 300 340
% Fat : Silage/barley 11.2 16.6 20.4
Concentrate/straw 11.0 15.3 16.6
% Meat : Silage/barley 69.7 64.9 62.1
Concentrate/straw 70.0 66.0 65.7
In agreement  with results  shown  earlier,  fat percentage  increased  and 
meat percentage  declined  with increasing  slaughter  weight.  There  was an 
effect  of type of diet on carcass  composition  but it was not the same at all 
slaughter  weights.  At 260 kg carcass  weights,  there was little difference 
between  the diets in carcass  composition.  However,  as carcass  weight  
increased  the effects  of diet became  more pronounced  and at 340 kg the 
differences  were 3.8 percentage  units more fat and 3.6 percentage  units  
units less meat for the silage and barley  fed cattle.
48
While the results  of this experiment  show that the silage based diet 
increased  fatness,  at present  this factor alone is not sufficient  to justify  
any change  by producers  in the use of unwilted  silage  for beef cattle.
Growth  promoter  effects
Information  on the effects  of growth  promoters  on carcass  composition  
is limited. In an experiment  at Grange  (Drennan  et al, 1979) Friesian  
steers fed silage plus 3 kg barley  daily were used to compare  the effects 
on carcass  composition  of different  growth  promoting  compounds  and 
combinations  of compounds.  Compared  with controls,  the feed additive  
Romensin  increased  carcass  weight  and as a result  fat percentage  was also 
slightly increased.  Ralgro plus Finaplix  treatment  increased  carcass  
weight also but in addition  it reduced  fatness and increased  meat  
percentage.
Conclusions
Bulls grow faster but fatten slower  than steers  while heifers  fatten at 
lighter  weights.  Equally,  continental  breed types grow faster  and fatten  
slower  than the traditional  breeds. Therefore,  the superiority  in com­
position  of bulls over steers and continentals  over traditional  breeds  
increases  with increasing  weight.
Carcass  fat percentage  increases  and meat percentage  decreases  with 
increasing  slaughter  weight. There  are no precise  estimates  of the rate at 
which  this happens  for the different  breed types. Approximate  estimates  
obtained  from research  work indicate  that over the normal slaughter  
weight  range there is a decline  in meat percentage  of 0.54 percentage  
units for Charolais  crosses,  0.65 percentage  units for Friesians  and 0.80 
percentage  units for Hereford  crosses  per 10 kg increase  in carcass  weight.
Both level of nutrition  and type of diet affect  carcass  composition  but 
in the context  of Irish beef production  the effects of these factors  are 
small.
In addition  to improving  growth  rate, hormonal  type growth  promoters  
also increase  meat percentage.
References
Berg, R. T., Jones,  S. D. M., Price, M. A., Fukuhara,  R., Butterfield,  R. M. and 
Hardin,  R. T. (1979). Patterns  of carcass  fat deposition  in heifers,  steers and 
bulls. Can. J. Anim.  Sci. 59 : 359-366.
Drennan,  M. J., Roche,  J. F. and L’Estrange,  J. L. (1979). Effect of Monensin  
sodium,  resorcylic  acid lactone  and trenbolone  acetate  on performance  and feed 
intake  of finishing  cattle. Anim. Prod. 28 : 416 (abstr.)
Flynn,  A. V. (1978). The relative  importance  of different  factors  in determining  
the beef production  of silage. Ph.D. Thesis,  National  University  of Ireland.
Geay,  Y. (1976). Fitting  the diet to the potential  of the animal. In Improving  the 
Nutritional  Efficiency  of Beef Production,  p. 333-347.  Ed. J. G. Tayler  and J. 
M. Wilkinson,  Commission  of the European  Communities.
49
Germ Plasm  Evaluation  Programme  (1974). Progress  Report  No. 1, Agricultural  
Research  Service,  U.S. Dept. Agr.
Harte,  F. J. (1969a).  Six years  of bull beef production  research  in Ireland.  In Meat  
Production  from Entire  Male Animals,  p. 153-171.  Ed. D. N. Rhodes,  Publ.
J. & A. Churchill  Ltd., London.
Harte,  F. J. (1969b).  The production  of beef from young bulls. III. Ir. J. Agric.  
Res. 8 : 293-305.
Keane,  M. G., Self, H. L. and Topel,  D. G. (1979). Effects  of dietary  energy  and 
slaughter  weight  on performance  and carcass  traits of Charolais  and Simmental  
cross steers.  Anim.  Prod. 28 : 458 (abstr.).
McCarrick,  R. B. (1966). Effect of method  of grass conservation  and herbage  
maturity  on performance  and body composition  of beef cattle. Proc. 10th Int. 
Grassld.  Cong.  Helsinki,  575-580.
MLC (1978). Beef Improvement  Services,  Newsletter  No. 34.
Prior, R. L., Kohlmeier,  R. H., Cundiff,  L. V., Dikeman,  M. E. and Crouse,  J. D. 
(1977). Influence  of dietary  energy  and protein  on growth  and carcass  com­
position  in different  biological  types of cattle. J. Anim.  Sci. 45 : 132-146.
50
SPECIAL  PRICE REDUCTIONS
to
MEMBERS  OF THE IRISH GRASSLAND  
ASSOCIATION
at
APPLEBY  JEWELLERS  LTD.
5 Johnston ’s Court,  Grafton  St., Dublin  2 
10 Aungier  St., Dublin  2 
Blackrock  and Dun Laoghaire
As manufacturers  and wholesalers  of gold jewellery  we 
can offer wholesale  discounts  to Macra members  as 
follows :
Engagement  Rings  and Wedding  Rings 33% 
Watches  by all best makers  25%
Gold & Silver  Jewellery  25%
Silver  Goods,  Cutlery,  Glass,  etc. 25%
HOPING  OUR FARMING  FRIENDS  HAVE  A GOOD  YEAR
APPLEBY  JEWELLERS  LTD.
Telephone  7S3991,  758483
51
SIZE  
SCALE  
GROWTH  
HIGH GAIN
COLOUR  MARKING
express  the superiority  
of the
CHAROLAIS
breed above  all others
Full information  from :
Walter  Feely,  Secretary,
Irish Charolais  Cattle  Society  Ltd.,
Irish Farm  Centre,  Bluebell,
Dublin  12. Tel. (01) 501166.
52
Beef Carcase  Classification  and 
Market  Requirements
P. O. RYAN
Department  of Agriculture,  Dublin  2.
Regulations  providing  for the Beef Carcase  Classification  Scheme  came  
into effect  on August  13th 1979 (1). The scheme  is currently  being  phased  
in on steers  at eleven  plants  and should  be fully operational  in 1980. One 
of the basic objectives  of the scheme  is to facilitate  the transmission  of 
market  requirements  back through  the production  and distribution  chain  
to the producer.  This paper presents  data on current  market  require ­
ments as determined  during  classification  studies  on overseas  markets  
over the past two years. These  requirements  are discussed  in the light of 
classification  returns  from export  abattoirs  during  the past six months.
The Classification  Scheme  is basically  a system  for describing  carcases  
in a standardised  manner (2). Two of the economically  most important  
characteristics  described  are ‘Conformation ’ and ‘Fatness ’. The distribu ­
tion of 57,000  steer carcases  among  the conformation/fatness  subclasses  
during  Autumn  1979 is shown  in Table 1.
Table 1
Percent  of steer carcases  in each Classification  Subclass
Fatness
ClassConformation  class
I R E L A N D Overall
1 — — — 0.1 0.1 — — 0.2
2 — 0.2 1.2 3.3 0.9 — — 5.6
3 — 0.6 9.2 14.2 1.4 — — 25.4
4 — 0.6 16.8 13.9 0.7 — — 32.0
5 — 0.5 15.2 6.5 0.2 — — 22.4
6 — 0.4 9.8 2.1 — — — 12.3
7 — 0.1 1.6 0.4 — — — 2.1
Overall — 2.4 53.8 40.5 3.3 — — 100.0
Average  carcase  wt. = 315.2 kg; N = 57,217.
The conformation  scale is constructed  in such a way that Classes  E 
(good commercial  type) and L (average  dairy type) are numerically  the
53
most important.  Class A can be regarded  as ‘reject ’ level for steers  but, 
as the scale also covers  cows, would be regarded  as a good commercial  
cow carcase.  Class R for steers  is a superior  type, while Class I (extra)  
is very exclusive,  with less than 0.1% of carcases,  and is designed  to cater  
for the exceptionally  well conformed  carcases  common  in some European  
countries.  The fat scale is constructed  to give an approximately  normal  
distribution  about  the central  class, 4.
Of the factors  determining economic  value  of carcases,  yield of saleable  
meat is perhaps  the most important.  The relationship  between  subclass 
and yield of saleable  meat is shown  in Table  2. A standardised  commer ­
cial cutting method  (3) was used to separate  431 steer carcases  into 
‘saleable  meat ’, ‘fat trim ’ and ‘bone ’. Fatness  class is the most important  
determinent  of yield, ranging  from an average  yield of 71.2% for fatness  
class 2 to 63.4% for fatness  class 7. Conformation  is also important  in 
determining  yield but only at low fat levels,  e.g. fatness  class 2, confor ­
mation  class I yields  77.3%,  R yields  74.2% and E yields  71.1%. But at 
higher  fat levels  (class  4) the conformation  effect  is insignificant;  I yielding 
69.0%,  R yielding  68.9% and E yielding  68.1 %.
Table 2
Effect  of conformation  and fatness  class on yield of saleable  meat  
(Steer  carcase;  N = 431)
Fatness
ClassConformation  class
I R E L A N D Overall
1
2 77.3 74.2 71.1 70.8 69.6 70.0—
71.2
3 74.5 70.3 70.0 69.7 69.0 68.7 — 70.1
4 69.0 68.9 68.1 67.9 65.7 68.3
5 71.1 68.3 67.1 68.2 — ' 67.7
6 67.8 67.6 66.1 65.6 — 66.9
7 63.6 63.4 62.7 65.6 — 63.4
Overall 69.5 68.6 69.2 69.2 69.8 68.9
It is clear,  therefore,  that carcases  vary considerably  in value according  
to variations  in conformation  and fatness.  These  differences  in value are 
reflected  in prices obtainable  on open wholesale  markets.  In a study 
carried  out at Rungis  market  in Paris in 1978 (4) classification  data were
54
related to wholesale  price. The study showed  that conformation  and 
carcase  weight  are the most important  detriments  of price in this market.  
Fatness  is relatively  unimportant,  largely because  all carcases  sold in 
Rungis  are pre-selected  and trimmed  down to an acceptable  relatively  
uniform  level of fatness.  Mean  prices  for each conformation  weight  sub­
class are presented  in Table 3. An additional  category,  ‘X’, was created  
to cater for the double  muscled  carcases  found in Rungis.
The magnitude  of the premium  for heavy,  well conformed  carcases  is 
somewhat  surprising  and is certainly  greater  than justified  by the higher
Table 3
Effect  of weight  and conformation  class on wholesale  price (Rungis  1978)  
(price in pence  per Kg; N = 210)
Weight
RangeConformation  class
X 1 R E L
500 Kg + 257 207 186 166 —
460-500  Kg 257 — 182 161 —
420-460  Kg 239 189 166 160 157
380-420 — 186 172 155 144
Under  380 Kg — — — 153 144
Overall 243 193 174 160 154
yields of saleable  meat  (5). Whatever  the reason,  the implications  for 
Irish cattle production  are significant,  e.g. a typical  Irish steer carcase  of 
320kg and conformation  class E would  realise  a price of 153p/kg.  An 
improvement  of one class in conformation  (to R) and an increase  of 60kg 
in carcase  weight  would  realise  a price increase  of 19p/kg —a premium  of 
£164 per carcase.  However,  of the sample  of 57,000  carcases  classified 
during  Autumn  1979, only 150 carcases  could meet these requirements,
i.e. less than three container  loads from all plants  in the country  over a 
three  month  period.
From this study and from trials carried out in co-operation  with 
exporters  and continental  buyers  it is possible  to construct  a contin ­
ental carcase  specification —particularly  for the prime Paris and Belgian 
markets  (Table  4). The inner grouping  of subclasses  (IR 123) can be 
regarded  as ‘very suitable ’ and the outer range (IRE 4 and E 123) as 
suitable  but at a discount.
55
Table 4
Continental  steer carcase  specification
1 R ELAND
1 1 1
1 1 1
i > 1
- - - - - - - -i- - - - - - - - ' - J - - - - - - - - -
v e r y 1 r !
s u i t a b l e
( 3 5 0 K g )
1 1 !
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ i_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1_ _ _ _ _ _J_ _ _ _ _ _ _T- - - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - - - \
S u i t a b l e1 1 1 ^
( 3 2 0 K g . - F ) !______ •_______ 1___„J______
1---------- r , T
' 1 1 1 1 1' 1 1 1 1 1
1-------- 1----------- i-------- 1--------
1 1i'll
1 11 i 1 11
- - - - - - - - - - - - - ^- - - - - - - - - - - — 1——-I—
1 11 1 r1 11 1
1 11_ _ _ _ _ _ 1_ _ _ _ _ _ I- - - - - - - - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - -2
4
F r o m t h e r e s u l t s  s h o w n  i n T a b l e 1 t h e p e r c e n t a g e  o f o u r s t e e r c a r c a s e s  
meeting  these requirements  are :
Very suitable  : 
Suitable  :less than
11%1%
Currently  about  20% of our steer carcases  are shipped  to the Continent  
but are only accepted  at a discount  and following  extensive  trimming  of 
excess  fat.
Turning  to our principal  export  market,  the United  Kingdom,  the situa ­
tion is more satisfactory.  The premium  market  in the U.K. is the super ­
market  and retail butchers  sector. Preliminary  data from a study  into the 
marketing  of Irish beef in the U.K. facilitate  the construction  of a typical  
U.K. Supermarket  purchasing  specification  (Table  5).
56
Table 5
U.K. supermarket  steer carcase  specification
Approximately  25% of our steer slaughterings  can meet these require ­
ments. This seems  an adequate  number  to ensure  a significant  trade with 
supermarkets,  but when spread over all plants it means  that only the 
largest  plant can assemble  more than two containers  per week.
Differences  in market  value have not in the past been communicated  
to the producer  and so there has been very little incentive  to change  
production  methods or breeds  to produce  a more suitable  type of carcase.  
The Classification  scheme  facilitates  realistic  price schedules  with pay­
ments  based  on quality  differences.  It is gratifying  to report  that several 
p’ants are already  paying  on the basis  of classification.  Table  6 shows  the 
price schedule  currently  (December  1979) operated  by one plant.
While the premia  and penalties  do not reflect  the full extent  of the 
variation  in market  value,  nevertheless  this schedule  represents  a welconie 
first step in the right direction.  It is to be hoped that all plants will 
institute  realistic  price schedules  when the classification  scheme  is fully
57
Table 6
Actual  price schedule  (December  1979)  
(prices  in p/kg carcase)
N D
2
3+ 3p.
-2p.
Standard
quoted
priceat
valuation
-4p,
-8p,
operational  so that the Irish producer  will have the opportunity  and 
incentive  to improve  his product  and render  it more suitable  for current  
market  requirements.
References
1. Fresh Meat (Beef Carcase  Classification)  Regulations  1979. S.I. No. 274 of 
1979. Stationery  Office,  Dublin  2.
2. Beef  Carcase  Classification  Scheme,  Dept, of Agriculture.  Leaflet  1979.
3. Ryan, P. O. (1978). Classification  and Carcase  Value. CBF —Irish Livestock  
and Meat Board 6th International  Beef Symposium,  Dublin  1978.
4. O’Connell,  J. et al. (1979). The marketing  of Irish beef in France  with special  
reference  to price/quality  relationships.  Irish Agricultural  Trust 1979.
5. Mulvehill,  P. (1979). The importance  of conformation  in assessing  carcase  
quality  and value. Irish Farmers ’ Journal  1979.
58
a dairy  herd, feed  a pig, 
fertilise  afield  and fuel a tractor.
A Bank  of Ireland  cheque  book is a most  adaptable  piece  of farm  
equipment.
It allows  you buy what  you need quickly  and simply.  It provides  you with an 
accurate  record  of who you've  paid. It tells you how you stand.
Make  sure you've  got a Bank  of Ireland  cheque  book.  It's a piece  of farm  
equipment  no farmer  should  be without.
BanKcrlreiand.
The  bank  of a lifetime
59
Pushing  up
Ireland ’s stock  
worldwide
Through  our marts  and meatplants 
and our worldwide  penetration  of 
available  markets  we provide  an 
unrivalled  service  to Irish farmers.
Take last year, Cork Marts-IMP  
Group  handled  over 307o of all Irish 
beef exports!  Our reputation  for 
quality  and continuity  of supply 
enables  us to pay top prices  for top- 
quality  stock.  And in tne process  makes  
the Cork Marts-IMP  Group  Ireland's  
largest  producer-owned  livestock  and 
meat marketing  organisation.  With the 
support  of our shareholders  and 
thousands  of other  farmers  through ­
out the country,  we will continue  to 
push up Ireland's  stock worldwide.
CORK  MARTS  
IMP  CROUP
Head  Ofice,  Wilton,  Cork Tel (021)  
45733 Meat Division  Headquarters.-  
Bamhall,  Leixhp,  Co Kildare  
Tel. (01) 280771
60
Use of Grass  Varieties  in Inereasing  
Produetion  of Beef
M. RYAN
An Foras  Taluntais,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
There are presently  47 ryegrass  varieties  on the Department  of Agricul ­
ture ’s recommended  list (1). In the Department ’s assessment,  all varieties  
are tested for at least three years at five centres.  Mechanical  harvesters  
are used to determine  DM yields and persistency  is assessed  on a scale  
of 1-9. Varieties  are assessed  in maturity  groups. It is clearly  desirable  
but impractical  to have animal  performance  data on all of these varieties.  
Cost factors  and land limitations  preclude  evaluation  of such large num ­
bers via the animal.  A limited  number  of varieties  are being  tested using 
animal performance  as the measuring  parameter  in the Agricultural  
Institute.
Connolly  et al (2) evaluated  a small number  of ryegrass  varieties  both 
as grazed  herbage  and winter  feed silage. Evaluations  of these varieties  
using grazing  animals  was carried  out using extra carrying  capacity  over 
and above the standard  grass (S^j) as the measure  of superiority.  The 
model  used was the common  intercept  model  (3).
At Johnstown  Castle in the years 1977-79  inclusive  an evaluation  of 
six varieties  .sown in monoculture,  has been conducted.  No legume  was 
sown,  nitrogen  fertiliser  input was 250 kg per ha per annum  given in 5-6 
incremental  dressings.  A description  of the varieties  is given in Table 1.
Table I
Varieties  evaluated  at Johnstown  Castle  1977-79
Variety Heading  date Ploidy
s.. Early Diploid
Barpastra Late Tetraploid
Sabrina Early Tetraploid
Vigor (Melle) Late Diploid
Cropper Early Diploid
Oakpark Early Diploid
61
The mean  effect  of variety  on liveweight  gain is shown  in Table  2.
Table 2
Effect  of variety  on liveweight  gain (kg/ha)— mean 1977-79
Variety LWG Relative
s.. 846 100
Barpastra 819 97
Sabrina 700 83
Vigor 911 108
Cropper 840 99
Oakpark 808 96
Only Sabrina  and Vigor  results  were significantly  different  from S21.
Seasonality  effects  were shown  by the different  varieties.  Table 3 illus­
trates the effect of variety  and stocking  rate on liveweight  gain and 
percentage  of total liveweight  gain attained  between  April and July, 1977-  
79.
LVv'G f.g/hc SEASONALITY  OF GROWTH  1977-79
62
Table 3
Effect  of variety  and stocking  rate on liveweight  gain (kg/ha)  April to July-
mean 1977-79
Variety  — SR LWG % of annual  total 
by July
Sj4 low SR 577 62
Sj, high SR 490 55
Barpastra  low SR 502 55
Barpastra  high SR 414 47
Vigor low SR 452 47
Vigor  high SR 477 50
Cropper 552 59
Oakpark 465 53
The period  mid-April  to early July represents  40 percent  of the total 
grazing  season. The early varieties  achieved  53 to 62 percent  and the late 
varieties  47 to 55 percent  of total annual  production  in that period.
The relatively  good mid-summer  production  of Vigor  compared  to S2. 
at the high stocking  rate is shown  in Fig. 1. The sharp decline  in live- 
weight  gain in S12 from early June onwards  is notable.
Wl(l(g) Livewcighf  change  (kg) April - July \978
April
FIGS.  2 & 3lAay Juno July
63
There were contrasting  weather  conditions  in the three years of the 
experiment.  The spring  of 1977 was normal  but the 1978 and 1979 spring 
seasons  were poor for grass growth  with resulting  effects  on liveweight  
gain of the animals.  These effects  are shown  in Figures  2 and 3 for 
and Vigor.
In 1977 animals  on these treatments  gained  weight  without  interruption  
from date of turn-out.  However,  in 1978 negative  liveweight  changes  
occurred  in all treatments  over the first three weeks  after turn-out.  The 
cattle on the late-heading  Vigor  showed  the greatest  loss in performance.  
A month  elapsed  before  the live weights  returned  to the levels  at turn-out.  
These were fasted weights  and while they may not represent  actual loss 
of carcase  weight,  nevertheless  they indicate  restriction  in DM intake. 
Maximum  possible  gains  are not likely in these circumstances.  The 1979 
data are illustrated  in Figure  4 and they indicate  that the cattle on high 
stocking  rate (HSR)  treatments  lost weight  or gained  very little liveweight  
for two cycles, i.e. five weeks after going to grass. The cattle on low 
stocking  rate treatments  (LSR)  performed  better  with only the late variety 
Vigor  showing  restriction  for one cycle.
Botanical  changes  were monitored  over time to check  on persistence  of 
sown species. These  are given in Table  4.
Table 4
Effect  of management  on percentage  ryegrass  in swards  (%) 1978
Variety Grazed Silage  + Grazed
s.. 80 75
Barpastra 68 44
Sabrina 18 24
Vigor 91 87
Cropper 85 82
Oakpark 82 75
The poor persistence  of the teraploids Sabrina and Barpastra  is notable.  
Cutting  silage and then grazing  the plots adversely  affected  survival,  
notably  in Barpastra.  Vigor  showed  better  persistence  than other  varieties  
under  both management  systems.
A small winter feeding  trial comparing  the six cultivars  was also 
undertaken.  The results  are summarised  in Table 5.
Table 5
Effect  of variety on average  daily gain (kg) of steers  fed on silage + 2.3 kg 
beet pulp nuts
VarietyAverage  daily gain 
kg/day Relative
s.. .89 100
Barpastra .78 88
Sabrina .93 104
Vigor .82 93
Cropper .91 102
Oakpark .80 90
The results  indicate  that Sabrina  gave much better  results  as a silage-  
fed grass than as a grazing  grass. However  differences  shown  in Table 5 
were not significant.  Further  studies  on the silage feeding  value of these 
varieties  are in progress.
It is concluded  that there are a number  of new ryegrass  varieties  avail ­
able which have advantages  to offer in terms of good mid-summer  
production,  persistence,  silage yield and quality. It behoves  the farmer,  
adviser  and research  worker  alike to seek out these better varieties  and
65
to recommend  and use only those which have shown their superiority  
over the standard  varieties,  especially  in trials where measurements  of 
animal  production  were made.
References
1. Herbage  Varieties,  Recommended  List 1980, Dept, of Agriculture.
2. Connolly,  V., de Valle Ribeiro,  M., Crowley,  J. C. Potential  of grass and 
legume  under  Irish conditions.  Proc. Int. meeting  on Animal  Prod, from Temp.  
Grassld.  June 1977, Irish Grassld.  & Animal  Prod. Assoc,  and An Foras  Talun ­
tais, Dublin.
3. Connolly,  J. The design  of grazing  experiments  : 2. A simple  linear  model  for 
the gain-stocking  rate relationship.  Ir. J. agric. Res. 15, 365-374,  1976.
66
GOOD NEWS!
HELP CONTROL  
GRASS  TETANY
New Greenvale  Cal-Mag  Grass Nuts 
will help protect your animals  
against GRASS TETANY for as 
little as 4p a day for cattle and 2p 
a day for sheep.
Greenvale  Cal-Mag  Grass Nuts are 
formulated  to give the required  
daily amount  of Calcined  Magnes ­
ite. And the high nutritional  value  
of G.C.M. Nuts provide valuable  
nutrients  for the profitable  produc ­
tion of meat and milk.Easy to store . . . easy to handle  . . . 
easy to feed. Ask your Irish Sugar  
Co. man about the GOOD NEWS  !
2 ozs. of Calcined  Magnesite  per 
pound  of nuts :
Cattle 1 lb. per day per head.  
Sheep J lb per day per head.
CAL • MAG CRASS NUTS
Greenvale
The Irish Sugar  Company  Ltd.,
St. Stephen ’s Creen House,  Dublin  2. Tel. 767501Greenvak
CAL MAG 
GRASS  
NUTS
67
Premier  Meat  
Packers  (I) Ltd
Sallins,  Co. Kildare
We require large numbers
of
PRIME BULLOCKS  
and HEIFERS  
LEAN COWS
For Quotations  Please  Ring  
045-9871  (10) Telex  5301
68
A System  of Low Cost Production  in 
the United  Kingdom
J. C. WILCOX
Farm Director,  Trawsgoed  Experimental  Husbandry  Farm, Dyfed,
Wales.
The location  of Trawsgoed  Experimental  Husbandry  Farm on the edge 
of the coastal  belt of mid-Wales  plays an important  part in determining  
the type of farming  system  which  can be followed.  The climate  is relativ ­
ely mild due to the influence  of the Gulf Stream  and the rainfall  is 1200 
mm and is well distributed  throughout  the year.
The lower part of the farm, which is used predominantly  for dairying,  
is 30 to 100 metres  above sea level. The lower land is reasonably  level 
and can be used for grazing  and silage while the slopes  are steep  enough  
to limit their use to grazing. Perennial  ryegrass  and white clover  sown  
as semi-permanent  swards  are the basis  of all the grass  seeds  mixtures  and 
the favourable  climate  and high rates of fertilizer  used result in good  
yields. In recent years under various  systems  of grazing  management,  
yields  of dry matter  per hectare  have exceeded  12 tonnes.
One of the objectives  in setting up this system of production  some  
twelve years ago was to maximise  the amount  of milk produced  from 
grass and to minimise  the input of purchased  concentrates.  In order to 
do this a spring  calving  herd was established  and early work investigated 
stocking  rates and time of calving.  AHhough  higher  stocking  rates have 
been used,  experience  has resulted  in the 180 Friesian  cows being  stocked 
at 2.5 cows per ha of grass receiving  approximately  400 kg of nitrogen  
fertilizer  per ha annually.  Average  annual  milk production  for 1977-79  
was 4586 litres sold per cow and was supported  by 618 kg of concentrates  
per cow. To achieve  this level of performance  careful  investigation  of 
three main aspects  of management  has been necessary.  The date of 
calving  in relation  to the date of turnout  to grass has a large effect  on the 
amount  of milk produced  and was investigated  in an early series of 
experiments,  the results from which indicated  that January/February  
calving  was beneficial  from he aspecas  of v'cld. financial  return and 
ease of management.  Secondly,  to sustain  a high level of production  from  
grass some system  of grazing  management  must he nracticed  and there ­
fore since the spring  calving  herd was first established  three main systems 
of grassland  management  have been employed.
The first system  used in the early days of the unit was one of paddock  
grazing,  generally  with two days spent in individual  paddocks  and a 
rotation  of 24 days. This was managed  in coniunction  with an equal area 
of grassland  used mainly  for conservation.  The management  during  the 
grazing  season  was for early  grazing  of the conservation  area,  followed  by 
grazing  the paddock  area for most of the season,  but allowing  for sup­
69
plementation  of the paddock  area by grazing  part of the conservation  
area if shortages  of grass occurred  during  mid-summer.  In the autumn  
the conservation  area was again  grazed  after the third silage  cut had been 
taken. During  the years when this system  of grazing  management  was 
used, a stocking  rate of 3 cows per hectare  was maintained.
The second  system  of grazing  management  employed  was one of set 
stocking,  or more accurately  continuous  grazing,  as a grassland  area 
stocked  at 2.5 cows per hectare  was used for grazing  and the density  of 
stocking  controlled  by taking  conservation  from part of the area. For 
most  of the grazing  season  one half to three quarters  of the area was used 
for grazing  and the remainder for conservation.  During  the early  part and 
at the end of the grazing  season  the whole  area was used for grazing.  By 
this system,  although  part of the grassland  area was continuously  grazed,  
the area was adjusted  to ensure  that there was always  sufficient  grass  and 
also that the grazing  area was never  seriously  undergrazed.
The third grazing  system  consisted  of utilizing  five or six paddocks  in 
no strict rotation,  but always  ensuring  that the cows had plenty  of grass 
for grazing  with any surplus  taken as silage. During  the course  of the 
grazing  season all paddocks  were cut for silage at some stage. The 
stocking  rate on this system  of management  was also 2.5 cows  per hectare.
Although  these three systems  of management  were not run as a strict  
comparison,  all were on the farm during  some seasons  and apparently  
supported  very similar  levels  of production.
Because  of a swing away from paddock  grazing  to the apparently  
simpler system  of set stocking,  a critical  comparison  of continuous  grazing  
and paddock  grazing  was started  in 1977. The provisional  results  from 
three years of this experiment  have indicated  that rotational  grazing,  
although  giving less total DM production,  has resulted  in higher  milk 
production.  This appears  to be due to the better  rationing  of the grazing  
availab'e,  particularly  at times of grass shortage.  The results  for 1977 
and 1978 are given in Table 1.
Table 1
Comparison  of rotational  and continuous  grazing
Rotational Continuous
Total grass 1977 11.6 12.4
DM production  
tonnes/ha 1978 11.6 12.1
Total lactation 1977 4491 4076
yield kg 1978 5054 4718
In 1979 an investigation  into the level of production  from grass under  
a system  where ad libitum  good quality  grass was always  available  to 
cows, has indicated  that higher  milk yields  may be possible  throughout
70
the grazing  season. This feature  has yet to be combined  with a manage ­
ment system  to provide  adequate  returns  per hectare.
In a system  of milk production  where individual  cow yields  are rela­
tively modest  it is imperative  that levels  of concentrate  feeding  must not 
be high if good financial  returns  are expected.  If only a limited  amount  
of concentrate  is fed it is obvious  that careful  consideration  must  be given  
to the stage of lactation  when it is most profitable  to feed concentrates.  
Three main periods  of feeding  have been investigated,  feeding  at grass,  
steaming  up before  calving,  and feeding  in early lactation  between  calving  
and turning  out in early April.
For a period of seven years, half the cows on an intensive  paddock  
grazing  system  were fed a flat rate of 1.8 kg of concentrates  per day. The 
overall response  to this feeding  was 1 kg of milk for every 1.6 kg of 
concentrates  fed. In one year only, did the extra mi'k pay for the con­
centrates  fed. Access  to a feed dispenser  while grazing  in two years of 
another  trial produced  no extra milk in one year and an increase  of 1 kg 
of mi'k for every 1.7 kg of concentrate  fed in the second  year.
Silage is fed during  the winter  period and gives an adequate  rate of 
liveweight  gain in the dry period. An experiment  was run in the three  
years 1975-1977  in which two groups  of cows were fed good quality  
silage and one group received  in addition  3 kg of concentrates  per cow 
per day for 50 days before calving. The concentrate  feeding  did not 
produce  any extra mi'k in the subsequent  lactation.  A series of experi ­
ments  has been carried  out to measure  the response  to concentrates  fed 
in early lactation.  One experiment  for three years compared  two levels 
of flat rate feeding.  Cows  calving  in January/February  and in February/  
Aoril  were fed either  5 kgs or 10 kgs of concentrates  per day together with 
ad Ubitifm  silage. The results  are shown  in Table 2
Table 2
Response  to concentrates  fed in early lactation
Calving  periodSilage +
5 kg concentratesSilage +
10 kg concentrates
January  - February
Lactation  yield 4835 kg 5004 kg
Concentrates  fed 660 kg 1003 kg
February  - April
Lactation  yield 4318 kg 4395 kg
Concentrates  fed 471 kg 561 kg
With January/February  calving  cows the response  to doubling  the 
quantity  of concentrates  fed per day was to produce  an extra kilogram  
of milk for every 2.02 kg of concentrates  fed. With February/April  
calvers  a much smaller  increase  in average  yield was also uneconomic.
71
As a result  of this and other  experiments  it is now the practice  with the 
herd to restrict  concentrate  feeding  to the period  from 2-3 weeks  before 
calving  until mid-May.  During  the dry period  silage gives an adequate  
rate of gain and concentrate  feeding  in early lactation  is restricted  to 7.5 
kg per day  for Januaiy/February  calvers  and to 5-6 kg for March  calvers. 
Extra feed is only given if grass production  is seriously  reduced  when 
some extra concentrates  may be used to supplement  either grazing  or 
silage.
Nitrogen  fertilizers  have generally  been applied  at high rates, approx-  
irnately  400 kg per has is used per annum. Following  six years of high 
nitrogen  fertilizer  application  to a paddock  grazing  system,  half the area 
was top-dressed  with only 250 kg of nitrogen  per hectare  each year while  
the heavier  450 kg dressings  were maintained  on the other half. The 
results  are shown  in Table 3.
Table 3
Nitrogen  level on paddocks  — milk production  litres per ha
250 kg N 450 kg N
1974 2905 1 2968 1
1975 2659 1 2746 1
1976 2891 1 3082 1
At the end of the three year period  milk production  from the paddocks  
receiving  the lower level of nitrogen  had been reduced  by 7% and the 
amount  of time spient grazing  the paddocks  was considerably  reduced  
with correspondingly  more time spent grazing  the area allocated  for 
conservation.
One of the problems  of spring  calving  is the production  of heifers  for 
herd replacements.  Because  of the necessity  for batch calving  at a time 
to make maximum  use of the subsequent  grass production,  calving  can 
only be at two or three years old. Two year old calving  while relatively  
easy with autumn  calvers  is more difficult  with spring  calvers  which  do 
not reach an adequate  pre calving  liveweight  with the same ease. As a 
consequence  of this an investigation  was started  to compare  three  year old 
calving  with calving  a year earlier. It is intended  to carry out this investi­
gation through  the productive  life of the heifers  but preliminary  results 
are indicating  that the heifers  calving  at three  years  are over 75 kg heavier  
at first calving  and over 70 kg heavier  at the second  calving  than those 
first calving  at two year old. The three year old calvers  produced  868 kg 
more milk in the first lactation  and only 309 kg more milk in the second  
lactation.  This increase  in yield does not compensate  for the extra lac­
tation  obtained  from the two year old calving  heifers.
The overall herd performance  in 1979, despite  the late cold spring, 
follows  closely  on results in previous  years. The results  are shown in
72
Table  4. The price used in calculating  the output  was 10.62 p per litre 
for milk and the price of the home mixed  concentrates  £104 per tonne.
Table 4
Herd performance  1979
Average  number  cows 171
Milk sold per cow 4538 1
Milk sales per cow £482
Concentrates  fed per cow 635 kg
Concentrates  fed per litre milk 0.14 kg
Margin  over concentrates  per cow £416
Calving  date has an important  effect  on yield with much  reduced  yields  
for March/April  calvers  as compared  with the January/February  calvers. 
Later  calving  is associated  with much lower  levels  of concentrate  feeding 
but this is insufficient  to compensate  for the lower  yield and margins  are 
reduced.  The contribution  of grass to annual  milk production  is shown 
in Table 5.
Table 5
Contribution  of grass to annual  milk production
Calving  periodAnnual  concentrate  
use kgMilk yield 
kg/cow% total energy  
from grass
January/February 711 4779 80
February/March 456 4419 86
March/April 203 4083 93
Late calving  is associated  with the more efficient  use of grass but calv­
ing in January/February  which is now the general  pattern  in this herd 
combines  good grassland  utilization  with higher  milk yields and better  
financial  returns.
73
Leo
Y^low
Ireland ’s leading  
milking  cow 
injector
guaranteed
uIrish
cP
LeoLaboratoriesLEO  Veterinary  Division  •Dublin  12.
74
Economics  of Low and High Cost  
Dairying  Systems
S. J. AIMES
Farm Management  Services.  Milk Marketing  Board, United  Kingdom.
Last year the results of a comparison  of dairying  in our respective 
countries  were summarised  (reference  1). It may be argued  that the fig­
ures, referring  to the calendar  year 1977, have been overtaken  by events, 
but they serve to emphasise  some of the differences  between  low and high 
cost systems  (Table 1).
Table 1
Physical  and financial  performance  (£ per acre)
Ireland England  and Wales
Herd size 48 74
Milk yield (galls) 724 1100
Concentrate  use (cwts) 8.4 35.4
Stocking  rate (acres/cow) 1.4 1.3
Farm gross margin 159 143
Overhead  costs 54 99
Profit 105 44
By tradition  Irish dairying  can be regarded  as being  low cost in terms  
of all the major inputs, feed, fertiliser,  paid labour, equipment  and 
borrowed  money. So far as Britain  is concerned  the opposite  is true. 
The figures  show that while by conventional  measures  of efficiency,  such 
as herd size and milk yield the Irish levels are below the British  levels,  
they are higher  in terms  of the factor  that really  matters,  profitability.
At this point it is important  to consider  why the British  and Irish sys­
tems of dairying  differ to such an extent. Historically  Britain  has had a 
far higher  milk price than that prevailing  in Ireland  and profitability  has 
consequently  been greater.  At the same time there has also been a good 
deal of prestige  associated  with a high milk yield per cow. These two 
factors  in combination  have encouraged  expenditure  on commodities  
assumed  to help bring about  the desired  high yield, namely  concentrates  
and sophisticated  technical  equipment.  Such expenditure  has inevitably  
been encouraged  by commercial  organisations  selling  the various  products.
Such developments  are fine so long as the milk price is high enough  to 
support  them. A sophisticated  industry  is however  far more vulnerable  
to a reduction  in price such as that currently  taking  place.
For the British  farmer,  operating  his high cost system, the outlook  is 
bleak, especially  since there is currently  little improvement  in technical
75
performance;  milk yields in our FMS sample  being static around  1150 
gallons  and concentrate  use around  36 cwt. Thus  the anticipated  increase 
of 11 per cent in milk price for the year ending  March 1980 will be 
inadequate  to meet cost increases  in general  and the rise in overhead  
costs in particular  (Table  2).
Table 2
FMS 82 all-grass  farm sample —financial  results  (£ per acre)
Year ending  MarchPercentage
1979 1980 change
Whole  farm gross margin 187 208 -h 12
Overhead  costs 136 162 + 20
Profit 51 46 - 11
Reference  2
Reference  to profit is meaningless  unless  we consider  how it is used.  
The main demands  on profit are for loan repayment,  tax, capital and 
private expenditure.  In 1979 these amounted  to almost £20,000  and 
resulted  in an increase  in overdraft  of nearly  £4,000. The implication  of 
such figures  is that at current  performance  the existing  milk price cannot  
support  the present  levels of skilled  labour,  modern  technology  or bor­
rowed  capital.
The lesson for the Irish dairy farmer  is that even if current  levels of 
profitability  leave him with spare cash, he should be careful  not to use 
it to build an overhead  cost structure  such as that commonly  seen in 
Britain  unless  he can achieve  physical  efficiency  well in excess  of 1150 
gallons  from 36 cwt concentrates  when stocked  at 1.3 acres  per cow. This 
argument  is strengthened  when we consider  that with the current  surplus  
in Europe,  the milk price is unlikely  to be maintained  in real terms. 
Further  there is a possibility,  hopefully  remote,  that the current  disagree ­
ment amongst  EEC members  may lead to a breakdown  of the Common  
Agricultural  Policy. One of the consequences  of such a breakdown  may 
well be to force Irish milk back on to the depressed  world  market.
It would therefore  seem vital that the Irish dairy industry  moves  for­
ward in a manner  that, while not necessarily  showing  maximum  profit 
under  current  conditions,  maintains  a reasonable  level of profit in more 
adverse  circumstances.  That surely means  making  the most of Ireland ’s 
natural  advantage,  grass,  and being  wary of an over capitalised  industry.
It should perhaps  be remembered  that sophisticated  capitalisation  is 
not in itself a guarantee  of improved  physical  performance.  Indeed  the 
recent  ADAS  surveys  of ‘Complete  Diet Feeding ’, surely  the ultimate  in 
sophistication,  have shown no economic  advantages  over conventional  
systems. Indeed examination  of some of the conclusions  of the most 
recent  report  suggest  the opposite.
76
Summary  of economic  conclusions  (Reference  3)
1. There was no clear evidence  of complete  diet herds improving  yields  
faster  than other  herds;  indeed  the evidence  indicated  the reverse.
2. Complete  diet herds used considerably  more concentrates  per litre of 
milk produced.
3. Complete  diet fed herds  did not on average  achieve  a higher  margin  
over concentrates  than conventionally  fed herds.
4. There still appears  to be no direct financial  reward  from herds on 
complete  diet feeding.
Such conclusions  do not however  show that complete  diet feeding  never  
has a place in dairy herd management.  What they suggest  is that the 
system  should  be adopted  only for reasons  such as ‘ease of management ’ 
rather  than for expectation  of improved  performance.  I would  argue  that 
such ‘ease of management ’ reasons  are far more likely  to apply  in the east 
of England  where a farmer  has access  to countless  arable by-products  
than they are in the west of Ireland.
The merits  of the latest  ‘system ’ of cow feeding —Flat Rate Feeding  of 
Concentrates  — must be judged in a similar way. While the results  
achieved  by such as Fred Gordon  at Hillsborough  and Cled Thomas  at 
Hurley  are impressive,  it is likely that if the system  were adopted  by a 
large number  of commercial  farmers,  results  would show no advantage  
over existing  systems.  Thus flat rate feeding  must be judged  on a wider  
basis,  and it is by such a measure  that it seems  to hold attractions  for the 
Irish farmer.
The philosophy  of the system  meets  the ideals  outlined  earlier  namely,  
using the natural  resource  of grassland  and being a champion  of the 
simpler  approach.  In its simplest  form flat rate feeding  would  require  a 
clamp,  albeit large, of self-feed  silage,  a trough  for feeding  concentrates  
and an unsophisticated  milking  parlour.  So far as the cows  are concerned  
housing  would  be of little benefit,  but from the farmer ’s viewpoint  prob ­
ably essential.
Discussion  of flat rate feeding  tends to mix up two separate  issues,  
firstly the method  of feeding  concentrates  and forage to cows and sec­
ondly,  the absolute  levels  of each component.  Complete  diet and flat rate 
feeding  should be evaluated  on whether  they seem to be the correct  
method  of feeding  for the individual.  The wider question  of absolute  
amounts  of forage and concentrates  is one which all dairy farmers,  
irrespective  of system  of feeding,  should  be asking.
Considering  concentrates  first, where the FMS average  use is currently  
35 cwt per cow, there is no indication  that the use of anything  over about  
25 cwt per cow leads to an improvement  in gross margin  per acre (Table
3).
Table 3
Analysis  of performance  of 1005 FMS farms  by concentrate  use (Reference  2)
Concentrate  use per cow (cwt)  17 23 27 32 37 46
Gross margin  per acre 173 195 217 216 222 221
77
When  .examining  these figures  in the Irish context,  it should  be remem ­
bered that the majority  of the herds included  in the sample  above are 
autumn  calving  and that for spring  calvers  the optimum  use is likely to 
be lower.
When a similar  analysis  is made on the basis of nitrogen  use, some  
improvement  can be seen at the highest  levels, although  that rate of 
improvement  slows  down at about  200 units per acre, around  the current  
FMS average  (Table  4).
Table 4
Analysis  of performance  of 1005 farms  by nitrogen  use (Reference  2)
Nitrogen  use (units  per acre) 62 100 139 178 218 259 333
Gross  margin  per acre 157 193 212 239 238 252 262
The implication  of such figures  is that the average  farmer  is likely to 
get a better  financial  response  from additional  fertiliser  than from addit ­
ional concentrates.  Such analyses  are however  sometimes  misleading  in 
their application  in that the inter-relationships  of such as nitrogen  use 
and stocking  rate are ignored.
This problem  can be overcome  by multiple-regression  analysis.  A 
recent study (Reference  4) indicated  that the direct response  to 1 lb 
nitrogen  was about  0.5 gallons  of milk while  the response  to 1 lb concen ­
trates  was only about  0.1 gallons  milk.
In terms of performance  levels shown  in the Irish comparison  earlier  
in this paper,  it could be argued  that there is scope for increase  of all 
inputs. The weight  of evidence  does however  suggest  that effort should 
be concentrated  on grassland  improvement.  This development  should 
take place alongside  an attempt  to maintain  the traditional  low-cost 
approach  through  which  Irish dairying  can ensure  its future. Lest I be 
accused  of talking  abstractly,  I would  conclude  by suggesting  that target  
p)erformance  might  well be 1100 gallons  from 16 cwt concentrates  when 
stocked  at 1.2 acres  per cow with 250 units of nitrogen,  under  conditions  
prevailing  in much  of western  England.  In the best areas  of Ireland,  con­
centrate  use ;could  well be decreased  and stocking  rate increased  to make  
full use of the potential  of the land.
Such performance  while  not over taxing  the system,  be that the cow or 
the grassland,  is likely to show a good return in terms of both gross 
margin  and, more importantly,  profitability.
References
1. Hughes,  H. C. A comparison  of the economics  of milk production  in Ireland  
and Great  Britain.  Ir. Grassl.  & Anim.  Prod.  Assoc.  J. Vol. 14, p. 67, 1979.
2. Amies,  S. J., Craven,  J. A. and Surah,  M. S. An analysis  of FMS costed  farms  
1978-79.  Milk Marketing  Board. FMS Information  Unit Report  No. 22, Dec­
ember 1979.
3. MAFF.  Complete  feeding  of dairy cows —supplementary  report  on investiga ­
tions carried  out during  1978-79.
4. Hawkins,  S. W. and Rose, P. H. The relationship  between  the rate of fertiliser  
nitrogen  applied  to grassland  and milk production;  an analysis  of recorded  
farm data. Grass  and Forage  Science,  Vol. 34, No. 3, September  1979.
78
Brucellosis  — Strategy  for the Farmer
B. CUNNINGHAM
Department  of Veterinary  Pathology  and Microbiology,  Faculty  of 
Veterinary  Medicine,  University  College,  Dublin.
Although  the strategy  of controlling  Brucellosis  on the farm might be 
simply stated as the “hygienic  management  of every parturition ” it is 
always  helpful  to know why one is advised  to do one thing and not do 
another.  If one has an adequate  knowledge  of the disease  suitable  man­
agement  methods  can be easily  deduced  to suit one’s own farm.
For all practical  purposes  the route of infection  on the farm is via the 
mouth  (it is possible  to transmit  the disease  in other ways but these are 
not of any great importance  in the field).  Thus  we have to protect  animals  
against  eating,  drinking,  or licking  any food,  water  or other  materials  that 
may have become  contaminated.  For instance,  a cow can become  infected  
by licking  her legs after paddling  through  infected  mud or slurry. A 
simpler  approach  is to prevent  these materials  from becoming  contamin ­
ated.
When ingested  the organism  passes  through  the mucosa  into the lym­
phatic  system  where  it meets  the major  defence  system  of the body. The 
bacterial  cells are engulfed  by phagocytes  and carried  to the next lym­
phatic  gland. Some destruction  of the organisms  takes place (more or 
less depending  on whether  the animal  is immunised —vaccinated —or not). 
In the unvaccinated  animal some organisms  will survive  the passage  
through  the lymphatic  system and pass into the blood stream via the 
thoracic  duct — and then become  widely dispersed  through  the body 
tissues. What  happens  next depends  on the age of the animal,  its sex and 
whether  or not it is pregnant.
(i) The young  calf and non pregnant  heifer are very resistant  to infec ­
tion. After  exposure  to infection they  may show  transient  blood  titres  
(very few will develop  permanent  blood titres)  which  in a matter  of 
six months  or so will usually  return  to negative  levels. These  animals  
will have thus acquired  a very useful Natural  Immunity  which  will 
protect  them against  re-infection  in later life. A small percentage  of 
such exposed  animals  (1-2%)  may however,  become  Latent  Carriers  
—and show no sign of the disease  until their first pregnancy  ends in 
an abortion.
It is not a good idea to rely on Natural  Immunity  as this small 
number  of latent carriers  can keep the disease  going in cycles  for 
many years in any large herd.
It is better  to rear the replacement  heifers  away from the adult  herd,  
and when  they are about  a year old to vaccinate  them. At this stage, 
if the adult  herd has been cleared  of the disease,  it might  be prudent  
to carry out an Anamnestic  Test on the heifer replacements  and 
remove  any possible  latent  carriers.
79
Immunisation  — whether  natural  or by vaccination  is not 100%  
effective  . It will protect  70-80%  of females  against  reasonable  
challenge  during  pregnancy.  Hence,  we must arrange  our manage ­
ment  so that in even an accident  situation  heavy  exposure  of pregnant  
females  is not possible.
(ii) The preg;nant  female
If unvaccinated,  the pregnant  female  has no initial defence  against  
invasion  and some organisms  will gain access  to the uterus  and the 
developing  udder. These are the two important  predilection  sites in 
cattle.
In the uterus, the developing  foetal membranes  are particularly  
attractive  to brucella  abortus  and enormous growth  in numbers  takes  
place in them. The foetal cotyledons  are damaged  and abortion  
usually  follows  anytime  later than 37 days after infection —a usual 
interval  is about  6 to 8 weeks. At the time of abortion  enormous  
numbers  of brucella  are released  in the placenta,  the foetal fluids  
and in the foetus. All the aborted  materials  are highly  dangerous  to 
both animal  and human  health.
If no precautions  are taken to control  the spread  of infection  in a 
non-vaccinated  herd the likely outcome  is that 90-100%  of females  
will abort with a loss of 80% of the calf crop.
In unvaccinated  animals  an infective  dose of 15 million  organisms  
will cause 100% abortions.  But a dose as low as 1500 organisms  
can cause 70% of heifers  to abort. Under  normal  farm conditions  
15 million  organisms  would  be a very small dose —emphasising  the 
need for very careful  hygiene.
(iii) The vaccinated  pregnant  female,  although  still susceptible  to heavy 
challenge,  has a very useful degree  of immunity— sufficient  to cope 
with environmental  risks on a well managed  farm.
Subjected  to a challenge  of 15 million  organisms,  70-80%  of vaccin ­
ated heifers  will be completely  protected.  Of the 20-30%  of heifers 
which  will become  reactors  possibly  half of them would  have viable 
calves. This is in marked  contrast  to the case of the unvaccinated  
heifers.
(iv) The male calf is quite resistant  to infection.  At the age of puberty  
he becomes  more susceptible  and can become  infected  in the repro ­
ductive  tract. Infected  bulls sometimes  produce  infected  semen  and 
although  they usually  appear  to cause little harm in natural  service  
their semen  can be very infectious  if used in AI. Chronic  infection  
can cause sterility.
Animal  health
1) An infected  cow discharges  enormous  numbers  of organisms  at the 
time of parturition  (whether  full term or premature).  These  must not 
drain into areas  where  other  cattle  can come in contact  with them.
2) After the placenta  is passed the genital  tract rapidly  involutes  and 
even in a few days the amount  of infection  being passed may be
80
minimal  or nil. Any cow should thus be kept separate  from her 
comrades  at least until after she has cleansed.
3) The loose box should  be cleaned  out and disinfected  after each par­
turition —and the hind parts  of the cow should  be sponged  down  with 
a suitably  diluted  disinfectant  after cleansing.
4) The calf should  be left with the cow for 24 hours so that it will be 
licked clean and will also get sufficient  colostrum.  A “wet” calf put 
in a pen with other  calves  can spread  the disease  as its coat can carry  
heavy  infection.  Even if the mucous  is allowed  to dry into the calf ’s 
coat it is still infective.
5) Dead  calves and foetal membranes  must be buried. They must not 
be thrown  on a dung heap or slurry  tank. They are often lifted with 
a fork, and moved  in a wheelbarrow —both  of which should  then be 
cleaned  and disinfected.
6) Leave  a trough  of disinfectant  outside  each isolation  box— and disin ­
fect your boots when going  in and coming  out.
7) Infection  can survive  in manure  or slurry for 3 months. Thus the 
manure  from the isolation  boxes should  be stacked  in a safe-draining  
area and allowed  to ferment.  Ideally,  isolation  boxes  should  not drain  
into the main slurry tank. If they do, slurry must only be spread  on 
non-grazing  land.
8) An infected  udder  is not of any great importance  to animal  health — 
even to a calf suckling  it (but infected  milk is a great hazard to 
humans.
9) Good herding  every day is essential  during  the season  of calvings  or 
possible  abortions.
At any sign of impending  parturition,  or of abdominal  discomfort  or
uneasiness,  a pregnant  animal  should be isolated  — at least until it is
apparent  that she is not going  to abort.
Human  health
Humans  are often quite susceptible  to Brucellosis.
1) Ninety  per cent of infected  cows are infected  in the udder  and thus 
produce  infected  milk —at least intermittently.  The milk of such cows 
will give a positive  MRT result. Such milk should  never be drunk  
unless  effectively  pasteurised.
2) Assisting  at an abortion,  or even a full term infected  parturition  can 
be particularly  dangerous  as the level of infection  on the calf and in 
the fluids and placenta  can be enormous.  If so assisting  or handling  
any of these materials,  rubber  or plastic  gloves  should  be worn.  After  
use they (and any ropes  used)  should  be effectively  cleaned,  disinfected  
(or sterilised  by boiling) —or buried  with the calf and placenta.
3) Placentae  should  not be manually  removed  unless  the cow is clinically  
ill with metritis —a decision  for your veterinary  surgeon.
4) Before  removing  bedding  from an isolation  box it should  be sprayed  
with disinfectant —e.g. Halomid.
5) Any clothing  contaminated  with uterine  discharges  should  be steeped 
in disinfectant  and then washed.  Furthermore,  any parts of the body
81
similarly  contaminated  should be thoroughly  washed as soon as
possible.
The newborn  calf should not be handled  — except  with gloves. It 
should  be left with the dam for at least a day so that it will be licked  
clean by the dam.
In a vaccinated  herd the within-herd  spread of Brucellosis  can be 
completely  prevented  by using the information  given above.
The only time there is any significant  risk of spread  of infection  on the 
farm is at or near the time of parturition.  Almost  all the attention  should 
be focussed  on this.
For the present,  in the pre-intensive  area, it is most imjxirtant  to keep  
the spread of disease  to a minimum.  In doing so. Brucellosis  can be 
virtually  eliminated  without  too much financial  strain.
At the commencement  of 1981 it is expected  that compulsory  eradica ­
tion measures  will come into force. These can prove economically  
disastrous  if there is much  infection  left in the herd. Most herds  clear up 
rapidly  under  intensive  measures  but some,  particularly  the larger  herds,  
may experience  difficulties.
It is not a simple process  to finally get rid of the last pockets  of 
Brucellosis  infection  in a country.  But the means  to do so are available  
and with farmer  co-operation  they will succeed.  The total eradication  of 
Brucellosis  is worth  working  for—and it is something  that can definitely 
be achieved.
82
Mewgrowth.
If Irish farming  has one basic  strength, it is our ability  
to grow  grass  like nowhere  else in Europe.  And every  new 
growth of grass  is a promise  of more  fodder,  more  stock,  
more  income  for Irifeh farming.
AtGouldings,werelyon  basic  strengths  too.
Reliable  research, dependable  service,  
first class  products.  And  this 
year, as always,  we’re ; v 
workingtowards  
new growth  
in all of .
Gofdding  grows""S'
GoukJing
83
ORBENIN
Beecham  Animal Health, Ferry  House. Lr. Mount Street. Dublin 2 
Orbenin  contatna  500 mg cioxacillin  par syringe
84
Financing  the Dairy  Industry  in 
the Future
P. MacCANNA
Chief  Agricultural  Adviser,  Bank of Ireland,  Dublin,
In the recent  past, we have emerged  from a particularly  buoyant  period  
of credit sufficiency,  good prices,  unprecedented  windfall  gains, and a 
generally  favourable  investment  climate  which accommodated  and en­
couraged  an adventurous  investment  approach.
For those  who availed  of the opportunity,  it was a time which  projected  
farming  onto a new and higher  place of deserved  affluence.  It was a time 
which  the sector  needed;  it was a period  when farmers  were rescued  from  
even the most crude management  of their financial  affairs  by large and 
sometimes  unexpected  price increases.  There was little urgency  in the 
acquisition  of improved  farm or financial  management  skills.
By contrast,  we are now faced with :
— A climate  of credit  restraint
— Higher  interest  rates
— Static prices  and rising costs
— Some uncertainty  about  the shape  of future  agricultural  policies. 
These changing  circumstances  have shifted  the parameters  and have
made decisions  about future investments  more difficult.  The year 1979 
was a bad year for farming;  a year which,  from a borrowing  viewpoint,  
brought  home to farmers  and, indeed,  to lending  institutions,  the need  
for more control in the administration  and use of farm credit in the 
future.
(A) General  availability  of credit
It is relevant,  before we discuss investment  at farm level, to look 
globally  at the credit situation.  The total amount  of credit  made avail ­
able to agriculture  in the years ahead will be shaped  by three major  
factors :—
1. The European  Monetary  System  ; the stability  of our economy  and 
the degree to which the Central  Bank see control  of credit as an 
essential  component  in maintaining  that stability.
2. Agriculture  as a sector  within  the economy  : its importance;  the return  
on the investment  and its overall  stability.  In the last five years,  
agriculture  has clearly  been a priority  area in terms  of opportunities  
for justifiable  and profitable  investment.  The positive  response  by 
Government  and lending  institutions  in making  the necessary  invest ­
ment capital  available  was conditioned  by :
a) The undoubted  potential  which existed  and indeed still exists in 
the agricultural  sector  for increased  production.
b) Our comparative  advantages  in many  areas  of agricultural  produc ­
tion, particularly  in the context  of grassland  based enterpri.ses.
85
c) Price and market  stability  under the influence  of the Common  
Agricultural  Policy.
3. The repayment  capacity  of agriculture  and the security  which  it offers.  
There was considerable  surplus  repayment  capacity  in the sector to 
justify  a 100% increase  in borrowing  by this sector within the last 
7 years.
The credit restrictions  imposed  by the Central Bank, which were 
understandably  in the interests  of the econcmy  as a whole,  were com­
pounded  by other  factors,  particu'arly  the break in the link with Sterling 
and industrial  prob ’ems in the non-Bank  segment  of the financial  sector.  
These events posed particular  difficulties  in rearranging  availab ’e re­
sources  so as to ensure  an even  flow of funds  throughout  the year.
Current  indications  wou ’d suggest  little prospect  of a significant  easing 
in credit  restrictions  for 1980 and perhaps  for some time to come.  How ­
ever, despite  the overall  restrictions  to date, agricu'ture  as a sector has 
fared extremely  well. Despite  the 18% credit expansion  guideline  for 
the economy  as a whole in 1979, advances  to agriculture  increased  by 
25%. I confidently  expect  the sector  to remain  a priority  area for scarce  
funds in the future. Furthermore,  careful management  by lending  
institutions  should  ensure that essential  productive  needs can be satis­
factorily  met throughout  the year.
The Common  Agricultural  Policy is the foundation  for much of the 
increased  confidence  evident  in agriculture  in recent  years.  Its continuation  
is vital if the sector is to remain  a priority  area and justify  preferential  
treatment  and priority  access to scarce funds. Therefore,  I will refer  
briefly  to the Common  Agricultural  Policy  and my current  perception  of 
its likely  development  and impact  in the immediate  years ahead.
(B) Future  development  of the C.A.P.
Current  political  and media  comment  might tend to suggest  that com- 
p’ete disintegration  of the C.A.P.  is imminent.  However,  when looked  at 
dispassionately,  this viewpoint  gives a rather  imbalanced  reflection  of the 
real situation.
In reality,  external  political  issues  and frustration  with the lack of pro­
gress in developing  other Community  policies  play as important  a role 
in the current  controversy  as do any internal  deficiencies  in the C.A.P.  
as an institution.
A realistic  view of the future development  of the C.A.P. demands  
rational  assessment  of the many complex  interacting  issues, some of 
which  demand  change,  while  others  strongly  favour  retention  of the status  
quo.
I see the critical  influences  which  will determine  the future  development  
of the C.A.P.  as follows  :
(1) Negative  pressures
— Existing  limits of the Community ’s so called ‘own resources ’, as 
determined  by the current  ceiling  of 1 % VAT receipts,  are likely 
to be reached  later in 1980 or early in 1981.
86
The British  problem,  whereby  the UK is calling  for a contribution  
to the Community  Budget  more in line with its receipts  from the 
Community,  is exerting  significant  downward  pressure  on EEC  
expenditure,  particularly  in the agricultural  sector.
The European  Parliament  is engaging  in a degree  of muscle-flexing 
in an effort to gain more control  over Community  agricultural  
expenditure.  These tactics  are tending  to disrupt  the day-to-day  
financial  operations  of the C.A.P.
Community  enlargement  through  the accession  of Greece  in 1981 
and possibly  Spain and Portugal  at a later date could lead to a 
further  dilution  of the funds available  to meet the needs of an 
expanded  agricultural  sector  in the Community.
Current  international  developments,  particularly  the recent  deter ­
ioration  of the US/USSR  conflict,  have market  implications  for 
certain  food products.  Maintenance  of prices for these products  
may necessitate  increased  Community  support  in an already  
delicate  budgetary  situation.
Structural  surpluses,  particularly  in the dairy sector,  are absorbing  
an increasing  proportion  of dwindling  Community  resources.  
Growing  consumerism.
(2) Positive  influences
— The Common  Agricultural  Policy is central to the continued  
existence  of the European  Community  as a coherent  unit. At the 
present  time, the C.A.P.  is the most developed  and arguably  the 
only fully fledged  Community  Policy  in existence.
— The EEC Commission  accepts  the need for an agricultural  policy 
incorporating  a system of supports  and safeguards  for farm in- 
eomes  if the Community  ideal of efficient  family  farms is to be 
attained.
— Removal  of support  could mean the movement  of 3-4 million  
peop'e  off the land, adding  to an already  serious  unemployment  
problem.
— The dynamic  nature of agriculture  itse’f is likely to betray the 
transient  nature of current  market  problems.  Factors  such as 
disease,  the international  economic  and trading  climate  and in 
particular,  weather,  all have a significant  influence  on the nature  
of agricultural  production  so that within  three or four years,  the 
current  dairy surplus  is likely to be supplanted  by problems  of a 
totally  different  nature.
— Ireland  is by no means  alone in its defence  of the C.A.P. Other  
influential  Community  partners,  particularly  France,  have expres ­
sed solidarity  in the objective  of maintaining  the C.A.P.  more or 
less in its present  form.
— The stren^h  of the farming  lobby,  not alone here in Ireland,  but 
particularly  in Germany  and France must be recognised  as a 
formidable  force in promoting  the continued  existence  of the
C.A.P.  in its present  form. Farmer  power  and influence  is usually
87
disproportionate  to the numerical  strength  of farmers  in the overall 
population.
— The total commitment  of all our political  representatives  to the 
maintenance  of C.A.P.
Although  some modifications  are inevitable,  current  evidence  would 
suggest  that the essential  elements  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy 
will survive.  Future  modifications  are likely  to reflect  changes  in empha ­
sis and operational  details  rather  than in the fundamental  character  of the 
Policy  which  is likely to remain  more or less intact  as the cornerstone  of 
all Community  initiatives.
In the Irish situation,  possible  adjustments  to the Policy,  particularly  
in relation  to the dairy sector,  may have some effect on the repayment  
capacity  of existing  borrowers.  However,  I am satisfied  that at both the 
production  and processing  levels,  there is sufficient  scope for improved  
output  and efficiency  to offset the financial  effects  of any likely refine­
ments  in the C.A.P.
While the future environment  in the agricultural  sector will demand  
more stringent  loan appraisal  and financial  control,  I believe  that a com­
mitment  to the financing  of further  development  is fully justified  by the 
overall opportunities  for profitable  investment  which still exist in the 
industry.
As a Bank,  we are aware of the opportunities  that exist in the sector 
for additional  low risk investment  justifying  the sector as a priority  for 
allocation  of available  credit.
(C) Investment  issues  in dairying —taxation
Taxation  and other factors  are causing  some confusion  in farming  at 
the moment.  In relation  to the investment  options  that exist, recent  
surveys  by some Co-operatives  suggest  that some farmers  are thinking  of 
reducing  milk output,  other farmers  are considering  cessation  of milk 
production  altogether  and taking  advantage  of the Dairy Herd Conver ­
sion Scheme.
Income  taxation  is a new variable  in Irish farming  and is one which  
will continue  to exert an influence  on farm investment  decisions  through ­
out the 1980 ’s.
Table 1
Family  farm income  *
<£2000  £2000-£5000
All farms  50% 30%
Full-time  farms  24% 36%
* 1978 Farm Management  Survey£5000-£8000 >£8000
20%
18% 22%
Tab'e 1 shows the percentage  of farms in the various  income  cate­
gories  for 1978. The majority  of farmers  can intensify  without  taxation  
becoming  an issue. For farmers  for whom  taxation  is currently  an issue  
the following  points  are relevant.
88
(a) Income  will never be increased  by cutting back output while the 
value of marginal  (additional)  output  exceeds  marginal  costs.
(b) Taxation  will reduce the marginal  income from a given level of 
production  to an extent  which  varies  in accordance  with the marginal  
rate of tax which it attracts  but will never  eliminate  it.
This reduction  is more serious  for the larger,  higher  income,  higher  tax 
bracket  farm and gives rise to two separate  types of decisions  based 
purely  on utility  criteria :
(a) Decisions  in relation  to future  expansion.
(b) Decisions  in relation  to possible  contraction.
Decisions  to/not  to expand
It is important  here to repeat a point which I made at a meeting  of 
this Association  in 1975 ; “that from an economic  point of view a 
decision  not to expand  from say a 50 to a 70 cow unit and incur the 
capital  expenditure  involved  in reorganised  milking  facilities,  extra build ­
ings, extra stock, etc. is an absolutely  different  one to a decision,  once 
one has made the investment,  to reduce stock numbsrs  from 70 to 50 
and leave fixed investments  on which loan repayments  are being made,  
under utilised ”. 1 can think of no situation  where on strictly  economic  
grounds  such a cut-back  could be justified.
In considering  expansion,  the degree justified  will depend on the 
question  “At what point will the additional  effort and risk involved  in 
future expansion  not be justified  by the after-tax  return  to such expan ­
sion ?” Farmers  with an income  level being  taxed at the higher  rates will 
generally  reach that point at an earlier stage than those with lower  
income  levels  and lower marginal  rates of tax.
We must accept  that a tax regime,  by reducing  the marginal  return,  
will reduce the level of intensity  at which the more commercial  high 
income  farmer  will ultimately  farm.
Decision  to change  system  (Dairy  Herd Conversion  Scheme)
This Scheme  has a limited  application  to the Irish dairying  sector. Its 
application  is strictly for farmers  who have large acreages;  a tillage  
option;  mediocre  performance  or some particular  personal  circumstances  
which  might  justify  the decision.  For farmers  who do not have a tillage  
option  and who would have to rely on the substitution  of a low income 
drystock  farming  system,  the Dairy Herd Conversion  Scheme  has no 
place.
Again,  for the smaller  farmer  where the attainment  of an income  to 
provide  a reasonable  standard  of living is the objective,  the Dairy Herd  
Conversion  Scheme  is not an economic  option.
With the increase  in the number  of farmers  paying  tax on accounts  we 
should  be wary not to pursue  tax minimisation  as an end in itself through  
indiscriminate  or marginal  investments,  particularly  in elaborate  machin ­
ery and buildings.  The UK experience  has shown  that the introduction  
of taxation  on accounts  gave a boost to investment  in buildings  and
89
machinery,  obviously  with a view to minimisation  of tax. This false 
strategy  was pointed  out recently  by no less an authority  than Mr. 
Arnold  Christensen,  President  of the British  Grassland  Association.  He 
emphasised  the danger  of such a strategy.  His priorities  were investments  
not in depreciating  or wasting  assets but, rather investment  in wealth  
creating  assets, particu'arly  stock. One must however  in making  this 
statement  point  to the need for substantial  additional  investment  by many  
farmers  in basic building  structures.
Desirable  tax incentives
Whatever  the future shape of the taxation  regime,  there is a need for 
incentives  to encourage  investment  in stock as a priority.  A considerable  
proportion  of investment  over the last four/five  years has been infra ­
structural  with little direct impact  on direct output. Therefore,  special  
treatment  is required  for such investment  since stock is not a self- 
liquidating  asset like machinery  or buildings.  This characteristic  of stock 
tends to lead to constraints  if increased  investment  in stock is taxed as 
current  income.
(D) Cost of credit —minimising  annual  repayments
Current  high interest  rates are a major deterrent  to investment  in all 
sectors. Strategies,  which will minimise  the total cost of servicing  loans,  
can be adopted.
(1) Use of overdraft
The first facility  which should be used to the optimum  level is the 
overdraft.  Typically,  £1,000  which can legitimately  be transferred  from 
term loan to a justifiable  overdraft  reduces  annual commitments  by 
approximately  £120. This is due to a lower interest  rate and to the fact 
that the average  utilisation  of overdraft  is approximately  66%. However,  
the account  must revert to credit for at least 30 days in the year. The 
use of overdraft  to the limit justified  by cash flow can effect considerable  
savings.
(2) Length  of term loan
There is some scope for reducing  annual  repayment  commitments  by 
lengthening  terms of loan. However,  there is a limitation  to this and 
Table  2 shows  that at high interest  rates,  there is litt'e advantage  in going
Table 2
Repayment  of £10,000  term loan at present  interest  rates
Term  of 
loan 
yearsRate of 
interestAnnual
repaymentsTotal
repayments
5 17 3,048 15,250
10 18 2,191 21,910
15 m 1,968 29,520
20 m 1,929 38,580
90
beyond  a 10-year  term when one takes account  of the total repayments  
which  have to be made.
When the profile  of borrowings  are short term, say under five years,  
difficulties  can be alleviated  by adding  a few extra years to the term of 
the loan However,  where  borrowings  are already  re’atively  long term,  say 
8-9 years, little advantage  can be gained from further  lengthening  the 
term of loan.
(3) Leasing —relevance
Leasing  also has certain  attractions  for farmers  who cannot  utilise  their  
full capital  allowances.  The following  points  are relevant :
• The advantages  of leasing  are very sensitive  to the ultimate  tax regime 
for farmers  and each case has to be assessed  in the light of individual  
circumstances.• It enables  farmers  not in the tax net to benefit  from lower interest  
charges,  since leasing  agencies  can claim tax credits  through  depre ­
ciation  allowances.• If the notional  system  continues  in some form, farmers  under such a 
system  with total interest  payments  in excess  of the normal  interest  
allowances  (currently  £2,400)  cou'd benefit  in a similar  way to those 
not in the tax net.• Leasing  releases  capital  for alternative  uses.
(4) Foreign  currency
Foreign  currency  has censiderab'e  attractions  in terms of reduced  
interest  charges.  However,  this advantage  must be balanced  against  the 
exchange  risk inherent  in foreign  currency  borrowing.  This risk can be 
covered  or insured  against  in the case of exports  which provide  foreign  
eurrency  receivables.  This is a mechanism  which has been widely  used 
by agribusiness.  Bank of Ireland has written some £30m in foreign  
currency  loans for agribusiness  in 1980.
At farm level, the application  of foreign  currency  borrowing  poses  
some problems,  un'ess  the Government  is prepared  to underwrite  possible 
exchange  losses. However,  special  circumstances  do occur,  for instance,  
where  the risk of exchange  loss can be minimised  and substantial  savings 
in terms of interest  can be made. Linder the Cattle Over-Wintering  
Foreign  Currency  Scheme  introduced  in 1979, Bank of Ireland has 
advanced  the equiva'ent  of approximately  £IR10m  which is currently  
attracting  an interest  rate of 10|% as opposed  to 16% and over for 
domestic  currency  borrowings,  if available.
Foreign  currency  lending  is a relatively  new development  in Irish 
banking  and more widespread  adoption  will demand  further  adaptation  
and improvement  of current  lending  mechanisms.  In this competitive  
world we will be constantly  searching  for ways in which it can be used 
to benefit  the whole  economy  and particularly  the farming  sector.
(E) Investment  decisions  in dairying —efficiency
Repayment  capacity  in dairying  has been reduced  considerably  by the 
price/cost  squeeze  and the prospects  of a more rigorous  tax regime  on
91
GastoGrass
iscomerting  
Natural  Gas 
into
Ammonia  
tomanufacture  
fertiTisersto  
service  agricuiturai  ireiand
to benefit  the 
Nation's  economyi
NET
NmUGIN  EIREANN  TEORAN1A
92
some farms. The importance  of improved  technology  as the basis for 
maintaining  or increasing  repayment  capacity  has been stressed  many  
times. Table 2 which  shows  the vastly increased  repayment  capacity  of 
an 850-gallon  cow herd at a stocking  rate of 1.2 as against  the more  
traditional  herd of 600-gallons  with a stocking  rate of 1.5/1.8.
Table 3
Importance  of good technical  performance —60 acre dairy farm
Stocking  rate600 gallons/cow
1.1 1.5850 gallons/cow  
l.I 1.5
Available  to meet  
repayments £3631 £1368 £7459 £3652
Borrowing  capacity  
(10 yr. term loan @ 18%) £16500 £6250 £34000 £16500
The break-even  yield which is necessary  to justify a certain  level of 
borrowing  will depend  on the particular  investment  to be made. Dairy  
farm investments  fall into three broad  categories  :
1. Cases  where  buildings  and milking  facilities  are adequate  and expan ­
sion requires  investment  only in additional  stock.
2. Cases  where  expansion  requires  investment  in stock and buildings,  but 
milking  facilities  are adequate  for the larger  herd.
3. Cases where expansion  requires  investment  not only in stock and 
buildings  but also in new milking  facilities  to accommodate  the ex­
panded  herd.
Table 4 gives an indication  of the average  borrowings  per additional  
cow added to the herd in each of these three situations  and gives the 
approximate  yield per cow necessary  to justify  the investment,  assuming  
all funds have to be borrowed.  It highlights  once again the importance  
of a high technical  performance,  particularly  where substantial  levels of 
fixed investment  have to be made.
Table 4
Expansion  from 30 to 50 cows
Investment  required Yield required
A. Cows only 500-550  gals.
B. Cows + extra
Accommodation 650-700  gals.
C. Cows -t- extra  
accommodation
New milking  parlour 800-850  gals.
93
(F) Some guidelines  on borrowing —the implications  
For planning
Priorities  must be carefully  considered  and the emphasis  must be on 
productive  investment.  For people  with limited  repayment  capacity,  cash 
generating  investments  must be given priority,  e.g. too much of the 
limited  repayment  capacity  of under-stocked  farms should  not be used 
in servicing  loans for drainage  which will not increase  cash income  for 
three/four  years. One needs to differentiate  between  drainage  of very 
wet land which will not increase  cash income  for three/four  years and 
the rehabilitation  of land from which a crop of barley  can be harvested  
within  a year.
Building  costs must also be examined.  Investment  in fixed assets  must  
be matched  to the immediate  cash return,  not the anticipated  cash return  
three/four  years hence. For example,  modification  of existing  milking  
facilities  as a first step would,  for many,  be a priority  over building  of a 
new facility. This philosophy  has much relevance  today to many 
developing  dairy  farms.
Technical  performance
The importance  of technical  performance  and its relationship  with 
various  levels of repayment  capacity  has been emphasised  already. In 
planning  investment  requirements  and estimating  repayment  capacity,  
farmers,  advisers  and indeed lending  agencies  should not budget  on a 
high performance,  simply  because  of a high level of commitment.  In 
these situations,  the evidence  suggests  that calculations  which are based 
on these types of assumptions  are unlikely  to occur.
Records/financial  control
The disciplines  of planning,  of keeping  farm accounts  to ensure that 
priorities  are right, to support  assumptions  about expected  levels of 
performance,  and to monitor  achievement  of targets, are becoming 
essential  components  in the proper  use of own and borrowed  funds.
It is important  that farmers  do not become  obsessed  with keeping  farm  
records  for taxation  purposes  alone. Farm records  are of greatest  value  
in helping  to improve  the technical  and financial  management of  the farm.
(G) Repayment  difficulties
It is useful to refer to the difficulties  which were created  by the sub­
stantial  drop in farming  incomes  last year. This drop in incomes  pre­
cipitated  liquidity  problems  on some farms. The cattle sector had a 
particularly  difficult  year and there were many  cases  where  requests  were  
made to have loan repayments  deferred.  Our Bank was constructive  in 
dealing  with these cases.
For a small minority  who have more deep rooted  problems  which  are 
now becoming  apparent,  I wish to emphasise  the Bank ’s commitment  to 
be constructive  namely,  taking  all feasible  steps  to ensure  the maintenance  
and indeed  expansion  of the farm business.  Our commitment  is to keep  
the agricultural  sector  moving  as rapidly  as possible  and each individual
94
2.
3.farm within  it. Some hard decisions  may have to be taken in a small 
percentage  of cases. The client  who has a problem  should  use the services 
of his Agricultural  Adviser/Consultant  to analyse the situation  and 
develop  strategies  to alleviate  the problem.
Options  open to the bank in a difficult  situation
1. Where  hard core has built-up  in the current  account : convert  this to 
a term loan, provided  the farm can meet existing  and new term loan 
repayments.
Restructure  term loan — some borrowings  may lend themselves  to 
being  put on a longer  term. However,  as pointed  out previously,  there  
is little benefit  in extending  the term of loan for longer  than ten years. 
In addition,  the desirability  of the lengthening  of the term of the loan 
would  depend  on the particular  project  and the use of the funds. 
Deferring  repayment  of principal  for one year —this would be a 
reasonable  strategy  provided  there was hope that the farmer  could  
return  to meeting  full principal  and interest  repayments.  However,  I 
would  point  out here that we are operating  within  a very tight guide ­
line from the Cenral Bank and deferred  repayments  of principal  
reduce  the capacity  of the total lending  system  to make  money  avail ­
able for new development  which  should  take place. However,  despite  
this implication  in some situations,  the strategy  is justified.
The one situation  which  must be avoided  at all costs by the Bank  and 
indeed  by the borrower  is that the borrowing  should  start to run away  
from the client,  i.e. that the borrower  cannot  meet interest,  and finds  
himself  paying  interest  on accumulating interest  in the following  years. 
This is a recipe  for disaster.
Options  open to the farmer
1. Improved  husbandry  : In many  cases we find that within  the limits  of 
the present  farming  programme  there is considerable  scope for in­
creasing  income  and repayment  capacity  through  improved  manage ­
ment,  e.g. on the dariy farm, improved  milk yield per cow, lower  feed 
costs, better  quality  silage.
2. A change  of system  : the disposal  of some drystock  assets,  substitution  
with tillage thus reducing  total overall  borrowings,  substitution  of 
cows for drystock,  substitution  of high yielding  cows for low yielding  
cows in the herd. All these strategies  can be considered.
In many cases, it is the last increment  of borrowing  that is causing  
most trouble.  The nature  of agriculture  itself being cyclical,  a good year 
would  put most accounts  back on the straight  and narrow  once again.
(H) Some  pitfalls  to be avoided  in using borrowed  finance
It is perhaps  now relevant  to deal with some of the pitfalls  which 
farmers  can encounter  in dealing  with the financing  of their operations  :
1. With repayment  difficulties,  faee up to problems  immediately  and 
seek help from Advisers/Consultants;  keep the Bank Manager  in­
formed.
95
2. In making  a case for concession,  provide  supporting  background  in­
formation.  Peope short of £10,000/£15,000  on budget,  looking  for 
concessions  in 1980 and 1981, should  be able to explain  or prove  that 
the flaws in the system  which  caused  the loss in the first place can be 
controlled.
3. Do not finance  fixed investment  out of cash flow. In recent years 
when cash flow was good and credit  not restricted  farmers  commonly  
embarked  on investment  in machinery,  farm buildings,  etc., only 
seeking  loan facilities  when the project  was well underway  and a 
shortage  of cash became  apparent.  This is a highly  dangerous  prac­
tice. Repayment  capacity  may not exist and current  credit  restrictions  
may not allow  the degree  of flexibility  which  existed  in the past.
4. Do not exceed  your loan approval  without  first consulting  with your  
lending  institution.  People  have commonly  exceeded  their permission,  
particularly  in the case of land purchase.  These applications  are 
examined  very critically  and in many cases, loans approved  are the 
very upper  limit of the repayment  capacity  of the client. There is no 
scope for exceeding  it. It is extremely  imprudent  to exceed  a loan 
approval  without  discussing  the matter  with your Manager.
5. There is concern  about easier credit. When some farmers  find it 
difficult  to obtain  credit from the major institutions,  which  examine  
applications  professionally,  they tend to utilise less disciplined  forms  
of credit. When repayment  capacity  is tight, resorting  to sources  of 
credit which do not subject  the total farming  operation  to critical  
analysis  is dangerous.  The total repayment  capacity  of the farm must  
always  be taken  into account.
However,  the responsibility  for his actions  is ultimately  the borrower ’s. 
Entering  into substantiai  financial  commitments  without  checking  on 
repayment  capacity  is likely to result in trouble. We have often been 
rescued  from careless  management  of our financial  affairs  in recent  years  
by windfall  gains which  are unlikely  to recur in the future.
(I) Conclusion
Despite  the current  uncertainties,  farmers  should  continue  to expand  
stock  numbers.  Investment  in stock,  e.g. breeding  heifers,  is considerably  
more attractive  now than in 1979. A reduction  in the price of heifers 
by over £200 is the equivalent  of approximately  6p-8p  per gallon,  a 
point  which  should  be borne in mind.
Smaller  farmers  have no option but to continue  to expand.  Current  
EEC proposals  are not policy and, in my view, are unlikely  to be 
accepted  in their present  form. Already  a considerable  part of the EEC ’s 
objective  in curbing  expansion  has been achieved  simply  by the confusion  
that has arisen from the proposals.
Farmers  should,  where feasible,  continue  to expand  stock numbers.  
Considerable  surplus  land and building  capacity  exist on many  
farms.
I am satisfied  that the future  of the milk producer  is fairly secure. By 
1983/84  1 doubt very much if it will be the problem  issue. Agriculture
96
is a cyclical  industry  and based on my experience  of our 20 years in 
dealing  with dairy farming,  I would  have no hesitation  in recommending  
to the young  farmer  to undertake  expansion  of a dairy  enterprise.
Credit  is likely to be tight for the economy  as a whole,  but agricul ­
ture will remain  a priority  area for additional  investment  funds.
There were considerable  difficulties  last year in spreading  available  
credit  evenly  throughout  the year. We hojje to ensure  an adequate  avail ­
ability  of funds for investment  of a productive  nature  right throughout  
the year. The size of this availability  will depend  on the Central  Bank  
guidelines.  Funds  should also be available  to meet ordinary,  seasonal  
and stocking  needs.
The emphasis  for the future must be on the improvement  of our 
technical  skills. More attention  must be devoted  to planning  financial  
aspects  of the farming  business.
Finally,  my view of the early  eighties  is one of cautious  optimism.  The 
climate  for investment  is considerably  more attractive  than that which 
faced many of our best farmers  when they initiated  dairy expansion  in 
the mid-sixties.  Overall,  I would  advise  young  farmers  in similar  situa ­
tions to ‘have a go’ and we as a Bank will support  them to the greatest  
fjossible  degree.
97
ABSTRACTS
TILLERING  IN GRASS  SWARDS
A. J. BRERETON  and O. T. CARTON  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
N ewtiller  production  and tiller deaths  occur  continuously  through  the 
season. For a brief period  shortly  before  flowering,  new tiller production  
ceases  and the rate of tiller death increases  sharply.  Shortly  afterwards  
new tiller production  rates increase  dramatically  for a short period  and 
the rate of tiller death declines.  The new tillers produced  immediately  
after flowering  do not emerge  until late in summer.
Data were presented  illustrating  these processes.  Data were also 
presented  relating  these processes  with flowering.  The implications  of the 
data for herbage  production  were discussed.
EVALUATION  OF THE MACHINE  WASHING  OF HERBAGE  
SAMPLES  CUT AT TWO HEIGHTS
G. B. NICHOLL
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunscny,  Co. Meath.
Herbage  samp'es  cut to ground  level may contain  soil contaminants  
which  can lead to analytical  errors. The washing  of herbage  samples  cut 
to either  ground  level or approximately  2.5 cm above ground  level was 
evaluated  using  a domestic  washing  machine  with a counter-sunk  agitator.  
Within  the two cutting  levels,  samples  were either  not washed,  or washed 
in cold water  for 2 minutes  with the excess  water  removed  by spinning. 
All samples  were dried, ground  and analysed  for percentage  ash and 
in vitro dry matter  digestibility  (DMD)  and organic  matter  digestibility  
(OMD).
Washed  samples  had a lower dry matter  (DM) content  and the same  
OMD as unwashed  samples.  Cutting  height  did not affect DM content  
of the samples,  but a difference  in favour  of cutting  above ground  level 
was found for OMD. Both organic  matter  (OM)  content  and DMD  were 
higher in washed  samples  but this depended  on cutting  height,  where 
larger differences  were generally  found in favour  of washed  compared  
with unwashed  samples  cut to ground  level. Samples  cut to 2.5 cm above 
ground  level were not adversely  affected  by washing.
It was concluded  that the machine  washing  of ground-level  cut herbage  
samples  was an effective  means  of removing  soil contamination  without  
adversely  affecting  analysis  of herbage  quality  components.
98
BREEDING  RYEGRASS  FOR IMPROVED  PRODUCTION  
AND PERSISTENCE
B. S. AHLOOWALIA
Plant Breeding  Department,  Agricultural  Institute,  Oak Park, Carlow.
Cultivars  of Italian  ryegrass  (Loliuin  multijloruni  Lam.) have earlier  
growth  in spring  and give higher  yield than those of perennial  ryegrass  
(Lolium  perenne  L.). They are, however,  less persistent  and have shorter  
life span than the perenials.  In order  to combine  the better  characters  of 
the two parents,  tetraploid  hybrids  were produced  by crossing  colchicine  
induced  polyploids  (2n=28,29,30)  of perennial  ryegrass  with the tetra ­
ploid cultivar  ‘Tetrone ’. One hundred  and fifteen populations  of such 
hybrids  were tested  for their yield and quality  in small plot (4.5 x 1.2 m^) 
trials and compared  with the cultivars  ‘Lemtal ’ (2x), ‘Tetila ’ (4x), ‘Tet­
rone ’ (4x), ‘Barmultra ’ (4x), ‘Sabalan ’ (4x) of Italian ryegrass  and a 
hybrid cultivar  ‘Sabel ’ (4x). The check cultivars  ‘Lemtal ’ and ‘Sabel ’ 
were replicated  three times  each; all the other  treatments  were unreplica ­
ted. The plots were sampled  during  1974- ’76 by cutting  four times each 
year.
The cultivars  ranked  as Lemtal  = Tetilia  > Barmultra  > Tetrone  
> Sabalan  = Sabel in their annual  dry matter  yield and digestible  dry 
matter  production,  the difference  between  the highest  and the lowest 
yielding  cultivars  being 10%.
The hybrids  (in their mean  performance)  produced  4% less annual  dry 
matter  (P>0.05),  and 5% less digestible  dry matter  (P>0.01)  and had 
1.3% lower  dry matter  content  than the mean of the six cultivars.  How ­
ever, the hybrid mean performance  was equal to that of the cultivars  
‘Sabalan ’ and ‘Sabel ’. The hybrid mean quality  i.e. digestibility,  crude  
protein  content,  crude protein  yield and seasonal  production  up to mid-  
June equalled  that of the cultivars.  Ten hybrids  were selected  on the 
basis of their individual  yield and quality  assessment,  which  out-yielded  
the parental  cultivar  ‘Tetrone ’ by 2-13%  in dry matter  yield.  Two hybrids  
out-yielded  the control  cultivar  ‘Lemtal ’ by 2% and 5% in dry matter  
and 3% and 9% in digestible  dry matter. Five of these hybrids  had 4 to 
14% more dry matter  up to mid-June  and 3-10% more protein  yield. 
These hybrids  rated between  6.5 and 7.0 for persistence  on 1-9 scale as 
compared  to 4.9 of ‘Lemtal ’, the cultivar  with the highest  persistence  
and 3.3 for Tetrone ’, the parental  Italian  cultivar.  The selected  hybrids  
headed  2-5 days later than cv. ‘Lemtal ’.
It is concluded  that hybridization  between  Italian  and perennial  rye­
grass at tetraploid  level is an efficient  technique  for combining  high yield  
and quality  with high persistence.
99
CULTIVAR  EVALUATION  USING  BEEF  CATTLE  
M. RYAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
Over three years,  6 ryegrass  cultivars  were compared  in terms  of carry ­
ing capacity,  DM yield,  DMD,  content  of live and dead material.
Vigor (Melle)  was 8% better in carrying  capacity  than the standard  
S24 while Sabrina  was only to 80% of S24. Vigor plots on botanical  
analysis  showed  higher tiller numbers  than the other grasses  with the 
highest  content  of ryegrass  in them. Ground  cover measurements  taken  
at the time of quadrat  sampling  for DM yield showed  that Vigor  had the 
highest  percent  ground  cover.  The tetraploid  Barpastra  had lower  values 
in November.
The regression  of total animal  LWG  on DM yield gave an R- value of 
74 for the equation  LWG (kg/ha)=284.3  -i- 0.07C6  DM (kg/ha).
In the silage evaluation  there was no significant  difference  in LWG  
between  the silages  made  from the 6 cultivars  which  were S24, Barpastra,  
Sabrina,  Vigor,  Cropper,  Oakpark.
EFFECTS  OF CATTLE  DUNG  PAT  ON PASTURE  DRY MATTER  
PRODUCTION  AND QUALITY
T. NOLAN,  J. F. CONNOLLY  and FRANCOISE  RONNEL  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Creagh,  Ballinrobe,  Co. Mayo.
Most studies  of mixed  grazing  have indicated  that the benefits  to pro­
duction  are associated  with the complementary  grazing  patterns  of sheep  
and cattle. This relates  especially  to sheep consuming  the high grass  
areas around  the cattle dung pats, which are refused  by cattle. Under  
cattle only grazing  approximately  10% of the area can be covered  by 
dung pats, 40% of the area can be under  high grass and between  35 and 
75% (depending  on season)  of available  herbage  DM can be in the high 
grass areas.
This study was devoted  to identifying  the characteristics  of the high 
grass areas. It was found that between  May Ilth and July 25th (which  
included  3 or 4 grazing  cycles)  these areas had two and a half times  
(excluding  dung pat areas) greater  pasture  growth  rate compared  with 
low grass areas. The area apparently  affected  (high grass with greener  
colour)  was about 0.2m “ on average  which was almost six times the 
average  dung pat area. The N P and K contents  in high grass DM were 
11% to 19% greater  than in low grass DM but the effect on N content  
was only for a short period. With average  contents  of 3.19% N, 0.50% 
P and 3.52%  K in high grass DM compared  with 3.08%  N, 0.44%  P and 
2.95% K in low grass DM it was found that 24% of N, 25% of P and 
26% of K in available  total DM can be concentrated  in one tenth of the 
area. Under  cattle only grazing,  ‘high grass ’ represents  10% to 18% of 
the area and about 36% of available  DM and could provide  37% of N, 
39% of P and nearly  40% of K.
High  grass  DM Ca content  was on average  14.5% lower  compared  with 
low grass. Mg levels  were similar  in both herbages.
100
THE EFFECT  OF WILTING  AND FORMIC  ACID  TREATMENT
ON SILAGE  INTAKE  AND MILK  PRODUCTION  BY COWS
J. J. MURPHY  and P. A. GLEESON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moore  park Research  Centre,  Ferinoy.
Co. Cork.
The effects  of wilting  herbage  up to 30% dry matter  before  ensiling  and 
the effects  of applying  85% formic  acid to direct cut material  on sub­
sequent  silage intake and milk yields by dairy cows were examined  in 
previous  experiments.  The effect of wilting  to higher  dry matter  levels 
or applying  acid to wilted herbage  before  ensiling  had not been investi ­
gated. Thus,  in this experiment  unwilted  and 36h wilted  silage both with 
and without  formic acid treatment  were studied together  with a 60h 
wilted silage.
An area of 17 ha of perennial  ryegrass  was divided  into five equal  
portions,  mown  and harvested  with a precision  chop forage  harvester  as 
follows;  (1) immediately  after mowing;  (2) immediately  after mowing  
treated  with 85% formic  acid (approx.  2.3 1/t); (3) following  36h wilting; 
(4) following  36h wilting  treated  with formic  acid (approx.  2.3 1/t); (5) 
following  60h wilting. These  silages  were fed ad libitum  over a six week  
period  to five groups  of 9 early calving  spring  cows selected  on calving  
date and blocked  on milk yield. They  were supplemented  with 5.0 kg/day  
of a 16% crude protein barley-soyabean  meal concentrate.  The pH, 
DM%  and resulting  animal  performance,  milk yield ,kg/day),  silage  DM 
intake  (kg/day)  and partial  feed conversion  efficiencies  (kg milk/ 1000 kg 
silage DM intake)  were as follows:  (1) 3.76, 21.2, 17.69, 1.76, 2009; (2) 
3.71,20.5,  17.98. 1.65, 2140;  (3) 3.97. 28.8 17.46.2.15,  1576; (4) 4.11, 31.4, 
16.92, 2.14, 1519; (5) 4.26, 39.2, 18.28, 1.99, 1806. All the silages  were 
well preserved.  Wilting  increased  the dry matter  content  from about  21% 
up to 30 and 39%. Milk yield on silage (4) was significantly  lower  than 
that on silage (5). There  were no significant  differences  between  the milk 
yields on the other silages. Wilting  significantly  increased  silage dry 
matter  intake  but since resulting  milk yields  were not significantly  chan ­
ged the partial  food conversion  efficiency  on these silages  was significantly 
lower  than on unwilted  material.  The application  of 85% formic  acid to 
the unwilted  or wilted herbage  did not improve  animal performance  
probably  because  in both cases  the control  silages  were well preserved.
101
THE EFFECT  OF WILTING  GRASS  SILAGE  AND MONENSIN  
SODIUM  ON THE INTAKE  AND PERFORMANCE  OF BEEF
CATTLE
R. W. J. STEEN
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough.
Co. Down.
In several  experiments  wilting  grass prior to ensilage  has increased  the 
dry matter  intake  of unsupplemented  silage but has not resulted  in any 
improvement  in animal  performance,  providing  a good fermentation  has 
been achieved  in the unwilted  material.  An experiment  has therefore  
been carried  out to examine  the effects  of wilting  on silage intake and 
animal  performance  and also to investigate  the interaction  between  wilt­
ing and the feed additive  monensin  sodium  when the silages  are supple ­
mented  with barley.
A perennial  ryegrass  dominant  sward  was cut in early August  and late 
September,  1979 after regrowth  intervals  of 8 and 7 weeks  respectively. 
Half of the material  was ensiled immediately  and the remainder  was 
wilted for 3-4 ways. At ensiling  the unwilted  and wilted herbages  con­
tained 160 and 266 g kg“^ of dry matter  respectively.  The silages  were 
offered  cd libimrn  to 48 aarolals-cross  cattle (32 steers and 16 heifers,  
mean initial fasted liveweight  350 kg) for a period  of 21 weeks. Twelve 
of the 24 animals  on each silage  treatment  received  a supplement  of 2.2 
kg of fortified  barley  per head per day while the other 12 received  the 
same supplement  plus 200 mg of monensin  sodium  per head per day. 
Silage dry matter  intake,  animal  liveweight  gain and carcase  gain data 
were presented.
A NOVEL  LABORATORY  APPROACH  TO STUDY  SILAGE
D. SEALE,  C. M. QUINN,  P. A. WHITTAKER  and R. K. WILSON  
Departments  of Biology  and Chemistry,  St. Patrick ’s College,  Maynooth.
The conservation  of grass  for winter  feed is a major  comjxment  of Irish 
agriculture.  About 12 x 10' tonnes are made annualyy.  Laboratory  
analyses  suggest  that about one third or 4 x 10' tonnes  are poorly  pre­
served. The reasons  for this are obscure.
The silage  process  is a very complex  fermentation.  In a study  involving 
152 grass cuts each ensiled  in triplicate  relationships  between  grass con­
stituents  (dry matter,  water soluble  carbohydrate,  glucose,  fructose  and 
sucrose  levels, nitrate,  buffer capacity  and fibre contents)  were poorly  
related  to final silage pH, with “r” values  all less than 0.4.
It is proposed  to study the microbiological  and chemical  changes  dur­
ing silage fermentation  using a novel approach.  Silage  will be made in a 
70 1 Mecaplex  “glovebox ” which  will allow control  of atmosphere,  con­
tinuous  sampling  through  entry ports and study of a larger  sample.  It is 
considered  that this approach  offers advantages  over the usual test-tube  
“batch ” system.
102
RED CLOVER  VERSUS  RYEGRASS  SILAGE  AS A SOURCE  OF 
WINTER  FEED  FOR STORE  LAMBS
S. FITZGERALD
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Three swards  namely,  a ryegrass  sward  (Agresso/Spirit),  a mixed  Red 
Clover/ryegrass  sward and a pure red clover  sward (Hungaropoly)  were 
established  in 1976 and cut twice a year over a period  of three years  for 
silage and fed to store lambs  ad libitum. The swards  were grazed  by 
weaned  lambs  in autumn  of 1977 & 1978. The ryegrass  sward received 
65-100  kg N/ha per cut while the red clover  sward received  none and 
the mixed sward received  65 kg N/cut  only in the third year due to its 
low clover  content  at that stage.
Silage dry matter  yields  for all three swards  averaged  over the three  
years for both cuts were 9.2, 8.7 and 7.8 tonnes DM/ha/year  for the 
ryegrass,  mixed and red clover  swards  respectively.
Results  show that red clover  silage when properly  preserved  can be a 
very useful source of winter  feed when fed to store lambs,  resulting  in 
high intakes  e.g. 2.5% - 3.0% of body weight  and producing  satisfactory  
lamb gains on silage alone. Ryegrass  silage would  require  supplementa ­
tion with 300-450  g barley/lamb/day  to achieve  a similar  level of per­
formance.  While it has a shorter  growing  season and consequently  a 
lower yield than ryegrass,  a significant  saving  in N fertiliser  and energy  
conservation  is achieved.  In a mixed sward the contribution  from red 
clover  can be substantial,  in terms  of high intakes  and lower  N fertiliser  
requirements  without  any significant  reduction  in yield.
STUDIES  ON THE MODE  OF ACTION  OF TBA AND RAL  
IMPLANTS  IN GROWING  CASTRATE  MALE  CATTLE
T. W. GRIFFITHS
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.
Two metabolism  and slaughter  experiments  using  24 Friesian  castrated  
male cattle were carried  out to investigate  the mode of action of the 
combined  implants  of Trenbolone  acetate  (TBA)  and Resorcylic  acid 
lactone  (RAL)  over the weight  range  250-400  kg liveweight.  Control  and 
implanted  (x 2) animals  were pair-fed  diets of differing  protein and 
energy levels. Responses  to implantation  were (kg/day  LWG):  Low 
protein  diets, 0.21; Normal  protein  diets, 0.24; Medium  energy  levels, 
0.25; High energy  levels,  0.34. Nitrogen  retention  was improved  in im­
planted  animals  in both experiments.  Implanted  animals  also gave lower  
fat and higher  meat yields  and chemical  analysis  of the edible  portion  of 
the carcass  showed  significantly  more water  and protein  and less fat.
These  results  are consistent  with the view that implantation  with TBA  
and RAL modifies  the metabolism  of the animal in the direction  of 
increased  protein  synthesis  and decreased  fat deposition.
103
PELVIC  SIZE AND SHAPE  IN BEEF  AND DAIRY  BREEDS
OF COWS  
O. H. LANGLEY
The Af’ricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
M. )J. DRENNAN
The Agricultural  Institute.  Grange.  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
D. HARRINGTON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Sandy  mount,  Dublin  4.
In Ireland  a high proportion  of calves  destined  for the beef herd come 
from cows in daily herds. With increasing  emphasis  on beef quality  some  
of these calves  will be sired by beef bulls. This is known  to cause some  
increase  in calving  difficulty,  and so it is important  to understand  more  
clearly  the factors which  contribute  to this increase.  An experiment  being 
carried  out at Grange  comparing  Friesian  cows,  Hereford  Friesian  crosses 
and Charolais  Friesian  crosses  as mothers  for single suckled  beef calves 
provided  an opportunity  to study the ease of calving  in these breeds. In 
the first year all first calf heifers  were mated  to a Limousin  bull; in the 
second  year one Simmental  was used on all second  calving  animals  and 
in the third another  Simmental  bull was used. In the month prior to 
calving  pelvic measurements  were made which recorded  the height  and 
the width of the internal  pelvic  opening.  The ease of calving  was then 
monitored  according  to the scale 1 for easy calving,  2 for slight  assistance,  
3 for difficult  calving  and 4 for very difficult  calving.
Both pelvic  height  and pelvic  width increased  in each breed from first 
calving  to second  calving  and from second  to third calving.  Whereas  the 
Charolais  had the highest  pelvic dimensions  in all years, the Hereford  
crosses  had the second  highest  pelvic  dimensions,  and the Friesians  had 
the least high pelvic dimensions  in all years. In contrast,  the Friesians  
had the greatest  pelvic  width  on average  in each year. The Charolais  had 
the second  widest  pelvis  and the Herefords  the least wide pelvis in each 
year. Thus, the ratio of the height to width varied between  breeds  of 
dam. The jDelvic height  divided  by pelvic  width  in the Friesians  always 
gave a ratio of less than 1 indicating  a pelvis  which  was slightly  wider  
that it was high, whereas  in both the Charolais  crosses  and Hereford  
crosses  the ratio of height  to width  was 1.1 in each year.
The ease of calving  is most easily  assessed  by investigating  the relation ­
ship between  the calf size and the pelvic  area. The most effective  way of 
achieving  this is to obtain  the ratio of the calf weight  compared  to the 
pelvic area (which  is obtained  by multiplying  the pelvic height by the 
pelvic  width). When  this ratio is greater  than 0.14 calving  is likely  to be 
more difficult.  When all animals  with a ratio of greater  than 0.14 were 
examined  it was found  that less than 50% of the Charolais  and Hereford  
cows had difficulty  calving,  whereas  more than 50% of the Friesian  cows  
had difficult  calving. It might be suggested  therefore  that the differ ­
ence in pelvic  shape may indicate  breed differences,  and that the Friesian  
calves  sired by Friesian  bulls might  be expected  to be a different  shape 
than calves sired by beef bulls. If this hypothesis  is correct  it might  
partially  explain  why greater  difficulty  was experienced  in Friesian  cows  
bred 'to beef bulls. ^ :
104
SUPEROVULATION  IN THE COW
M. P. BOLAND,  L. G. KENNEDY,  T. F. CROSBY  and I GORDON
U.C.D.,  Department  of Agriculture,  Lyons Estate,  Newcastle,
Co. Dublin.
The success  of egg transfer  in the cow depends  on a predictable  supply 
of fertilized  eggs for transfer.  PMSG  has normally  been used for super ­
ovulation,  but results  have been variable.  A crude  horse pituitary  extract  
(HAP)  has been used with success  for superovulation  in the sheep  in this 
laboratory.
In this study PMSG  has been compared  with HAP for superovulation.  
Forty-four  heifers  were given a single i/m injection  of 2,5C)0 i.u. PMSG  
during  the luteal phase of the cycle (days 8-12) and 39 heifers  received 
300 mg HAP  as a single  i/m injection  during  the same period.  Forty-eight  
hours  later animals  were injected  with 500 A^g Cloprostenol.  Donors  were 
inseminated  twice at oestrus  and egg recovery  attempted  3-8 days post 
oestrus. Mean ovulation  rates of 16.5 + 9.1 and 12.7 ± 10.6 were found  
for PMSG  and HAP,  and 7.5 and 5.1 fertilized  eggs respectively.
Slightly  higher  ovulation  rates and numbers  of eggs were found  in the 
summer  months. Extending  the interval  from PMSG  to prostaglandin  
injection  from two to three days increased  the ovluation  rate (16.3 vs. 
18.7) and number  of fertilized  eggs (7.9 vs. 9.0).
105
STUDIES  RELATED  TO EGG TRANSFER  IN SHEEP  
T. F. CROSBY,  M. P. BOLAND, A. A. AL-KAMALI  and I. GORDON
U.C.D.,  Department  off Agriculture,  Lyons  Estate,  Newcastle  P.O.,
Co. Dublin.
In the first of three experiments  39 Texel  ewes were heat synchronised  
with intravagina  sponge  pessaries  (30 mg FGA)  for 12 days. 200 mg/ewe  
of horse anterior  pituitary  extract  (HAP)  was administered  to induce  
superovulation.  The ewes were allocated  to one of three treatment  reg­
imes (a) 50 mg HAP on each of 4 days, (b) 100 mg HAP on each of 2 
days, (c) mg HAP as a single dose. The animals  were bred by uterine  
insemination  at 36-48  hrs. Mean  ovulation  rates of 15.0, 12.6 and 9.7 and 
egg recovery  rates of 6.8, 5.5 and 2.2 respectively  were obtained.  The 
percentage  of eggs fertilised  was 47.7, 56.3 and 75.0 respectively  and was 
significantly  different  between  treatments.  The fertilised  eggs were trans ­
ferred  to recipient  ewes and by 7 weeks  66% had not repeated.
In the second  experiment  27 crossbred  ewes were used to evaluate  the 
influence  of method  of synchronisation  on superovulation  and recovery  of 
fertilised  eggs. The four treatments  employed  were (a) 12 day intravag-  
inal sponge,  (b) 12 daily progesterone  injections,  (c) 12 day sponge  sup­
plemented  with four daily progesterone  injections,  (d) natural  cycle.  HAP  
was administered  over a 4 day period and breeding  was by uterine  
insemination  using pooled  semen.  Mean ovulation  rates of 10.6, 8.9, 8.9 
and 18.2 respectively  were recorded  and 85.7%,  76.2%,  75.0%  and 51.9%  
of eggs recovered  were fertilised.
In the third trial, 21 cull ewes were used to compare  uterine  insemina ­
tion with repeated  cervical  insemination  on egg recovery  and fertilisation.  
Pooled  semen  from Texel rams was used in breeding.  Significant  differ ­
ences were found in the percentage  of eggs recovered  (46.0%  v 78.9%)  
and in the percentage  of eggs fertilised  (77.3%  v 55.3%).
106
SYNCHRONIZATION  OF OESTRUS  AND A.I. IN GILTS
M. P. BOLAND,  J. CRAIG  and D. L. KELLEHER
U.C.D.,  Department  of Agriculture,  Lyons Estate,  Newcastle,
Co. Dublin.
A practical  method  of controlling  the cycle in the gilt would be of 
considerable  economic  importance.  In this trial a new synthetie  proges ­
tagen (Regumate)  was evaluated  as an oral synchronization  agent. Fifty-  
eight cyelic  gilts were fed one of three levels  (0, 15, 20 mg) daily for 18 
days. At the termination  of treatment,  half the animals  in each group  
received  either  0 or 500 i.u. PMSG. Gilts were bred at the first oestrus  
using one of three methods : (a) natural  service,  (b) A.I., (c) A.I. and 3 
minute  teasing  with a sterile  boar after A.I. Progestagen  treatment  had a 
significant  effect (P<0.05)  on the interval  to heat. Overall  PMSG  treat ­
ment had no influence  on the interval  to oestrus  onset.
A slightly  higher but non-significant  increase  in ovulation  rate was 
observed  with progestagen  treatment  and with PMSG.  The proportion  of 
gilts yielding  fertilized  eggs was 89%, 74%, 56% for nil, 15 mg and 20 
mg respeetively.
Results  would  indicate  that regumate  can be effective  a sa synchroniza ­
tion agent.
107
FERTILIZATION  AND EMBYRO  LOSS FOLLOWING  
ARTIFICIAL  INSEMINATION  IN THE COW
M. G. DISKIN  and J. M. SREENAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Fertilization  rate in the cow following  the use of natural  service  or 
artificial  insemination  using fresh extended  semen  is normally  estimated  
at about  90%. Calving  rates,  however,  are reported  to be closer  to 50%.  
There are few reports  on the timing  of embryonic  mortality  in the cow. 
A total of 256 beef heifers  was used in two experiments  to establish  
fertilization  and subsequent  embryonic  survival  rates following  the use 
of frozen-thawed  semen.  Fertilization  rate was estimated  at 90%. Embryo  
survival  rates were high (93%) up to and including  Day 8 but were  
reduced  at Days 12 (56%; P<0.001,  16 (66%; P<0.001)  and 42 (58%;  
P<0.001).  This study indicates  that fertilization  failure accounted  for 
10% of overall  reproductive  failure  while embryo  death accounted  for 
30%. The major portion  of this embryo  death occurred  between  Days 
8 and 16.
A further  146 heifers  were used in two experiments  to study  the effects  
of progesterone  supplementation  (100 mg daily)  or HCG administration  
(1500 i.u. daily) during  the luteal phase on CL weight and number,  
circulating  progesterone  levels and embryonic  survival. Progesterone  
supplementation  only slightly  increased  progesterone  level (P>0.10)  and 
had little effect on luteal tissue weights  (P>0.10).  HCG administration  
induced  accessory  CL numbers  (Mean ± SE, 2.18 ± 0.13) and weight 
(P<0.001)  and increased  progesterone  level (P<0.05).  Pooled  embryo  
survival  rates for control,  progesterone  and HCG  groups  were 54%,  71% 
and 64% respectively.  In a further  experiment  with 141 dairy cows,  
calving  rates of 65%, 73% and 57% were recorded  for similar  control,  
progesterone  and HCG treatments,  respectively.
108
THE DELETERIOUS  EEFECT  OF ENVIRONMENTAL
CONTAMINATION  ON FERTILITY  IN THE DAIRY  HERD
P. J. HARTIGAN
Physiology  Department,  Trinity  College,  Dublin.
It is well-recognised  that contamination  of the environment  of pregnant  
cows is a crucial  factor in the pathogenesis  of bovine  abortion.  Conse ­
quently,  control  measures  are designed  to break the ‘cycle of infection ’, 
largely  by secregation  of infected  animals,  disinfection  and vaccination.  
By contrast,  little attention  has been given to the possibility  that environ ­
mental  contamination  may lead to colonization  of the genital  tract of the 
non-pregnant  cow by pathogenic  microorganisms  with deleterious  effects  
on fertility.
In this communication  two episodes  are described  which indicate  that 
this does occur,  at least when the environment  is very heavily  contamina ­
ted. In one herd, infertility  in six cows was associated  with chronic  
inflammatory  lesions  in the reproductive  tract  due to Aspergillus  fumigatus.  
Transfer  of one affected  animal  to a new location  was followed  by elim­
ination  of the infection  and resolution  of the lesions. In another  herd,  
there  was massive  contamination  of the environment  by Corynebacterium  
pyogenes  in discharges  from purulent  sinusitis  in a number  of recently  
dehorned  cows. The organism  invaded  the reproductive  tract causing  
severe  inflammatory  lesions  and a marked  reduction  in herd fertility.
Segregation  of cows with purulent  discharges  and disinfection  should  
be an integral  part of any programme  of management  for improved  
fertility.
109
SILAGE  EFFLUENT  AS A PIG FEED
D. C. PATTERSON  and N. WALKER
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  
Co. Down,  Northern  Ireland.
Silage  effluent  is normally  an unavoidable  by-product  of ensiling  grass  
in our climate.  The quantity  of effluent  from a silo is primarily  deter ­
mined by the quantity  of grass and its dry matter  content  but some  
additives  can have an effect on effluent  yield. Collection  and storage  of 
silage effluent  can be accomplished  at low capital  cost and the material  
normally  of pH 3.8-4.2  can be preserved  with the addition  of formalin  
(3 1/1000  1 effluent)  in open tanks or by ensuring  anaerobic  conditions  
of storage.
In feeding  experiments  carried  out with pigs, effluent  was substituted  
on a dry matter  basis for 150 g/kg of a baconer  diet. The production  
results  obtained  in five experiments  involving  almost  400 animals  indicate  
that the digestible  energy : protein  ratio of effluent  and the amino acid 
balance  meet approximately  the nutrient  requirements  of growing  pigs. 
In five digestibility  studies  it was found that the mean digestible  energy 
content  of effluent  was 16.5 MJ/kg  organic  matter. Voluntary  intake  
studies  have shown  that intake  of effluent  dry matter  can be depressed  
when  the dry matter  content  is less than 400 g/kg. Although  some min­
erals in effluent  can exceed  the requirements  of the pig, there was no 
depression  in animal performance  when effluent  was given as a sole 
source  of liquid.
Silage  effluent  has been used successfully  in feeding  trials on commer ­
cial farms. Feeding  silage effluent  can increase  the fattener ’s margin  by 
over £3 per pig and since enough  silage effluent  is produced  in Northern  
Ireland  to feed all of the 1.2 x 10“ baconers  produced,  the potential  sav­
ing for the region  approaches  £M4.
no
PROBLEMS  ASSOCIATED  WITH  FEEDING  WHEY  AND  
DELACTOSED  WHEY  TO PIGS
T. J. HANRAHAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Whey and delactosed  whey are good sources  of nutrients  for pigs. 
Their  physical  composition  6.5% and 30% total solids  respectively  means  
that they are of little interest  to the provender  milling  trade.
When transferred  to pig farms the storage  life of whey can be very 
short especially  in unclean  tanks during  the summer  months.  Microbial  
degradation  by streptococci,  Clostridia  and yeasts  can release  50% of the 
molecular  weight  of lactose  as carbon  dioxide.  An experiment  at Moore ­
park showed  that poorly  stored whey contained  less than 50% of the 
nutrient  value of fresh whey.
Feeding  experiments  with whey demonstrated  that it has a depressing  
effect on appetite  as the quantity  fed increased  from 25% to 33%. Pigs 
on the higher level consumed  10% less feed (P<0.01).  There was no 
effect on feed conversion  efficiency  (P>0.05).  This result cannot  be 
attributed  to a higher  liquid intake since a similar  effect was observed  
when dried whey or whey concentrate  was used.
A number  of scientific  papers  have suggested  that the salt content  of 
whey can suppress  appetite.  Experiments  with delactosed  whey which  
has twice the salt content  of whey substantiate  this viewpoint.  Adding  
25% delactosed  whey  to the diet of individually  fed pigs suppressed  feed 
intake by 15% (P<0.01).  With group feeding  (10 pigs/pen)  a similar  
diet resulted  in 7 out of 80 pigs dying  from salt poisoning.  In the dietary  
regime,  these pigs were allowed  3.5 kg water  per kg of meal equivalent.  
The Na+Cl  content  of the diet was 1.95%. A similar  feeding  regime  did 
not cause mortality  in individually  fed pigs or in group  fed pigs with an 
ad libitum  water supply.
Ill
^ iti . ■: ' '''^■,:v:i;;
