,; -w ■. -. -.r-
IRISHJOURNAL  OF THE
GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION
(Animal Production  Society)
SPRING  1962
is always  best  
and when  you use
iiiiiiiiiiiniig Hiiiiiiiimmiii
iii[miiimii(i!^
or
\^cl^i 4cA %ttt PiJXp.
I you increase
I the Feeding:  Value
I
Miiiitiiiiiiiiiit  iiiiiiiiimiip^
I
^iniiHiiiiiini  ^ iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
= Wr/te  for free
s Advisory  Leaflets
COMHLUCHT  SlUiGRE  EIREANN,  TEO.
CARLOW  MALLOW  THURLES  TUAM
JOURNAL  OF THE
IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION
(Animal Production  Society)
contents
PRINCIPLES  OF FODDER  CONSERVATION  .........................
A lecture  by Professor  Alfred Kbnekamp  of the Institute  of 
Grassland  Husbandry,  Fodder  Production  and Fodder  Conser ­
vation,  at Braunschweig  Vblkenrode,  given to the Irish Grass ­
land Association  on July 15, 1961.Page 3
LIST OF MEMBERS  AND PAST PRESIDENTS .........................
A full list of the names  and addresses  of Members  of the Irish  
Grassland  Association.Page 40
FACTORS  AFFECTING  YIELDS  AND QUALITIES  OF IRISH
WOOLS ......................................................................................  Page 52
An article by Vivian  Vial, M.Sc., focussing  attention  on those  
wool traits which respond  to selection.
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  .................................  Page 57
A short history  of the Association  since its foundation  in 1946
IMPROVEMENT  IN SHEEP BREEDING  .................................
This article by Oscar Colburn  reviews  the factors  required  to 
make an accurate  assessment  of commercial  needs in the 
breeding  of sheep.Page 58
OMr sincere thanks are due to the contributors  of articles  in this book,  
and to the Irish Farmers'  Journal  for use of photographs  from its files.
M'r. •.■-^■■,>'';,,/%p,
...... ■
'•V' . - .
■• / * ■ W i' 'v>; ' f*-h
■ .. ^ .i>*'  :.r
Results  of experiences  and trials of the technique  
of silage making  and fodder  conservation  in the 
Federal  Republic  of Germany  with outlooks  on the 
conditions  in the Republic  of Ireland.
PRINCIPLES  OF pQpp£|{
CONSERVATION
by Professor  Dr. Alfred  Konekamp  
Institute  of Grassland  Husbandry  
Fodder  Production  and Fodder  Conservation  
Braunschweig —Volkenrode.
THE GENERAL  ECONOMICAL  BASIS  OF FODDER  
CONSERVATION  IN WEST GERMANY
In ihe Federal  Republic  of Germany,  i.e. the area west of the 
“ Iron Curtain  ’* in Northern  and Western  Germany,  we find 
mostly  family  farms  without  hired labour  with a comparatively  
heavy stock. The proportion  of unalterable  oermanent  grass ­
land is about 40% of the agricultural  area, varying  from  
30—100%.
Under the given climatic  conditions  the stockkeeper  has to 
provide  for winterfood  as a rule for half a year, for young  cattle  
for 150 days, for dairy cows 180-200  days.
For a rationable  stockkeeping  therefore  the following  con­
siderations  have to be made;
1. In which form shall we offer the conserved  food to the 
animals  ?
2. How can we obtain  the best qualities  of same  ?
3. By which  methods  of food conservations  can we have the 
lowest  cost of production  ?
Cost of starch  unit
Regarding  the last and perhaps  imoortant  question  we can 
prove by numerous  investigations  and calculations  that we can 
count in the average  with the following  costs of production:
Cost of 1 KStE (2.2 lbs. St. Eq.)
Method  of food-stuff  Cents  of German  Mark Pence
Grazing  ......................................  16—22
Silage ..........................................  21—27 41—51
Hay ..........................................  34—44 6|—8?
Bought  concentrates  .............. 50—60 10—12
The average  value for farm-produced  food can be calculated  
at a cost of 5i—6 Pence  corresponding  to an output  of 3500 —5500 
lb. of Starch  Eq./ac.
Using these figures  we have to take into consideration  the 
influence  of the output  of area and fodder-quality  within the 
different  methods  of utilization  and conservation.  These  connec ­
tions result  from the following  table 1 and diagram  Nr. 1 shown  
below. The “ losses of conservation  ” mentioned  hereby  form  
the most important  criterium  for the quality  of a certain  silage.
Table 1
Cost of production  for 1 KStE  in grass  silage  and hay in connection  
with output  of area and losses of conservation
Relative;  0,30 DM (6 d)/KStE/100.
Relative  costs of production  in connection  with area-output
2300 lb. StE/ac.  3450 lb. StE/ac.  4600 lb. StE/ac
Silage
loss 15—20% ......... 108 80 70
„ 35—40% .........Hay140 104 90
loss 15—20% ......... 163 127 103loss 35—40 % ......... 220 163 137
t>IAGRAM0
240 -f-
200 -■LOSSES15-20%
35-40%
SiLACrE HAY
Yield.' 2.300  KSr.ESiLACrE may 
3450  KSt.E
4SILA&E HAY
4600  K St E
The tendency  resulting  thereupon  for the practical  farmer  is 
clearly  to be made out;
Rising output per acre — Falling  costs  
Less losses  —  Falling  costs
Less hay and more silage — Falling  costs
The harvesting  methods  influence  the feeding  value.
The degree  to which the different  methods  of harvesting,  
e.g. in hay making,  influence  the digestability  and the nutrition  
value of food is shown  by the latest trials of digestibility  with  
sheep  by K. Richter  and H. J. Oslage  (2) compiled  in Table  2;
Table  2
(after  K. Richter  and H. J. Oslage)
Method  of hay making:
on the ground  Swedish  fence Hot air ventilation
Digestibility % % %Organic  matter... 56.1 62.9 66.3Crude  protein  ... 58.9 66.1 74.0Fibre .................. 60.9 63.2 60.9Crude Fat ...... 27,7 61.9 55.8N-free
extractives 53.0 62.9 67.3Nutrition  value g g 0
1 kg contains;
Dry matter  ...... 856 878 884Digestible
protein 67 (100) 74 (110) 92btarch
equivalents 282 (100) 371 (132) 405
This is the first time, as far as I know,  that the economical  
advantage  of better  methods  of hay conservation  has been nroved  
by exact digestive  experiments  on the animal. First of all a 
higher yield in harvesting  is gained by using racks for hay 
drying  and better  still by aeration  and ventilation  of wilted  grass  
in the barn since the losses by crumbling  away of leaves and 
stalks are avoided. Moreover  such hay being dried carefully  
has a higher  digestibility  by higher  concentration  of nutrients  in 
the fodder  unit. It is due to these facts and the lesser  weather  
risk joint to them —which  always  means  a diminution  of labour  
—that the cost of production  decreases.  We will see further  
below  that similar  tendencies  are found  in silage making.
The content  of nutrients  determines  the output  of milk.
The importance  of better  qualities  of farm produced  fodder
for the practical  keeping  of stock and the rent of animal  hus­
bandry  altogether  is shown  in simple  figures  in Table  3 and the 
respective  diagram  Nr. 2:
KCr MILK  (3SV«F qO
8 t8 36
6 --
4
2 -
e6 637 36
6125‘-84
ON THE  GROUND ON HAY  RACKS
Diagram  @ CZHDl<a«^TI»LE
FROTCIN&ARN  DRIED
1 STARCH  
[ UN  ITS
Table  3
5 lbs. of hay from a good ley contains  nutrients  
for ....... lbs. of milk (3.5/^ Fat)
Method  of Hay Making in digestible  protein in starch  units
dried  on the ground  ....... 6.12 5.34
dried on racks .............. 6.63 7.36
dried in the barn by air 8.36 8.00
I want to point out that the hay of the best method  (Barn  
drying)  is at the same time the best equalized  in prolein  and 
starch  units.
Rough  figures  of the losses according  to type of silo
In making  silage very similar  connections  can be shown  as 
regards  the different  methods,  their losses  and the quality  oblain-  
able. i.e. the units of valency.
The losses  of crude  protein  and starch  units occurring  during  
the process  of conservation  can be classified  on the base of 
balanced  investigations  and experiences  under practical  condi ­
tions on the whole  as follows:
Improvised  methods  .................................
(Trench  silo without  concrete  walls.  
Dutch  free stack)
Concrete  trench silos (More than 125 
c.yds.) ..............................................................35— 40%
25—40'/
(Carefully  stored  and covered)
Silos  of medium  height ............................. 20—30'i
(Carefully  pressed  and covered)
Tower silos ................................................ 15—25%
(according  to dry matter  content)
How much is left of fresh grass for the animal  ?
To give a more plastic  picture  I propose  to put the question  
as follows:  What will remain  of the most important  nutritive  
values  of fresh grass grown  on an acre of grassland  after being  
processed  for conservation?  I take as base a yield  of 8 tons of pad-  
dock grass (incl. a proportion  of 10% of clovers  and 5% of good  
herbs),  cut before  shooting  to ear. This amount  of grass will 
contain  in the average  620 lbs. digestible  crude  protein  and 2.400  
lbs. of StE. being  yield,  as said before,  of one acre.
See Table  4 and diagram  Nr. 3 for the figures:
Table  4
Yields  of digestible  crude protein  and starch units/ac  
permanent  grassland
(Base:  8 t/ac of grass before  shooting)
8 tons grass contain:
(a) immediately  after cutting
(b) after conservation
digestible  crude protein StE
a)after cutting ...... 620 2,400
b)after conservation  
Hay making
on the ground  ... 128 1,080
on racks .............. 222 1.440
hot air barn  
d r y i n g .................. 384 1.800
Silage
improvised
methods  ... 342 1.560
in concrete silos.. 384 1.800Artificial drying 588 2.160
K-St.E/ocrc
iooo-rDIAGRAM
HAY MAKING
ON ON BARM
&RDUND  RACKS ORJEDSi U AO-E
IMPROVItEO  fONCRElE  
SILOS SILOS
The price of labour  increases  continually !
At a period  where  especially  in German  Agriculture  (free  
part of Germany)  numerous  farm hands migrate  over to the 
industry  the problem  of cost Of labour  for the different  method  of 
conservation  is of decisive  importance.
This question  was investigated  by E. Zimmer  in a special  
study on the utilization  of the different  shapes  of containers  
envisaged  from the point of view of labour  cost (3). See the 
following  Table 5:
Table 5
Space of time needed  for silage making  using different  types of 
silos and different  intensity  of mechanisation
Need of time for 1 ton of silage  expressed  in number  of 
labour/minutes
(Research  work at the Agricultural  Centre  of Volkenrode  and 
the Max-Planck-Institute-Kreuznach,  1957-1960)
Types  of silos  
Kind of fodderUse of manual  work  
Grade  of mechanising  
Kind of covering  . . . whenLabour/  Relative
ton
Loading  Covering  Unloading  silage
Medium  height  &Hand Soil Hand 95 100
moveable  rim
Tower  silo Chopper Immersion
-lidHand 68 72
Chopper Immersion
-lidGrab 40 42
Flat—and TrenchGrab Immersion
-lidGrab 40 42
sHo
Wilted  silage Hand Foil Hand 67 71
Hand Foil Front-
loader47 50
Sugarbeet-tops Hand Foil Hand 41 43
Hand
Elevator-
loaderFoil Front-
loader
Grab27
2228
23
I restricted  myself  on the values  which can be calculated  
and measured  during  silage  work proper,  loading  and unloading  
and feeding.  The expenditure  for cutting,  processing  on the field  
and transport  to the silo may be neglected  since they are about  
the same with all the methods  mentioned.
The Irish Shell and BP Film  
Library  of 16mm  sound  films — 
educational,  travel,  agriculture,  
motor  sport,  aviation,  industrial,  
and general  interest  — is avail ­
able to schools,  convents,  film  
societies  and other organisa ­
tions.  The films,  many  of which  
have  won  major  awards  at inter ­
national  film festivals,  can be 
borrowed  free of charge.
ASK FOR OUR FILM CATALOGUE  •
IRISH SHELL AND BP LIMITED
SHELL-BP  HOUSE,  FLEET  STREET,  DUBLIN  2. TELEPHONE  7138!.
II.
Weather  conditions  for farming  in West Germany
To give the Irish silo experts  and farmers  a better under ­
standing  for the climatic  conditions  under which we have to 
work'in  the Federal  Republic,  which  are the fundamental  bases  
of our knowledge  and which  are the principles  of our advisory  
work to practical  farmers,  I would like to give some special  
evidence.  For only thus will my audience  and the reader  of this 
paper  be able to modify  my statements  according  to Irish condi ­
tions and To judge  them.
To begin  with follows  now Table  6 with the most important  
climatic  facts,  which  are furthermore  represented  on the diagram  
Nr. 4. The knowledge  of these conditions  is especially  important  
for the problems  of fodder  conservation.
Table  6
Weather  in North-West  Germany
(Average  values  of the districts  of Oldenburg.  Bremen.
Emden,  Quakenbriick)
MonthRainfall
Sum of the month  
InchesRelative  
moisture  of air 
monthly  average  
%Average daily  
temperature  in 
month  
Fahrenheit
January 2.16 89 33.4
February 1.69 88 34.7
March 1.85 82 38.6
April 1.85 77 45.0
May 2.05 74 53.8
June 2.48 75 59.0
July 3.07 78 62.2
August 3.11 80 60.8
September 2.32 82 55.9
October 2.40 87 48.1
November 2.09 88 40.1
December 2.40 90 35.4
27.47
The highest  rainfall  is therefore  in the months  of June,  July  
and August,  during  which the biggest  part of grass harvesting  
takes place. Those three months  have accordingly  the highest  
daily temperatures.  The relative  air moisture  is then also the 
lowest,  but we realize  typical  maritime  climate  zones. On the 
whole  the conditions  for hay making  in the old style, i.e. on the 
ground  are not favourable.  And this we have to take in account  
in our plans and research  work.
10
Lactic acid bacteria  are favourtzed  by anaerobic  conditions
and sugars
In the following  I quote some of the results I presented  
already  at the 8th International  Grassland  Congress  1960 at 
Reading  (England)  as far as they belong  to our subject  4.
The fundaments  of the fermentation  techniques  for silage  
making  are generally  known. It has to be our aim from the 
start to prevent  quickly  the respiration  of the cells, to avoid the 
decomposition  of protein  and to restrict  the further  retrench ­
ment of carbohydrates.  This is brought  about bv all measures  
leading  to a rapid formation  of acidity,  therefore  lowering  the 
pH-value.  We found  as optimum  limit values  for wet and humid  
silages  a pH of 3.5—4.2. for wilted  silages  with high dry matter  
content  a pH of 4.5—4.8.
In practical  farming  there are first of all 2 measures  leading  
to a quick lowering  of the dH and to a vigorous  formation  of 
lactic acid:
1) Easily  soluble  sugar-stuffs  have to be nrovided  as food  
for the bacteria,  at least 2Yf sugar.
2) It is essential  to create  anaerobic  conditions  in the fodder-  
stack.
The lactic acid bacteria  secure  a sparing  conservation,  i.e. 
there  are only little  losses  of nutrients  and other  imoortant  stuffs.  
The fodder  becomes  palatible  and the conserve  remains  stable.
The time of cutting  has decisive  influence
The process  of ensiling  includes  to some extent  the previous  
cultural  measures  and starts already  at cutting  the grass. The
It
SiLAaE  ^ 
QUALITY  ~
GRASS
FIRST
CUT
GRASS
second
cur
DIAGRAM©VERY  GrOOD
In Shoot tnftloofn
73%
50
727 oSATISFACTORY  
In Shoot In BloomBAO
(nSttoof  InSibom
3lVo
19%□
50%
■
cut at the right time has great  influence.  We can see that clearly  
by investigations  carried  through  to a great  extent  in practice.
In Table  7 and Diagram  Nr. 5 it is shown  which  influence  has 
the harvesting  in Ihe state of shooting  and flowering  of the grass  
on the quality  of silage.
Table  7
Influence  of time of cutting  on siiage quality
(Proportion  of the various  grades  i 7t)
Percentage  of silage  on the grades
Time of 
cutting
1. cut
Shooting
Flowering
2. cut 
Shooting  
FloweringVery good  Satisfactory  Bad
61—100 Flieg  points  41— 60 Flieg points  less than
40 Flieg  
points
73 9 18
50 19 31
72 22 6
30 20 50
We can clearly  see the tendency;  we have the biggest  chance  
to get a highly  valuable  silage if we succeed  to cut before  the 
state of shooting  of the grasses  is passed.
The fermentability  depends  on the sugar-content
The faculty  of fermentation  of plants depends  to a high  
degree  on their content  of fermentable  sugar.* The soecies  of 
fodder  plants  and naturally  also Lheir selected  seeds differ very  
much in this regard.
12
AND
Insecticides  
Weedkillers  
Seed  dressings  
Fungicides
YOU CANShelltoskill
FARMING  REALLY  PAYS
Wise  farmers  know  that more  profit  per acre 
can be obtained  b/ taking  full advantage  
of the Shell Chemicals  range.
Our technical  advisory  service,  staffed  by 
fully-experienced  agricultural  graduates,  
will deal with your agricultural  enquiries  by 
■phone  or letter.
See the address  below.
BE SURE OF SHELL  CHEMICALS
ciie :a«ica .l.s
Shell Chemical  Company  Limited
33/34  Westmoreland  Street.  Dublin  2. Tel. 72114/5.
13
I want to mention  just shortly  that even the hour of the 
day at which  the cutting  is executed  has a clear influence  on the 
fermentability  of the green  crop. Length  and intensily  of insola ­
tion influence  the content  of assimiliates.  Silage  cut in the after ­
noon contains  frequently  15—207^ more fermentable  sugar  than  
grass cui in the morning.
The Swedish  scientists  Kivimae  and Wylam  have fixed the 
sugar content  for 3 important  fodder  plants on the following  
average:
Red clover (Trifolium  pratense)  2.2% in fresh matter  
Timothy  (Phleum  pratense)  4.27 in fresh matter
Corn for silage (Zea mais)  5.6% in fresh matter
This corresponds  also with our practical  experiences  in silage  
making. The rising sugar content  improves  also the fermen ­
tability.
The same  investigators  have also worked  out the connections  
between  the state of development  at the moment  of cutting  and 
the sugar content  and had the following  results:
Content  of fermentable  sugar (%) in fresh matter
after Kivimae  and Wylam
a) Before  budding  Begin  budd Full buds Begin  flower  Full flower
b) Before  shoot Begin shoot Shooting Full shot Begin  flower
a)
Red
clover  1.74 1.98 2.21 2.46 2.71
b)
Timothy  3.9 4.02 4.12 4.34 5.12
All factors  have to be in the optimum
As we know  by experience  it is much  easier  to ensile  Timothy  
grass  than red clover. And this depends  not only on ^he different  
content  of protein,  as we see now, but at the same time on the 
sugar  content. We can see that the latter increases  in the pro­
gress of development  resp. of ripening  and culminates  in the 
case of red clover  in full bloom  and in that of Timothy  in the 
beginning  of flowering.  But this fact again should  not induce  
us :o choose  the time for cutting  only from this ooint of view.  
Doing  so other valuable  qualities  of the olants  like content  of 
protein  and fibre and digestability  would  be injured. As in all 
biological  proceedings  the point  is rather  to catch  the optimum  of 
all valuable  qualities.  Besides  I believe  that a sugar content  
of about 2% onward  will satisfy  the demands  of fermentation  
with regard  to lactic acid and stabilisation  of the food.
In choosing  the best moment  of cutting  other factors  play  
an important  part. So amongst  others  the nhysical  nature  of 
the silage. Unwieldy  fodder  getting  too old contains  in the stalks  
many  spaces  and impedes  us in our struggle  to density  the stack.
t4
The practical  farmer should therefore  never miss the right  
moment  of cutting  ! This has come when the clovers  are in full 
buddings  and the grasses  in shoot. This will agree  well with the 
previous  results  of our experiments  as regards  the sugar  content.  
The evaluation  of numerous  series  of investigation  on grass  silage  
gives us determined  proves.
The dry matter  content  acts on the quality
In causative  connection  with the sugar content  of silage is 
also the content  of dry matter. The higher  the dry matter  when  
ensiling  the more concentrated  is the natural  solution  of sugar.  
Our aim is therefore  to reduce  the water in the green fodder  
before  filling  in by prewilting  vigorously.  The ootimum  would  
be to reach  a dry matter  content  on the field of 30—35% but this 
measure  will only answer  to the purpose  if we succeed  to reach  
this state in not more than 48 hours  by mechanical  methods  like 
tedding,  turning,  eventually  also by crushing.
It is astonishing  indeed that these favourable  reciprocal  
effects between  dry matter,  sugar content  and fermentability  
have been discovered  only in recent  years.
Again  I will show you in Table  8 and diagram  6 some prac ­
tical results compiled  out of many investigations  of the last 
years.
BETTER  SEEDS
mean
BETTER  GRASS
Belter from
^eedd dCtd.
— lo be sure !
Specialists  in Cereals  and Grasses
4'5 HARCOURT  LANE  DUBLIN  2.
15
Table 8
Influence  of the dry matter  content  on silage  quality
(Proportion  of the various  grades  in %)
Percentage  of silages  inthe grades
Dry matter Very good satisfying Bad
content 61—100 Flieg  points  41-—60 Flieg  points less than
40 Flieg  
points
>25% 65 14 21
>25% 26 12 62
DIAGRAM  (§) 
SllAGt(aUAUTY  ►
MATTER
CONTENTVERY  ^OD
65%>I26%SATl^PAtfrORY
14%I27«BAO
627o
21%
In this diagram  divergence  of percentage  of the 3 grades  in 
2 groups  with higher  or lower  dry matter  content  appears  more  
clearly  still.
What  can we do in case of bad weather  ?
But what will happen  when weather  conditions  do not allow  
prewilting,  e.g. in the case of a permanent,  obstinate  “ Scotch  
mist ” what  can the practical  farmer  do then ? Suchlike  situations  
are frequent  in the grassland  areas of the Federal  Republic,  
especially  in the rainy hill areas with normally  23-28 inches  
of yearly  precipitation.  Unfavourable  weather  conditions  will 
injure —and I have to stress  this—in the first line the farms  which  
are not yet or not sufficiently  mechanised,  whereas  a farm  
manager  with a technical  good oulfit will in most cases succeed  
in prewilting  sufficiently  by making  use of transitory  fine weather  
periods.
Also from humid  forage  we can obtain  good silages
The harvesting  of forage ripe for ensilage  must not be 
delayed  in any way, it is essential  to level the “ grass hill ** 
existing  in the intensive  grazing  farms  in May and June some ­
how. but in proper  time. The silage maker  is therefore  forced  
to employ  appropriate  evading  methods  which  enable  him to get 
a good silage  even from wet material  with a dry matter  content  
of less than 257r. In such situations  we have to take refuge  in
16
1^1  age
BETTER
SILAGE
r-Vane}N
development
Kylage
mintKdii  '.
fUlSWl
from >«“«• *''*^* ‘is the result otextensive  
German  research.
Available  from  your local  
agricultural  merchant  in 
56ib. bags at 80'*.  
Full directions  in each  
bag.
• Visit our stand No. 332 
In machinery  enclosure — 
R.D.S. Spring Show
13^
PAN BRITANNICA  INDUSTRIES  LTD*
WALTHAM  ABBEY,  ESSEX, ENGLAND
Write tor free booklet  to Irish Distributors:  T. P. WHELEHAN  SON & CO.
Finofas. Dublin.
17
EARLY BITE 
GRASS
FOR
HIGtlER  YIELDS 
AND
HIGHER  OUALIIY  
USE
GOULDINGS
-5-12
APPLY NOW AT 
3 cwls. statute  acre
18
additives.  For this purpose  we made  investigations  on the utility  
of different  additives  and their  effect. Without  going  into details  
we compare  the results  of a series  of practical  cases. They are 
meant  to inform  the farming  community  on reliable  figures.
In Table  9 and diagram  Nr. 7 three  big groups  are presented:  
without  additives,  chemical  additives  and molasses.
Table  9
Effect  of molasses  and chemical  additives  on the quality  of grass
silages
(Percentages  of the different  grades)
very  good satisfactory  bad
Flieg points  100—61 60—41 40— 60
Without  additives  .................. 21 19 60
Chemical  additives  .............. 38 15 47
Molasses  ................................  76 10 14
Molasses  are the best additive
If we compare  the 2 extreme  grades  “ very good  ” and “ bad ” 
we can easily see which effect we can exoect  from the right  
employment  of the additives.
The best success  will come from the molasses  with an 
addition  of \*/( of the green  stuff. We can again see the favour ­
able effect  of the sugar  on the fermentation.
This is especially  gratifying  for animal  nutrition  as we have  
here a healthy  natural  product  and the cost for this additive  
decreases  by ihe fact that we find again about  50'’^ of the sugar  
content  of the molasses  as nutrient  in the fodder  ration.
Only mineral  acids can help in the case of wet fodder
In very unfavourable  cases, when the forage is very wet 
(dry matter  content  of less than 18—20^/ ), but has to be brought
j vERVerOOD
SILAOE  QUALITY  y
WithoutA^itive«□
Kola&iesSATISFACTOgy &AD
6o^
47%
14%
19
in anyhow  by reasons  of farm management,  or if the material  
is soiled  and infested  by bacteria  of putrefication  or if the grass  
shows  already  the beginning  of butyric  acid formation  by laying  
a longer  period  in swath  on the field, even the molasses  can not 
help any more. In such a situation  the farmer  has to take on 
more massive  methods  and to add solutions  of mineral  acids.  
Doing  so we can without  any fear employ  the recipes  of A. I. 
Virtanen —Helsinki.  The Finns have proved  on a great scale  
that it is possible  to get valuable  grass —clover  silages  by the 
AIV method  even under  their generally  unfavourable  conditions.
The principle  of this method  should  be to make the shocks  
of acids  vigorous  enough  to lower  the pH-value  down  to 3.5. The 
calculation  of the equivalents  of acidity  is based  on the prescrip ­
tions of A. J. Virtanen.  We could take them over in the whole  
unchanged  and recommend  our farmers  after a special  study  
trip to Finland  to work accordingly.  (5) But we employ  in the 
Federal  Republic  also soluwions  of formic  acid. A handy  means  
is Amasil —salt which  has about the same effect.
If the silage is free of butyric  acid we will also have  
good silo-milk
When feeding  silages  treated  with dissoluted  mineral  acids  
we have to take certain  precautions  against  acidoses.  This is 
effectuated  by restricting  the ration  of silage  on about  66 pounds  
per cow and day and adding  5-6 lbs. of good hay. We state there ­
fore that under  German  conditions  this method  may be employed  
only in certain  cases of exception.  We believe  that the AIV-  
method  will be justified  in areas  of hard-cheese  production  where  
silage feeding  is forbidden  uo to now because  it is possible  to 
obtain  with security  grass-silages  free of butyric  acid even under  
disfavourable  conditions.
The practical  farmer  needs simple  prescriptions
Our prescriptions  for the use of the different  methods  are 
in brief the following:
(1) Normal  case
Cut. if possible,  in the afternoon  because  of the higher  
sugar-content.  Thereby  higher  concentration  of the cell-sap  
and augmentation  of the sugar-content  by 50-100^/.  Dura ­
tion of prewilting  1-2 days. The losses  by orewilting  are at 
the average  2-4% of dry matter.
<2) If prewilting  is impossible  (dry matter  remains  under  25%).
use additives  with sugar.
Suchlike  humid  silages  receive:
0.5—1% of feeding  sugar  or
0.8—1.5% of dried sugarbeet  pulp (fully  valued)  or 
2.0—4.0/^ of molasses  or 
3.0—5.0%  of molasses-pulp.
The same treatment  is applied  to all forage  plants  originally  
hard to ferment  like lucerne,  vetches,  beans, pure clover.
20
-JF-MAKES  SENSE OF SILAGE  
1-MAN 1-TRACTOR  WITH THE 
NO 50 FORAGE HARVESTER
Sidemounted  the No. 50 —JF— Forage  Harvester  has a gearbox  
with rear drive for self-unloading  Spreader/Trailer.  The harvester  
is removed  by one man 
in one minute.  Height  
control  is from 
driver ’s seat.
—JF— gives you grassland  control.  —JF— cuts, chops and blows  
in one operation.  —JF— keeps  you going  whatever  the conditions. 
Safer on hills the trailer  fits direct to the tractor.  —JF— takes  
less power.
FOUR PROVINCES  
M A C H I N E R Y  L T D . ,  
D R O G H E D A  P h o n e  8 H I
F . P . 4 1 B
2 1
etc., the natural  sugar  content  of which  is under  1.5^/, As 
regards  the cost of feeding  sugar  one can count praticaliy  
with the reappearance  of the sugar nutrients  in the lactic  
acid of about  50%.
In Germany  groats  of com or cereals  are not used as 
additives  by economical  reasons.
(3) In the case of fully wet silages,  rain stricken  forage,  grass  
from sewage  fields or of soiled material  we have to use 
mineral  acids. We recommend  to keep mineral  acids or 
salts in stock  for these  exceptions.
With one of these 3 variances  the farmer  will always  be 
successful.
The “best type of silo ” can only be determined  from the 
farm organization
“ Which  is the best silo ? this question  is asked again and 
again by the practical  farmer  emphatically  I But science  can 
only make  fundamental  statements:
(a) A silo has to be gastight.
(b) It must allow a high density  of the fodder  stack or by 
spontaneous  pressure  or by mechanical  pressing,  and
(c) It should  have an arrangement  to drain  off the effluents  
impeding  the access  of air from outside.
All types of silos fulfilling  this demand  really can pass as 
the “ beSv ’’ from the point of view of fermentation.
I am not dogmatical  in this regard,  but feel obliged  to inform  
the silo-farmer  where  one type of silo fits in and the other not. 
On the condition  of an unobiectionable  structure  this question  
has to be decided  according  to the economical  structure  of each  
farm separately.
The second  question  is then —I always  have German  condi ­
tions in view —how far is the farm mechanised  and which  is the 
technical  outfit. We have also to take into account  if the pen-  
barn system  and self-feeding  can be recommended.
Anyhow  a deliberate  planning  of the whole fodder-chain  
from the stem to the crib is to be made  of which  the silo is the 
most important  link.
The plan of work is to be carried  out with sequence.
Only ihus it is passible  for the advisor  to give general  direc ­
tions  for the correct  way to choose. The ooints  have to be shifted  
properly,  but then the course  once started  has to be continued  
consequently:
(a) For small  holdings  of 25-35  acres  generally  only  the “ long-  
fodder  chain ” is applicable.  Needed  for that is a “Loader ” 
operated  by a tractor  of about 25 h.o. In this case we 
need also a chopper-blower  if we have to fill a tower  silo 
or an arrangement  to unload  if the unchopoed  forage  is 
discharged  into a trenchsilo.  Also a tractor  rolling  down
22
the forage  in the trench  should  be at disposal,  but this 
will be possible  in a small holding  only by neighbourly  
help.
(b) For bigger  farms  above  75-125  acres  the ** chopping-chain  ” 
with chopper*blower  is adequate  which guarantees  an 
exact short chopping  of 0.8 inch. The charge  of the silo 
can then be executed  either  by the hay grab or by the 
pneumatic  conveyor.  Using the latter we need also a 
special  trailer  for chopped  forage  unloading  continually  to 
the forepart  over a transversal  conveyor.
General  directions  for West-German  grassland  farms.
For German  conditions  we decided  in the following  way on 
the choice  of the type of silo:
(1) The "Trench-silo ” is the prototype  for all farms  going  in 
mainly  for root-crops  (sugarbeet)  with a great output  of 
sugarbeet-tops,  or cultivating  silo-corn,  leys or catch-crops.  
We call these farms " enterprises  with root-crops —forage  
and cereals. ” Generally  they have a great  technical  power.
23
uos&es  OF 
STARt.H  Units
RfLATiVe
0.00 - •
iSo - •
loo - -
so ••
dbiagram
ON LY FOlU  
2 1 4 -
l o of o i l  - I - 8 I N C H E S  
OF EARTH
Tower
Silotrench
Silotrench
Silo
Another  characteristic  trace of them is the appearance  
of great amounts  of forage  in a comparatively  short time,
and this is just the basis to make real good silage in a 
trenchsilo.  It is essential  to bring home the forage  for 
the silo in 3-4 days and complete  the covering  ! Further ­
more we need quantities  for the filling  of at least lOOm^.
(2) For intensive  grassland  farms  (we have in Germany  40% 
of the arable  area as unalterable  permanent  grassland)  
the “ best silo ” is the tower silo. Why ?—Practising  a 
good fertilizing  (176 pounds  of N/acre)  and a severe  
grazing  management  a good deal of the forage,  even of 
heavily  stocked  pastures,  has to be harvested  early by 
cutting  the young  grass  and ensiling  it. This happens  two 
or three times in the first half of the grazing  season.  
Repeated  fillings  can only be executed  in tower silos, if 
the farmer  is interested  to obtain  the very best quality  
and to economise  the cost of labour.
The tower silo is the prototype  for grassland  farms  
This is the reason  why we can only recommend  the tower  
silo in the case of farms  with a high oroDortion  of grassland.  All 
improvised  methods  like trench  silos and stacks  above ground,  
even if covered  by foil or earth will always  be conected  with  
big losses ! Quality  of these silages  is rarely  good, butyric  acid 
fermentation  and high losses on the outside  can simoly  not be 
avoided  even with the greatest  care. Our results  are briefly  com­
piled in Table  10 and Diagram  Nr. 8.
24
Table 10
Losses  of nutrients  with the different  types  of silos and 
effect  of covering
(Balance  experiments  Volkenrode  1957-1960.  orewilted  
24-267^  DM)
Type of silo and Covering Relative  losses  of nutrients  
Percentage  of St.Eq.
Tower silo ..............................................
Trench  silo with foil ..........................
Trench  silo with foil + 8 inches  earth100
214
156
The composition  of a great investigation  material  out of 
balance  experiments  made in the years 1957-1960  with pasture  
grass  gives  the result  presented  in Table  11 (average  values).
The diagram  below has only in the left part interest  for the 
Irish farmer  since this climate  will permit  in the best case only  
a slight prewilting.
Table 11
Losses  of nutrients  and silage quality
with different  types  of silos and 25-27%  DM
Material:  pasture  grass  
(relative  values)
Tower  silos Silos  of medium  
heightTrench  silos
Losses  of Starch  units 100 
Flieg Points .............. 78130
70183
60
The results  were obtained  by exact balance  experiments,  
they are therefore  to a great extent  reliable  since the whole  
matter  ensiled  was weighed  coming  in and going out and the 
nutrient  content  analysed  chemically.
LOSSES  IN _
stawmeouiv . Slightly
(15-27%  dm)
200 4-
ISb ' ■ 
too 
So 
o-PRE  WILTEDHEAVILY 
(607c  PM)
Quauty
-ISO
100
So
TOWER.
SlUOMEDIUM  SIZE
SiloTRENCH
SILOTower .
SILOMEDIUM  SIZ£  
Silo
25
in
Characterization  of Irish Family  Holdings
If I am trying  now to apply the West-German  principles  to 
the conditions  of the Republic  of Eire I start from the facts com­
municated  to me by Mr. T. Raftery  for this purpose.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8) 
(9
(10)
(11)
(12)In Eire in most cases very small farms are concerned  
with a cultivable  area of 35 to 50 acres ((=15  — 20 ha). 
Having  a long growing  season  the period  of winter  keep is 
very short;  to my estimate  120 days average.
Only a very small number  of farmers  makes  silage  up to 
now.
Wilting  for silage  will be possible  only in rare cases  under  
the Irish weather  conditions.
Silage  is made to-day  almost  exclusively  in Trench  Silos.  
Generally  the surface  of the fodder-stack  in the trench  
silo remains  uncovered.
When brought  in the silo good forage has generally  a
Dry Matter  content  of only 18-20%.
The stored  forage  heats up quickly,  a cold fermentation  
is therefore  rare.
Ensilages  show a very low quality.
The whole  winter  keep is composed  of rather  poor fodder  
qualities.
Additives  for silage  are only apolied  in cases  of exception.  
If there are any so generally  molasses  in a solution  of 
1.57c.
A comparison  of Irish and German  conditions  is interesting
These conditions  in Eire can be compared  the nearest  to 
the small holdings  in the rainy hills of the German  Federal  
Republic.  The differences  are noi as big as one would believe  
at first sight. Also in our country  we have as yet only one third  
of the necessary  silo capacity,  only every fifth farm has a silo 
at all. Insufficient  silage  methods  are frequent,  and wilting  is— 
though  possible  in many cases —rare. The technical  eauipment  
of the “ fodder-chain  is still imperfect  in these small farms;  
the same happens  with pressing  and covering.
In the grassland  areas of the plains with bigger  farms of 
about 75-125 acres (30-50 ha) and a proportion  of grassland  of 
TO-lOOt^  silage is generally  made —if pasture  grass is ensiled  at 
all—in trench  silos or open stacks  as we find them in Holland.  
In these cases the losses are between  35 and 507. the qualities  
are seldom  good, mostly  only satisfactory,  if not decidedly  poor  
or bad.
We find a fundamental  difference  to Irish conditions  in the 
fact that these  farms  have to provide  for a winter  keen of 180-200  
days or else they need manifold  the silage  capacity  of Eire !
26
Counting  only 120 days of winter  keen in Eire the require ­
ment of silage  capacity  is therefore  only two-third  of ours. This  
is a great advantage,  for feeding  on pasture  is cheapest.
The aim is the hayless  fodder  ration.
Hay of good quality  will always  be more  difficult  to make in 
England  and Eire than good silage. Already  bv this reason  and 
further  because  the unit of nutrients  is much  cheaper  as in hay.
Silage  should  occupy  with the Irish farmer  the first place.
27
To my opinion  hay should  be fed only to calves and only  
occasionally  to dairy  cows  and fattening  cattle.  The matter  arrives  
therefore  more than with us to a hayless  ration. Doing  so we 
have, however,  to presuppose  that we obtain  real good qualities  
of silage. We have the same aim in West Germany  and take it 
as a fundamental  principle  in reorganizing  the fodder  producing  
farms. The leading  principle  has to be in future:  “ much  silage — 
little hay ” or more radical:  “Only silage —no hay. ” Thus we 
feed in the cheapest  way.
Requirement  of labour  is lower  in silage  making  than in hay.
We have two reasons  for it;
(1) Because  the requirement  of labour of the different  
methods  of fodder  conservation  is the lowest  by making  
silage. We can see that by table 12 and diagram  10.
Table 12
Requirement  of labour  of the different  methods  
of fodder  conservation
(according  to A. Markus  (6).
Calculation  for a 62 acre grassland  farm, fully  
mechanized,  yield of green  matter  8 t/acre.
Method  of Labour  hours  Tractor  hours  Netto  output
conservation  per acre per acre lbs. st/eq.
Hay on the ground  ............ 7.76 5.68 1080
Hay on racks .................. 28.48  3.80 1440
Barn drying ........................ 7.80 3.80 1800
Silage (tower  silo) ............ 6.20 4.08 1800
Artificial  drying .................... 5.44 4.84 2160
LABOUR  Hr5 
per Acre
26ACRE  ORASSLAND  FARMDIAGRAM@
Nett output,  
K St. E/Acre  
loooT
Methoaof
Cons«r^ionrr^SILAae
LlJ^Tower)^ARTlf»C»ALDrying
28
HOW  TO
FARMING  
MECHANISATION
Many  farmers  haven ’t got the ready-  
cash to pay the full purchase  price  for 
that new tractor  or up-to-date  machinery  
which  might  make  the difference  between  
success  or failure.  Is this your  problem?  
If so. consult  your  local  manager  of 
the Ulster  Bank  which  exists  to assist  
credit-worthy  farmers  to spread  their  
costs  over a period.
THE ULSTER  BANK  PERSONAL  
LOAN  SCHEME  is a ready,  cheap  method  
of financing  your  mechanisation  projects  
and may  be the answer  to your  problem.
ULSTER  BANK  LTD
Dublin  Offices:
32/33 COLLEGE  GREEN. 3/4 LOWER O'CONNELL  STREET.  
130 LOWER BAGGOT  STREET,  6U RANELAGH,  7T/SD LOWER 
CAHDEN  STREET. DUBLIN  AIRPORT  
Over 200 offices throughout  Ir-land.
29
The expenditure  of human  labour  and of machine  work is the 
lowest  in silage making —the same as in artificial  drying.
(2) Because  the losses  of nutrients  are much  lower  in making  
silage  than making  hay. We can see that in Table  13 and
diagram  11.
Table  13
Relations  between  quality  and losses of 
nutrients  making  silage
(Percentages  in the various  grades)
Silage  quality very  good satisfactory bad
Number  of samples 39 55 17
Flieg Points 100—61 60—41 40— 00
Content  of butyric  acid 0.00 0.35 1.30
Losses of starch units... 22 (100) 29 (132)  35 (158)
With the increase  of the butyric  acid content  — a reliable  
standard  for the “ quality  ” of a silage —the losses  of starch  units  
increase  by leaps ;.o 132^ and 158% ! It is astonishing  indeed  
that the farmer  does not pay any regard  to these loss-figures  in 
his production.  This is the heavy mortgage  of the processing  
husbandry  basing  preferably  on farm produced  fodder.
30
(2)
(3)Scheme  of organisation  of silage  making  in an Irish farm  
of medium  size
Planing  the stio-capacity  requirement  for a farm it is neces ­
sary to make up the calculation  in relation  with the mechanical  
equipment  and the “ fodder-chain. ” The expenditure  of this kind  
can only be economical,  if the necessary  emphasis  is laid from  
the beginning  on the silage  husbandry.
The three main points  should  be to my opinion:
(1) High and well secured  grass*yieids  from the pastures  
in order to get enough  silo grass besides  the forage  for 
the grazing  animal (high “grass-mountain ”).
The feeding indoors is to be organized  after the 
principle:  " Much  silage —little  or no hay. ”
Best quality  of silage.
I should  like to venture  according  to these orinciples  a pro­
posal for the planning  of silage making  for a farm of medium  
size in Eire:
The holding  has 50 acres (20 ha) and 100% of grassland  (per ­
manent  pastures).  The rate of stock is 1.5 “cattle unit ’’/ha or 
30 cattle units on the 50 acres. (1 cattle unit=1100  pounds  live-  
weight).  The period  of winter  feeding  is 120 days, daily ration  
of silage  is fixed on 77 pounds  per head (=35  kg).
The farm requires  therefore:
30 (cattle  units) X 120 (days)  X 35 (silage  ration)  kg of
silage  = 126,000  kg —126 tons of silage during  the winter
=18m3  silage  capacity  netto.
Supposing  a medium  rate of losses  of 20% during  fermenta ­
tion the yield of green  material  should  be therefore:
126 + 126 X 20 = 126 + 26 = 152 tons
100
Basing  on a yield of 15 t/ha or 6 t/acre  we would  have to cut 
altogether  an area of 25 acres or 50% of the total area. This  
corresponds  to the output  of a grassland  farm of a middling  
intensitv.  This output  of mowing  can be distributed  on various  
areas of about  4 acres during  the rotation  of grazing  in a period  
of 6-8 weeks. This work can be done without  any difficulty  on a 
farm equipped  with tractor,  tedder,  loader  and chopper-blower.
In the above  mentioned  instance  we come to a requirement  
of silo-capacity  (netto)  of ISOm^. If we chop the grass, obtain  
a good compact  storing  and refill the silo twice we can count  
with an utilization  of the silo space  of 90%, that means  a planing  
of a total volume  of 200 silo capacity.  One  cattle  unit demands  
therefore  a Silage capacity  of 7 m^ (We in West Germany  have  
to base our planings  on 10 per cattle  unit I).
In a pure grassland  farm of small to medium  size we 
choose  the tower  silo.
Now come the most Important  decision  for the farmer:
31
“ Which  is the best silo for my farm ? ’’—This  question  is put very  
often to us. especially  in critical  cases like the one in discussion.  
You will remember  our previous  statement  that we dGCline  in 
West Germany  trench  silos of less than 100 m^ capacity  because  
the losses  in smaller  trench  silos are too high. If we were con­
cerned  in our case with a farm producing  sugar  beet/and  ensiling  
chiefly  sugarbeet-tops  we could perhaps  concede  a trench  silo. 
But our case is concerned  with a pure grassland  farm, and there ­
fore we have to take in account  the following  fact: When we 
follow  the rotational  system  of grazing  the grass wanted  for the 
silo does not come in altogether  at once, but is soread  in various  
cuts of young  grass  executed  in the month  of May and June. It 
is therefore  only possible  to fill the silo piecemeal,  in a oeriod  of 
several  weeks. Consequently  we have to use a type of silo 
enabling  us to various  refillings  without  a great expenditure  of 
labour  and as well without  considerable  losses.
Under these circumstances  the refilling  in the trench silo 
gets impossible  without  saying. We can therefore  eauip our 
model-farm  only with a type of silo having  a small surface  in 
proportion  to its capacity;  and that is just the tower  silo. It would  
be then suitable  to divide  the whole  silo space  into 4 units  of 50m^  
in order to meet the limited  labour  oower  of a suchlike  farm.  
The filling  of a 50 m^ silo in 2 turns  requires  each time an amount  
of fresh material  of 50 x 0.7 = 17.5 tons, that is the yield  of about  
3 acres. At these  periods  the cuts of grass may be also expected  
in a good grassland  farm.
A practical  Key for the calculation  of silo capacity
Table 14
Rate of Stock,  Silo Capacity  and—Types  (in rough  figures)
Area of 
farm  
acres  
(ha)Rate  of stock Capacity  
(cattle  units) m^Tyne of silo
Units Size Diameler  Height  
(Number  per 
of silos) unit
m^ feet feet
(1) 12 (5) 7 50 2 25
(2) 25(10) 14 100 4 25 9 15
(3) 40(15) 21 150 6 25
(4) 50 (20) 28 200 4 50
(5) 75 (30) 42 300 6 50 10 20
(6) 100 (40) 56 400 6 65
(7) 125 (50) 70 500 8 65 12 22
In the cases 1-3 we come  therefore  to silos of “medium  hight. ” 
in 4-7 to tower  silos if one dares to term them thus already.
In both groups  chopped  grass is filled in. In smaller  holdings
32
BETTER GRASS WILL GIVE YOU A BETTER
LIVING
AVAIL OF SUBSIDIES  ON
Phosphates,  Potash and Ground Limestone
Manuring  gives you the cheapest  stock*feeding  through ;
★ EARLIER  and BETTER GRASS
★ A LONGER  GRAZING  SEASON
★ MORE HAY and SILAGE  FOR THE WINTER
Here is a General  Guide
1. If there is enough  lime in your soil, use 3 to 4 cw>. superphosphate  
per acre.
2. On acid soils not seriously  short of lime, you may use 4 to 6 cwt. of 
Semsol.  Ground  Rock Phosphate  or Basic Slag.
3. If your soil needs potash,  use 1 cwt. of Muriate  of Potash  also.
4. Dress lime deficient  soils with Ground  Limestone.
5. fot early grass hay or silage,  you can get still better  results  by applying  
a nitrogenous  fertiliser  as well as phosphates  and potash.
Ask your Agricultural  Instructor  
or Parish Agent for advice on 
the treatment  of your Grassland
Issued by the Department  of Agriculture
33
where .he use of a field chopper  would  not pay—unless  by the 
insertion  of a machine  community —the wilted  (if possible)  and 
windrowed  grass is taken up with the “ Loader  ” and chopped  at 
the silo with a chopper-blower  and then filled into the silo. For 
the above mentioned  silo-hights  a simple  ensilage  harvester  is 
sufficient,  which  requires  about 15 HP on the motor.
How to retain  the C o^-gases  in the container  ?
Another  problem  now appears  at once:  How can we cover  the 
fodder  stack on the top to secure  an anaerobic  fermentation  and 
how can we avoid the rain penetrating  ? The latter  appears  to 
me very important  in the rainy Irish climate.
I will try now to show  you the methods  by which  we believe  
to solve this problem  in our West German  grassland  farms. I 
would  like to make  first some preliminary  remarks.
As long as the plant is still breathing  after cutting  the con­
sumption  of oxygen  (0) and the production  of carbonic  acid (CO 2) 
continue.  This process  goes on for a considerable  time after the 
filling  in of the grass in the silo. The quicker  and more inten ­
sively  the CO 2 concentration  rises the earlier  the cell-respiration  
will cease. The plan, is drowned —so to speak —in the CO 2 
atmosphere  produced  by itself  and fades  away  at last. This passes  
within  a few days after filling,  if we succeed  to keep the CO 5- 
gases in the container !
On the death  of the cell, the olasmolysis,  sets in. the cell sap 
breaks  out and the fodder  stack goes down quickly. In silos  
about 15-20 feet high their own pressure  produces  a vigorous  
compression  which can not be distinguished  in the final state  
from a compression  caused  by continual  treading,  encumbering  
by weights  or mechanical  pressing  equinment  (high pressure  
mechanism).
The temperatures  remain  low, they should  not surpass  86'T.  
The outbreaking  cellsap  liberates  sugar  stuffs,  a welcome  nutrient  
for the bacteria.
Now ’ we can understand  better  that the production  of natural  
carbonic  acid and its conservation  in the silo is a deciding  factor  
in fodder  conservation.  Hereupon  is founded  the “ CARBONIC  
ACID  METHOD. ”
This method  can only operate,  however,  if the technical  out­
fit of the silo is beyond  any objection.  The first condition  is 
gastightness  of the walls of the container.  Neither  dare the 
hatchways  and sap sink valves  allow  any gas exchange.  Further ­
more it is necessary  to exclude  the too of the silo from the out­
side air in such a manner  that the carbonic  acid produced  within  
the cointainer  can not evade soontaneously  over the edges of 
the walls. The gas exchange  is to be kept under  control.
The gas pump  works  continually !
Even the practical  farmer  should  not overlook  the fact that
34
the main losses  of silage  making  are caused  in the whole  by two 
processes:  the flow off of the cell sap and the exchange  of gases.
The ever working  gas pump during fermentation  causes  
most  of the losses  above  all. It is the continual  mutual  exchange  
of carbonic  acid and oxygen  which  can come to an extraordinary  
extent  according  to the differences  of temperature  from inside  
to the outside  and frequently  also from the outside  to the inside.
We have investigated  the function  of the fermentation  gases  
in balance  trials in a special  arrangement  (7). The results  are 
compiled  in Table  15.
Table 15
Gas content  involume according  to time
in
6 hours 12 hours 24 hours 48 hours 120 hours
Sugar  beet tops O2 12.2 1.2 0.0 0.2 0.2
chopped  CO  2 1.4 11.3 17.9 31.8 64.2
Silage corn  O2 7.4 4.3 1.1 0.2 0.2
chopped  CO 2 9.4 23.0 30.8 43.8 57.8
Grass/clover  O2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.0
chopped  CO  2 26.0 34.1 45.4 57.4 74.6
The production  of COa rose in all three cases very quickly  
quickly  and vigorously.  The content  of O2 decreases  quickly.  
Even in the third case (grass/clover)  where  we succeeded  to lead 
the fermentation  under  absolutely  anaerobic  conditions  we could  
state a very vigorous  development  of CO^-gases.
It is evident  that these gas-exchanges  can only be possible  
in a silo if it possesses  the necessary  constructive  qualities.  The 
gas-tightness  of the walls —already  a high requirement —is no. 
sufficient  in most cases: certain  arrangements  are to be added  
permitting  an ingenious  closure  at the top. This nurpose  serves  
the “ immersing  lid ” with the necessary  additions  like groove  
and barring  liquid. The physical  function  of the arrangement  
can be best explained  in the picture. The immersing  ring of the 
lid entrenches  into the groove. The liquid —glycerine,  molasses  
or oil—flows round  the immersing  ring from boih sides. But the 
effect of barring  is limited  to a certain  hight of the barring  
liquid,  i.e. 2 inches. According  to the amount  of Cj? production  
and to the actual difference  of temperature  from the inside to 
the outside  or vice-versa  a certain difference  of pressure  is 
formed. More often than one would suppose  there are also 
underpressures  (partial  vacuum)  in the container.  It is self-  
evident  that the whole  arrangment  should  be carefullv  mounted  
and controlled.  I can not go into details  by lack of time, but I 
would  be pleased  to put sketches  and plans  at your disposal.
35
We call that to-day  the German  method."  It will spread  
more and more according  to the speed of acknowledgement  of 
the conception  of quality  in silage  making,  in feeding  our cattle  
and in the requirements  of milk and dairy products,  butter  and 
cheese.
The silo with immersion  lid was invented  30 years ago.
The carbonic  acid method  is already  fairly  old; thirty  years  
ago Tiemann  and Rehm founded  the experimental  bases at 
Tschechnitz  near Breslau (Silesia),  induced  by the Czech.  
•• Moravia  method. ” The modern  technicians  have opened  the 
door for the application  of the immersion  lid also on the tower-  
silo. The electric  grab, operated  by one man. enables  us already  
to-day  to fill the silo automatically  and unload  it on the same  
way. Thus an important  link of the “ fodder-chain  ” is closed  
and the mechanization  from the stem to the crib is reached  I
The people  of animal  nutrition  still do not believe  in 
the high nutritive  value of grass !
Before  I come to the end I would  like to mention  just one 
subject  which  I believe  is of greatest  interest  especially  for the 
Irish stock breeder  and dealer,  that is the question  if grazing  
alone  is sufficient  to fatten  cattle  on good pastures.  You will see 
that permanent  grassland  intensively  managed  gets an ever  
increasing  importance  for modern  cattle  fattening  !
36
According  to older conceptions  of animal  nutrition —unfor ­
tunately  sometimes  valuable  until our days —the requirements  of 
young  growing  cattle can not be met by pasture  alone. This  
opinion  is based  on the old dogma  lhat the content  of dry matter  
and that of crude  fibre be always  too high. But people  pretending  
this started  from the experiences  of the old undivided  permanent  
pastures  and extensively  managed  paddocks.
L. Kriiger-Giessen  (8) has established  for the fattening  of 
young  cattle the following  principle;  “ From the 5th month  of 
life the supply  of starch  units is always  secured,  if 2.2 lbs. starch  
Equiv.  are combined  with less than 4.5-5 pounds  of dry matter  
and less than 1-1.1 pounds  of crude  fibre. ” Kruger  believes  even  
that good hay. older green forage  and the silage made out of it 
will not satisfy this demand,  because  these foodstuffs  contain  
more than 4.5 pounds  D.M. and more than 1.1 pound  of crude  
fibre in 2.2 lbs. starch.
But we are able to prove for good rotational  pastures  that 
the grass, cut before  shooting,  highly  satisfies  the a/m demands.  
This appears  on Table 16 of a 3 years*  grazing  trial on the lower  
Weser  by A. Ddrrie  (9).
Table  16
Content  of nutrients  in pasture  grass
(Volkenrode  experiment  at Geversdorf  1952-1954)
Average min. max.
Dry matter 18.3 15.0 22.6
Crude  protein  in % DM 19.3 13.8 23.7
Crude  fat in % DM 22.3 20.4 24.4
Starch  units in 2.2 pounds
DM 657 603 715
The animal  gets thus with 2.2 lbs. starch:
Dry matter  pounds  3.4 3.1 3.7
Crude  fibre pounds  0.75 0.69 0.82
The area in question  was a permanent  pasture  which  can be 
botanicallv  described  as lolielum  cynosuretum  tyricum  and 
which yielded  3.500-3.900  lbs. s..'E./acre.
We can therefore  take for proved that good permanent  
pastures  provide  a full nutrition  of young  fattening  cattle  even  
with the highest  demand  for beef auaiity.
Conclusion
The grassland  farms  are the mos; delicate  children  of agricul ­
ture in the whole world. The processine  of green forage  into 
animal  products  has its own difficult  problems.  The first condi ­
tion to make  grassland  farms  pay is the art to produce  a high out­
put per unit of area by rational  management.
We do not hesitate  to pretend  — and we can prove it by
37
practical  instances —that permanent  grassland  can bring  the same  
caloric  output  and the same rent as the intensive  arable  system  ! 
Grass is a crop equal to sugar beet and wheat ! It 
is only essential  to treat it the same way ! By intensive  
management  of the grassland,  especially  fertilizing  and best 
grazing  methods,  an optimum  utilization  of the grown  forage  by 
productive  and healthy  animals  can be secured. Making  use of 
the full yielding  potential  of the permanent  grassland  the modern  
fodder  conservation  is assigned  a special  heavy  task.
This paper was read to the Irish Grassland  Association  on 
July 15, 1961.
LITERATURE
(1) M a k u s, A. Die Kosten  des wirtschaftseigenen  Futtes  im
Grunlandbetrieb
Mitteilungen  der DLG 1961, Heft 5. S.130-134
(2) R i c h t e r, K und O s 1 a g e, H.F.
Untersuchungen  iiber den Einflub verschiedener  
W erbungsmethoden  auf die Verdaulichkeit  und den 
Nahrwert  von Kleegrasheu.
“ Futterkonservierung  ” 1/1960.  Verlag  DLG-Frankfurt.
(3) Z i m m e r, E. Die verschiedenen  Siloformen  aus arbeitswirt
—schaiLlicher  Sicht.
Landw.  Wochenblatt  fiir Westfalen  und Liooe. Folge  
18/1961.
(4) K o n e k a m p, A.H.
Conservation  of grass and clover  under West German  
conditions.
8th International  Grassland  Congress,  Reading  1960 
Session  3 B. Paper  3B/1.
(5) Z i m m e r, E. Garfutterbereitung  und Milchwirtschaft  in
Finnland  unter beconderer  Beriicksichtigung  der HarL-  
kaserei. Zeitschrift  fiir Futterkonservierung  1/1960  
Verlag  DLG-Frankfurt.
(6) M a k u s, A. Arbeitsbedarf  verschiedener  Konservierung-
sverfahren  Berichte  iiber Landwirtschaft  1961. Bd.39. 
Heft 1. S.157.
Verlag  Paul Parey-Hamburg
(7) Z i m m e r, E. Die Funktion  der Gargase  im Silobehalter.
Zeitschrift  fiir Futterkonservierung,  1960. Heft 2/3. 
Verlag  DLG-Frankfurt
(8) K r ii g e r. L. Versuchsergebnisse  iiber die Mast  des Rindes.
Vorlrag  Hochschultagung  Giessen  am 23. Juni. 1960.  
Referiert  in “ Kurz und Biindig. ” Herausgeber  Landw.  
Abt. der BASF-Ludwigshafen/Rhein.  Jahrgang  13, Falge.  
13. S.203.
(9) D 6 r r i e, A. Das Leistungsvermogen  einer Marschweide
bei intensiver  Bewirtschaftung.
Dissertation  Berlin 1958 in ” Landwirtschaft  — 
Angewandte  Wissenschaft ” Nr. 88. Landw. Verlag  
Hiltrup  (Westf.)
38
ytoMfimoAJV^
Grass and Clover  Seeds
for
Temporaty  Leys or Pernmnent  Pasture ?
Your enquiries  for Farm or Garden  Seeds will be ^
appreciated  and command  our attention.  •'
CATALOGUES  FREE ON REQUEST.
5 ALEX DiCKSON  & SON (Dublin)  LTD. ?
$ 61 Dawson  Street  Dublin 2. t
s ?
SILOSVAN  Buck Rakes, World Famous  General  purposes  Implement,  
particularly  effective  for silage making  as the profiled  spoon-shaped  tines  
are ideal for use after forage harvester.  Available  in three sizes  —9 tines,  
12 Tines and 15 Tines. Rear or Front Loading.  Inter-changeable  Cock ­
lifting Tines available.
SPECIAL  SILOSVAN  designed  for Beet-two  sizes, 17 Tines and 23 Tines.
SKALSVAN"  Fully Mounted  Disc Harrow.
HYDRIEN  Mounted  Plough.
KOMAG"  P.T.O. Compressors,  etc.
For Timely Delivery  Order iWon
Hire Purchase  Facilities.  At your local dealer  or direct from
Sole Imporler
JAMES  P. LARKIN
12, MATHER  ROAD,  MOUNT  MERRION,  DUBLIN
Telephone  ; 889754
39
IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION
PAST PRESIDENTS
1946/47
1947/48
1948/49
1949/50
1950/51
1951/52
1952/53
1953/54
1954/55
1955/56
1956/57
1957/58
1958/59
1959/60
1960/61
1961/62The 0‘Morchoe  
The O’Morchoe  
The O’Morchoe  
Lord Carew  
W. J. Mitchell
Senator  E. R. Richards-Orpen
Professor  M. J. Gorman
R. I. McCulloch
Dr. H. Kennedy
Col. The O’Grady
W. A. Smith
Dr. T. Walsh
R. Ivan Allen
Professor  J. Ruane
Dr. L. B. O’Moore
John Richards-Orpen
40
IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION
LIST OF MEMBERS
Allen. R. Ivan. Imokilly  Orchards.  Shanagarry,  Co. Cork.  
Allen. Charlie.  Bettystown  House.  Bettystown.  Co. Meath.  
Alien. George.  Bettystown  House, Co. Meath.
Allen. Lorcan-  Raheenagurren.  Gorey. Co. Wexford.
Barrett,  J. P.. Mullinahone  Co-operative  Creamery,  Co. Tipperary.
Barton,  W. S., Springfield,  Ferrybank,  Waterford.
Barton,  C. B. R,. Streamstown,  Birr, Co. Offaly.
Baxter,  Professor  J., University  of Dublin,  Veterinary  College  of Ireland.  
Ballsbridge,  Dublin.
Bayly, John. Ballinaclough  House, Nenagh-  Co. Tipperary.
Barrett,  J., Kickham  Street. Mullinahone.  Co. Tipperary.
Barry, Ml., Department  of Agriculture.  Dublin.
Bellingham,  Col. A. J., Glencara,  Mullingar,  Co. Westmeath.
Bennett,  J. W., Rathellin,  Leighlinbridge.  Carlow.
Bewiey.  J., Knocksedan-  Swords.  Co. Dublin.
Bernall,  K. O’C., Brook Watson.  Nenagh,  Co. Tipperary.
Bellew,  James  Bryan.  Barmeath  Castle,  Dunleer,  Co. Louth.
Bell. R.. Agricultural  Institute.  Johnstown  Castle.  Wexford.
Bielenberg,  P., Money  Tullow,  Co. Carlow.
Bland, John, Rath House. Portarlington-  Leix.
Bland. Wim., Rath House,  Portarlington.  Leix.
Blood, Lt. Col. B. F. G., Ballykilty,  Quin. Co. Clare.
Boylan,  Major E. A., Hilltown.  Drogheda.  Co. Louth.
Boyle, Professor  C., University  College,  Cork.
Boyd. F. B.- Bushville,  Tagoat.  Co. Wexford.
Binchy, Owen, Gortskeagh,  Charleville,  Co. Cork.
Blunden,  Commander  Sir Sm.. Castle Blunden,  Kilkenny.
Bruton,  M. J., Newtown,  Dunboyne,  Co. Meath.
Brophy.  Stan., Castlemore.  Tullow,  Co. Carlow.
Brown, R. S., The Cottage,  Bagenalstown,  Co. Carlow.
Browne,  Glen. Hermitage,  Glanmire,  Cork.
Brockett,  Lord, Carton Estates.  Maynooth,  Co. Kildare.
Brennan,  Peader-  Corballis,  Readypenny,  Dundalk.
Brown. Dan, Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle, Co. Wexford. 
Brady, F., Cruicetown,  nr. Nobber,  Co. Meath.
41
Bracken,  Gerald G., 70 Willow  House. Sussex Road. Dublin.
Burke, Wm. J., Castlegar,  Ahascragh,  Co. Galway.
Byrne,  L. F., Messrs.  Chemical  Services  Ltd.- 1 Upr. Hatch St., Dublin. 
Byrne, Andrew,  Longtown,  Sallins,  Naas, Co. Kildare.
Cairnes,  David,  Stameen,  Drogheda.
Campion,  James,  Conahy,  Ballyragget,  Co. Kilkenny.
Candon,  P. A., Albatross-Fertiliser  Co., Ltd., Rosbercon,  New Ross- Co. 
Wexford.
Cannon,  P. J,, Caulstown,  Drogheda,  Co. Louth.
Carew,  Lord, Castletown.  Celbridge,  Co. Kildare.
Carroll,  Ml., Agricultural  Institute,  Thorndale,  Drumcondra,  Dublin. 
Carty, P.- Belrichard,  Arklow,  Co. Wicklow.
Casey, Brendan,  13 Palmerstown  Ave., Dublin.
Cement  Ltd., 35 Westmoreland  St.. Dublin.
Chatterton,  B. J., Disfield  House, Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.
Clarke,  P. J., Beechmount  Lodge, Navan,  Co. Meath.
Clarke,  Joseph,  Cooper  House Farm, Mungret,  Co. Limerick.
Clarke.  W. J. Rosannagh-  Rathnew,  Co. Wicklow.
Clinton,  M. A., Inisfail,  Newcastle,  Co. Dublin.
Coakley,  Denis, Lr. Kevin Street,  Dublin.
Cobden,  G. V., Kiltorcan  House,  Bailyhale,  Co. Kilkenny.
Coburn,  H.. Doonan  Lodge, Donegal.
Coffey,  Miss S., Glendarragh,  Newtownmountkennedy,  Co. Wicklow.  
Cogan- Ray, Shalvastown  House, Slane, Co. Meath.
Collins, Rev. Patrick,  Warrenstown  Agricultural  College,  Warrenstown.  
Co. Meath.
Conway,  A., Agricultural  Institute,  Thorndale,  Drumcondra,  Dublin. 
Conlon,  S. A., Bride St., Kildare.
Connors,  P. J., Agricultural  College,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Cope, A. J., Castledermot,  Co. Kildare.
Courtney-  J. B., Ministry  of Agriculture,  3 Market  St.. Omagh.
Costello,  Lt. Gen. M. J., 29 Victoria  Road, Clontarf,  Dublin.
Cotton,  T., Thomastown,  Edenderry.  Offaly.
Coddington,  Major D. H., Old Bridge,  Drogheda,  Co. Louth.
Coyle,  Eugene,  29 Claude  Road, Drumcondra.  Dublin.
Craigie,  A. A., Ballygall  House,  Glasnevin-  Dublin.
Craig, John, Paul & Vincent  Ltd., Blackball  Place, Dublin.
Cronin,  M. C., Potash Ltd., 16 College  Green,  Dublin.
Crowley,  J. P., Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea.  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin. 
Crinion,  M. F., Rushwell  House, Slane^ Co. Meath.
Cullen, T. M., Albatros-Fertiliser  Co.. Ltd., Rosbercon,  New Ross, Co. 
Wexford.
Culleton,  L. J., 3 South Road, Curragh  Camp,  Kildare.
Cumisky,  P., Crosses,  Monaghan.
Cunningham,  E., Ballysallagh,  Kinsalebeg-  Youghal,  Co. Cprk.
Cunningham,  Patrick,  Strathroy,  Omagh,  Co. Tyrone.
Curran,  Simon,  34 Glen Abbey  Road, Mount  Merrion,  Dublin.
42
Daly, M., c/o Messrs.  Goulding  Fertilisers  Ltd., Marina,  Cork.
Dardis,  J. F., Dardis  & Dunn Ltd., 15/16 Ushers  Island Quay, Dublin.  
Davies.  J, T. M.. I.C.I. (Export)  Ltd., 3 Sth. Frederick  St., Dublin.
Dean, B. G., Ardmulchan,  Navan, Co. Meath.
Dclahunt,  H. C., Furze Ditch, Brittas  Bay, Wicklow.
Delahunty,  M., Lisronagh,  Clonmel,  Co. Tipperary.
Dennis,  Major Gen. M. E.. Fortgranite,  Baltinglass,  Co. Wicklow.  
Dempsey.  C., Shandon,  Dungarvan-  Co. Waterford.
Dickie,  J. D., Seatown  House,  Swords,  Co. Dublin.
Dillon, J. M., 36a Merrion  Square,  Dublin.
Dillon, Ml., Corbally,  Celbridge,  Co. Kildare,
Doherty,  Lt. Col. A. G., 17 North Circular  Road, Dublin.
Donegan,  P., Annagassan  Mills- Dunleer,  Co. Louth.
Dowse,  E. W., Carnew,  Co. Wicklow.
Downey.  N., Agricultural  Institute.  33 Merrion  Road, Ballsbridge,  Dublin. 
Doody, Tim, Agricultural  Institute,  Herbertstown.  Co. Limerick.
Drinagh  Co-Operative  Ltd.. Drinagh,  Co. Cork.
Duffy, Rev. V., St. Patrick ’s College,  Cavan.
Dwyer-  J. P., Moneymore  House,  Borris-in-Ossory,  Co. Leix.
Emmett,  J. Ballykilty  House,  Inch. Co. Wexford.
England.  Miss Zoe, Dunany,  Togher,  Drogheda,  Co. Louth.
Farrell,  J. F. K., Miltown,  Clonmellow,  Co. Meath.
Feighery,  D,, 7/8 Lower  Abbey  Street,  Dublin.
Finegan,  T., Drummond  Farm, Ardee, Co. Louth.
Finnan.  G. F., St. Enda ’s Villas, Navan,  Co. Meath.
Fives. P. A.. Tourin,  Cappoquin,  Co. Waterford.
Forbes,  J. F., Ballinabarna,  Enniscorthy,  Co. Wexford.
Freeman,  Dr. E. T.. 22 Fitzwilliam  Square,  Dublin.
French,  John, Gorey. Co. Wexford.
Furnell,  Dr. M. J. G., Ballyclough,  Ballysheedy,  Co. Limerick.  
Furnell,  Maj. P.- Lough Gur, Holycross,  Kilmallock,  Co. Limerick.
Gahan, W., Sugar Factory,  Carlow.
Gaisford  St. Laurence,  Brig. C., Belmont,  Mullingar.
Galway-Greer,  N., Rooske  Lodge, Dunboyne,  Co. Meath.
Gibbons,  Ml., Bonnetsrath,  Kilkenny.
Gilmore,  Mrs. Agnes,  Moylough,  Co. Galway.
Godsil,  R. B., Fry-Cadbury  Ltd.. Malahide  Road, Coolock,  Dublin. 
Gorsach,  M., Bettystown,  Co. Meath.
Goulding  Fertilisers  (Cork)  Ltd., Marina,  Cork.
Greene,  J. N., Kilkea  Lodge,  Mageney,  Castledermot,  Co. Kildare.  
Guinan,  J., Agricultural  Advisor,  M/s. D. E. Williams  Ltd., Tullamore.
43
Hadden,  M. A.- Richardsons  Chemical  Co., 19 Short Strand.  Belfast.  
Handcock,  H., Ballyhook,  Grange  Con, Co. Wicklow.
Hannon,  J., Poplar  Square,  Naas.
Harnett,  P., Department  of Agriculture,  Dublin.
Hart, F. G., Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Co. Meath.
Harvey,  C. J., Goulding  Fertilisers  Ltd., Newrath,  Co. Waterford.
Harvey-  A. P., Gorey,  Co. Wexford.
Haskins.  R. B., Oatlands,  Wicklow.
Hatch,  C., Veterinary  College  of Ireland,  Pembroke  Road, Dublin.
Hatch,  W. R., Agricultural  Attache,  U.S. Embassy,  15 Merrion  Sq., Dublin. 
Hatton,  H. M., Wills, Gorey, Co. Wexford.
Hatton,  F., Loggan-  Tinahely,  Co. Wicklow.
Hayden,  G., Eadstown,  Naas.
Hayes,  N., c/o J. J. Stafford  & Co., Paul's  Quay,  Wexford.
Hayes,  Spencer,  3, Portrane,  Donabate,  Co. Dublin.
Hearn, Ian, Kitestown  House, Crossabeg,  Wexford.
Headfort  Estate  Co., Kells, Co. Meath.
Heffernan,  D., Pudding  Field, Tipperary,
Heffeman,  Dr. T. P., Keylong  House,  Cahir.
Heffernan-Delaney,  John, Parsonshill,  Fethard,  Co. Tipperary.
Helleris,  Miss J., Ballyshunnock,  Kilmacthomas,  Co. Waterford.
Hill, L., Johnstown  House,  Arklow.
Hilliard,  James, Clonmagadden,  Navan, Co. Meath.
Hogg, J. F. C., David Bell Ltd., 21. City Quay, Dublin.
Horgan,  F. St. A.. Firville,  Macroom,  Co. Cork.
Horsman,  H., Templerainey  House,  Arklow-  Co. Wicklow.
Hughes,  Rev. K., Holy Ghost Fathers,  Kimmage  Manor,  Dublin.
Hurley,  D., County Buildings,  Clonmell,  Co. Tipperary.
Iceton,  Wm., Tara Stud, Tara, Co. Meath.
Jameson,  Shane. Provincial  Crop Driers Ltd.- Cappoquin.  Co. Waterford.  
Jeffers,  R. J. D., Drumleck,  Castlebeilingham,  Co. Louth.
Jennings,  P., Co. Committee  of Agriculture,  11 Parnell  Square.  Dublin. 
Johnson,  G. F., Dunmore  Park, Kilkenny.
Kehoe, A., Cruagh  Cottage,  Killakee,  Rathfarnham-  Dublin. 
Kelly, Col. Harvey,  Clonhugh,  Multyfarnham,  Co. Westmeath.
44
Kelly, James  F., The Twenties,  Drogheda,  Co. Louth.
Kennedy,  Dr. Henry, 1 Appian  Way, Dublin.
Kerr, I., 7- Dublin  Road, Drogheda,  Co. Louth.
Keane,  J., Parkboy,  Nenagh,  Co. Tipperary.
Keating,  Edmond,  9 Rathdown  Villas, Terenure,  Dublin.
Keating,  J., Veterinary  College,  Merrion  Road, Ballsbridge,  Duljlin 
Kidd, T., Balisland  House-  Shillelagh,  Co. Wicklow.
Kiely, Jas, Lisavaird  Co-op. Ltd., Clonakilty,  Co. Cork.
Kieling,  Jas, Kilcrea  House,  Donabate,  Co. Dublin.
Kieran,  L. T.. Ashviile,  Dunleer,  Co. Louth.
Killeen,  D., Urney  Chocolates  Ltd., South Slob- Wexford.
Kilroy,  W. E., Headford  Place,  Kells, Co. Meath.
Kilroy,  Lt. Col. A. J. M., Castlecor,  Oldcastle,  Co. Meath.
Kilroy,  M. M., Oldcastle,  Co. Meath.
Lalor, D. E., Newtownmacabe,  Straffan-  Co. Kildare.
Lamb, W. H., Naisitra,  Inchicore,  Dublin.
Laohy, Denis, Burke Street, Fethard,  Co. Tipperary.
Lee, R. P., Veterinary  College-  Ballsbridge,  Dublin.
Leeson,  W. T., Ballyman  House,  Ballyman,  Bray, Co. Wicklow.
Le Clerc, M. H., Raheenlusk,  Kilmuckridge,  Gorey,  Co. Wexford.  
Leonard,  E. H., Moortown,  Drumree,  Co. Meath.
Levinge,  Sir Rd.- Sandyford,  Dublin.
Lewis,  B. M., c/o Potash  Ltd., 16/17 College  Green,  Dublin. 
Litton,  John, Epworth,  Quarry  Road, Greystonc:;,  Co. Wicklow.  
Lonergan,  P., Seatown  Place, Dundalk,  Co. LouUi.
Lord, J., Chas, Legaland-  Crossdoney,  Co. Cavr.n.
Love, R. A., Marley,  Rathfarnham,  Dublin.
Love, Philip, Marley, Rathfarnham,  Dublin.
Lysaght,  F. P., Hazelwood,  Mallow,  Co. Cork.
Lyons, Ml., Ballygullen-  Cranford,  Gorey, Co. Wexford.
McAuley,  L. A., Balrath,  Navan,  Co. Meath.
McCarthy.  Mrs. Pearl, Gortnafluir,  Clonmel,  Co. Tipperary.
McCarrick,  R., Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.  
McCulloch,  R. I., Gerrardstown-  Ballyboughal,  Co. Dublin.
McCullagh,  Robert,  St. Patrick ’s Hospital,  James  St., Dublin. 
McCulloch,  J. F., Clonswords,  Ballyboughal,  Co. Dublin.
McDonnell,  J., Co. Committee  of Agriculture,  Liberty  Square,  Thurles
45
-MacDonald,  Martin,  Potash  Limited,  College  Green-  Dublin.
McDowell,  D. R., Treetops,  Togher,  Drogheda,  Co. Louth.
McElligott,  B. T. J., McElligott  & Sons, Ltd., Easton House, Leixlip,  Co. 
Kildare,
McGrane,  A., Knocklyon  Castle,  Templeogue-  Dublin.
McGuinness,  J,, Grangegeeth,  Slane, Co. Meath.
McHugh,  P., Townley  Hall, Drogheda,  Co. Louth.
Mclnerny,  Marcus,  U.S. Embassy,  Merrion  Square,  Dublin.
McKeever,  Maxwell,  Stickillen-  Ardee,  Co. Louth.
McKevitt,  A., Kilkerly  Dairy, Dundalk,  Co. Louth.
McLysaght,  Dr. E., Raheen,  Tuamgraney,  Co. Clare.
McMenamin,  J. A., 24 Highfield  Road, Rathgar,  Dublin.
Madden,  W. F., Derrahiney.  Ballycrissane-  Ballinasloe,  Co. Galway.  
Maguire,  Dr. M. F., Agricultural  Institute,  Thorndale,  Drumcondra,  
Dublin.
Maher,  G. V., Ballinkeele,  Enniscorthy,  Co. Wexford.
Maher, J. F., Stirling,  Clonee,  Co. Meath.
Mahon,  Sir Geo.- Castleknock  Lodge,  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.
Mansfield,  P., Morristown  Lattin.  Naas, Co. Kildare.
Maude,  H. A. C., Belgard  Castle,  Clondalkin,  Co. Dublin.
Meade,  N., Deer Park, Stackallen,  Navan-  Co. Meath.
Meagher,  P. J., Kedrah  Castle,  Cahir,  Co. Tipperary.
Mee, J., Four Roads, Roscommon.
Mellon,  D., Thormanby  Lodge. Howth,  Co. Dublin.
Mellett,  B., The Island, Clare Castle, Ennis, Co. Clare.
Meredith-  H., Ballymoate,  Glenealy,  Co. Wicklow.
Milne, B. E., Bannlusk,  Cuffesgrange,  Co. Kilkenny.
Milne, H., Ballymoran  House,  Ballycarney,  Ferns. Co. Wexford.
Milne, K., Ballymoran  House,  Ballycarney,  Ferns,  Co. Wexford.
Mitchell,  W. J.- Collinstown  House,  Leixlip,  Co. Kildare.
Mockler,  J., Ballincor,  Lisronagh,  Clonmel,  Co. Tipperary.
Monahan,  J., Castletown,  Carlow.
Monahan,  Fk., Ladycastle,  Straffan,  Co. Kildare.
Mooney,  J. J., Killegland,  Ashbourne,  Co. Meath.
Morris,  Frank,  Tomahurra,  Enniscorthy,  Co. Wexford.
Mullally,  Martin,  Dublin  District  Milk Board,  64 Leeson  St. Lr., Dublin. 
Murphy,  0., Physiology  Dept.,  Trinity  College,  Dublin.
Murphy,  W. E., Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Co. Wexford. 
Murray,  R. H., Messrs.  Paul & Vincent  Ltd., 9 Blackball  Place,  Dublin. 
Murray,  J. P., Albert  College,  Glasnevin,  Dublin.
46
National  Farmers'  Association,  27 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin.
Nagle,  Wm., Bregoge,  Buttevant,  Co. Cork.
Naper,  Capt. N. W. I.. Loughcrew,  Oldcastle,  Co. Meath.
Navratil.  Alfred.  Ballinacurra  House,  Ballinacurra,  Co. Cork.
Neenan.  Dr. M., Agricultural  Institute,  Oakpark  House,  Carlow.
Nuallain,  Z.. 2 Cypress  Road. Mount  Merrion.  Co. Dublin.
O'Beirne.  A.. Imperial  Chemical  Industries  Ltd.. 3 Sth. Frederick  Street.  
Dublin.
O'Brien,  John. Killintown  House.  Multyfarnham,  Co. Westmeath.
O'Byrne.  Manus,  Deanswood,  Ballymun  Road. Dublin.
O’Byrne.  Donal.  Goulding  Advisory  Services,  11 Molesworth  St., Dublin. 
O’Connor,  J. D.. Veterinary  College,  Merrion  Road, Ballsbridge.  Dublin. 
O'Connor.  P., Ballymore  Castle,  Oooldscross.  Cashel.  Co. Tipperary.  
O’Donnell.  J. F., Riversdale.  Killenaule,  Thurles.
O’Donoghue,  D.. Dardistown.  Cloghran,  Co. Dublin.
O’Donoghue,  J.. Dardistown,  Cloghran.  Co. Dublin.
0 Grady Roche.  Sir Slandish,  Aghade  Lodge. Ardattin.  Co. Carlow.  
O’Grady,  Patrick.  Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford. 
O’Grady,  Col. The. Kilballyowen,  Bruff,  Co. Limerick.
O'Keeffe.  Ml.. Bracklyn,  Delvin.  Co. Westmeath.
O’Keeffe,  P., Ballybane,  Clondalkin.  Co. Dublin.
O’Kelly,  Kevin,  W. & H. M. Goulding  Ltd., 22 Molesworth  Street,  Dublin. 
O’Loan, P., C.A.O.,  Carrick-on-Shannon.  Co. Leitrim.
O’Mahony.  E.. Agricultural  Institute,  Grange  Farm.  Dunsany.  Co. Meath.  
O’Mara, J., Barberstown  House.  Clonsilla.  Co. Dublin.
O’Meara.  B. L.. Ardfert.  Thurles.  Tipperary.
O’Meara,  John, Main Street.  Bansha,  Co. Tipperary.
O’Moore. Dr. L. B., Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock.  Co. 
Dublin.
O'Neill.  S.. The Wood, Lurgan,  Co. Armagh.
O’Reilly,  J. P. H., Drogheda  Chemical  Manure  Co., Drogheda.
O’Reilly, E. J. Raheenagurren,  Gorey, Co. Wexford.
O’Reilly, Noel, c/o Irish Farmers ’ Journal.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin.  
O’Sullivan,  J. J., Seaview,  Ring, Dungarvan,  Co. Waterford.
O’Sullivan.  C. J.. 2 Maretimo  Gardens  East. Blackrock,  Co. Dublin.
Ormsby.  Thomas  M.. Milford,  Cloghan ’s Hill, Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Onions,  Oliver,  Borris  House,  Maryborough.  Leix.
Orpen,  John, Monksgrange.  Enniscorthy.
Orpen,  Capt. E. R., Monksgrange.  Enniscorthy.
Patterson.  R. W., 57-58 Dawson  Street,  Dublin.
47
Parkes,  J. W., 1 Rathdown  Park, Terenure,  Dublin.
Peacock,  N. J. F., Saunders  Grove.  Baltinglass.  Co. Wicklow.  
Pearce,  B., Lismore,  Co. Waterford.
Poole,  A. T., Ballyfinogue.  Killinick,  Wexford.
Poole,  J. H., Ballybeg  House,  Ferns,  Co. Wexford
Porter.  S. G., Springfield  House,  Clonegal,  Ferns,  Co. Wexford
Potterton,  K. W. E., Carbury,  Co. Kildare.
Powell,  S., c/o Messrs.  F. A. Waller  & Co. Ltd., Banagher,  Offaly.  
Power,  Desmond.  Castlecomer  Estate,  Castlecomer,  Co. Kilkenny  
Power  Seeds Ltd., 26 O'Connell  Street.  Waterford.
Priest,  Capt. H., Ashton,  Gorey,  Co. Wexford.
Raftery,  P., Coshla  Ledge,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
Raftery,  T., University  College  Farm,  Glasnevin.  Dublin.
Reeves,  Henry.  Athgarvan,  The Curragh,  Co. Kildare.
Kenehan,  Wm., Bodalmore.  Kilkenny.
Roache,  Wm.. Albert  College,  Glasnevin,  Dublin.
Roark,  R. G., Mill House,  Camolin,  Co. Wexford.
Roberts.  Professor  0., University  College,  Cork.
Roberts,  B. H., Ballyanna,  Ballycotton.  Co. Cork.
Robinson,  Richard  G., Newberry  Hall, Carbury,  Co. Kildare.
Robeck,  Brig. The Baron  de. Gowran  Grange.  Naas, Co. Kildare.
Roche.  C. A., Chemical  Services.  1 Upr. Hatch  Street.  Dublin.
Rothwell,  James,  Glenashough,  Clonegal,  Ferns,  Co. Wexford.
Roundtree.  T. J., Muchwood  House,  Kildalkey,  Co. Meath.
Ronayne,  Patrick, Irish Advisory  Service,  21 Alma Road, Monkstown.  
Dublin.
Ronan,  T. J.. Dudley's  Mills. Coleville  Road. Clonmel.  Co. Tipperary.
Rowan,  M. A., 51-52 Capel Street,  Dublin.
Ruane,  Professor  J., 23 Trees Road, Mount  Merrion,  Dublin.
Ryan, Thos.,  Caherelly,  Kilmallock.  Limerick.
Ryan. J. R., Burton  Park, Churchtown,  Mallow.  Co. Cork.
Sheridan.  Thos., Malheaney,  Skerries,  Co. Dublin.
Shillington.  Cloncarneel,  Kildalkey.  Meath.
Shinnick,  Neil. Woodfort,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Shorter,  R. N., Drimbawn,  Tourmakeady.  Co. Mayo.
Shuttleworth,  P. H., Irishtown.  Gormanstown.  Co. Meath.
Scanlan,  E. G., Dublin  Road, Balbriggan,  Co. Dublin.
Schaffalitzky  de Muckadell,  Henrik,  Glenwilliam,  Ballingarry.  Limerick.
48
Scmitz,  Capt. T,, Dunsaney  Castle,  Dunsaney,  Co. Meath.
Seath,  Professor  D., Albert  College,  Glasnevin,  Dublin.
Senior,  B. J., Kilronan,  Howth  Road, Clontarf,  Co. Dublin.
Smith.  W. A.. Blackball,  Batterstown,  Co. Meath.
Smith,  H. M., Drinagh,  Mountmellick,  Co. Leix.
Smithwick,  Major  J., Youghal  House,  Nenagh,  Co. Tipperary.
Smyth,  W. M.. Drumcree  House,  Collinstown,  Co. Westmeath.
Smyth.  W. P., Castletown,  Ballybrophy,  Leix.
South-Eastern  Cattle  Breeding  Station,  Dovea,  Thurles,  Co. Tipperary.
Spain,  Dr. H., 9 Priory  Drive,  Stillorgan,  Co. Dublin.
Spillane,  John, Scart, Aherla,  Co. Cork.
Stafford  King-Harmon,  Sir C., St. Catherine ’s Park, Leixlip,  Co. Kildare.  
Stewart,  J. A., Eatownstown  Estate Office, Derrinstown,  Maynooth,  Co. 
Kildare.
Swan, Comdt.  P., Kingsfurze,  Naas, Co. Kildare.
Tait, John. Inch Glebe,  Whitegate,  Co. Cork.
Tait, Wm., Hermitage,  Rostellan,  Co. Cork.
Thompson,  W., Imperial Chemical Industries  Ltd., Imperial  House, 
Donegall  Square  East, Belfast.
Thompson  & Son Ltd., M/s. Thos.,  Hanover  Works,  Carlow.
Thornton.  I. M., Galtee  Cattle Breeding  Station,  Mitchelstown,  Co. Cork.  
Tierney,  Maurice,  Clover  Meats Limited,  Ferrybank,  Waterford.
Tottenham,  Capt. C. B., Cloragh  House,  Ashford,  Wicklow.
Townsend  Flahavan,  Kilmacthomas,  Co. Waterford.
Treacy,  Sean, Kilmoylan,  Bandon,  Co. Cork.
Turner,  R. R., Hewley  Manor  Farm,  Crewkern,  Somerset,  England.
Twomey,  Dermot,  Clonkerdon  House,  Cappagh,  Co Waterford.
Tyrrell,  G. W., Woodtown  Abbot,  Kiidaikey,  Co. Meath.
Vial, Vivian,  Agricultural  Institute.  Dunsinea,  Castleknork,  Co. Dublin.
Wallis, M., M/s. Townsend  Flahavan  Seeds, Ltd., Kilmacthomas,  Co. 
Waterford.
Walshe,  Jas., Park House,  Carlow.
Walshe,  E. C., Moneylawn,  Gorey,  Co. Wexford.
Walsh,  Frank,  Bacon  Factory,  Callan,  Co. Kilkenny.
Walsh,  G., Sion Road, Kilkenny.
Walsh,  P., c/o Dardis  & Dunns  Seeds,  Usher ’s Island Quay, Dublin.
49
Walsh,  R.p Red House,  Newbridge,  Co. Kildare.
Walsh.  Dr. T., Agricultural  Institute.  Merrion  Road. Ballsbridge,  Dublin. 
Ward,  Ml. J., Nuttstown,  Clonee.  Co. Meath.
Ward,  Raymond.  Ballintr>'.  Clonee.  Co. Meath.
Ward.  D., Kilcloon,  Dunboyne,  Co. Meath.
Ward. Sean. Department  of Agriculture,  Athenry  Agricultural  College,  
Athenry.  Co. Galway.
Warren,  H., St. John ’s, Enniscorthy,  Co. Wexford.
Webber,  D. R. W., Shellfield  House,  Ramelton,  Co. Donegal,
White,  Eamon,  Kilrue,  Mulhuddart,  Co. Dublin.
Wilson-Wright,  J., Newtown  House.  St. Margaret's,  Co. Dublin.
Wilkinson.  R.. Balconis,  Santry,  Co. Dublin.
Willett.  Major  R. F., Annagor,  Drogheda,  Co. Meath.
Willis.  W. McI., Kentstown  Glebe,  Brownstown,  Navan,  Co. Meath.
Wood.  John A., Rockrohane.  Carrigrohane.  Co. Cork.
Woods.  J. D., 2 Upr. Ely Place.  Dublin.
Yates-Hale.  R. R., 50 Butterfield  Avenue,  Templeogue.  Co. Dublin.
FERTILISERS
"The one with the bird on the hag
A range of Straights,  Powder  and Granular  Com ­
pounds for every crop including  grass. All 
Albatros  products  are available  from Merchants  
and Co-Operative  Stores supplied  by our depots  
throughout  Ireland. Our depots  are at: CORK, 
CARRICK-ON-SUIR,  DUBLIN, DROGHEDA,  
LIMERICK.  KILMACSIMON,  NEW ROSS, 
TULLAMORE,  WATERFORD.  WEXFORD.
50
the
gold rush  
is on 
again!
Yes. the gold rush is on and we're all in it.
You can turn grass into gold and every week the 
FARMERS'  JOURNAL  brings you up-to-  
the-minute  Information  on modern grass  
farming  ... on growing  grass that will gladden  
the 'eye of the master'.  Grass that brings  
you well-fed cows and the bloom of health  
in your calves.  More beef, more mutton  ... 
more . . . more; more for you and your family.
Place a regular  weekly  order with
your newsagent-The  Journal  is your guide
to farming  prosperity.
A TOWER  OF STRENGTH  
IN IRISH FARMING
IRISH
FARMERS JOURNAL
EARLSFORT  TERRACE.  DUBLIN
n
Factors  affecting
YIELD AND QUALITY  
OF IRISH WOOLS
by V. VIAL,  M.Sc.
Of all the farm commodities  sold in Ireland,  none is so 
ill-prepared  for sale, so heterogeneous  or sold with such mis­
givings  as the wool clip. Despite  years  of official  advice  against  
tar-stained  wool, dead wool mixed  with fleece  wool, fleeces  tied 
with binder  twine—all  these faults  are still very much apparent  
in the consignments  to the merchants.  When so little care  
and attention  is paid to the clip, it would  seem that the average  
farmer  just does not realise the potential  cash value from  
quality  wools nor has he stopped  to reflect on what should  
be the relative  incomes  from wool and from lamb and mutton.
The hill farmer  is getting  equal returns  from both sheep  
and wool, despite  the fact that his primary  aim is quality  
wool production*  On the other  hand, the specialised  £1 farmer  
gets approximately  5 times his income  from sheep sales as 
from wool. Individual  farmers  will alter these ratios depend ­
ing on what form of conscious  selection  towards  wool or meat  
is exercised.
This paper has been prepared  to focus attention  on those  
wool traits which  will respond  to selection.  Wool improvement  
appears  to be a breeding  problem  rather than a nutritional  
one.
a. Fleece  Weight
Profitability  from wool is primarily  determined  by the 
weight  of clean  wool shorn  from each sheep. Improved  feeding  
of the flock tends to increase  fibre diameters  and coarsen  the 
clip and has very little effect on the actual weight  of wool.  
A higher  plane of nutrition  also tends to increase  the quantity  
of grease  and suint in the fleece thereby  lowering  the yield  
of clean wool. On the other hand, the heritability  of wool  
weight  is fairly high and repeatability  of fleece weight  is also 
high. Repeatability  is a measure  of the extent to which  
superiority  of fleece weight  is maintained  throughout  the life­
time of the animal,  despite  environmental  changes  from year  
to year. If, for example,  we take a flock of sheep and
52
weigh the fleeces at shearing,  we may find that the five 
best fleeces  are 1.4 lb. heavier  than the flock average. Next  
year these same five ewes may be 1 lb. heavier  than average,  
i.e. their superiority  in the second  year is 1.0/1.4  x 100 = 70'r. 
We express  this relationship  by saying  that “ the repeatability  
for fleece weight  is 0.70 ”. In practical  terms,  if we selected  
hoggets  which had a fleece weight  at the two-tooth  stage 1 lb. 
above average,  they would have a fleece weight of 0.7 lb. 
above flock average  at subsequent  shearings.  A measure  of 
repeatability  is the basis for improvement  of fleece weight  in 
the current  flock: it is temporary  and must be established  for 
succeeding  generations,  i.e. woolrecording  must be continuous  
if continuous  gains are to be made by selection.
If the gains made in any one generation  by selection  are 
to be added to the gains made in the preceding  generation,  
then we must know something  of the heritability  of fleece  
weight. Heritability  measures  that part of the current  improve ­
ment brought  about  by selection  which  will be handed  on from  
parents  to offspring.  Estimates  of heritability  are obtained  
from a knowledge  of daughter  and dam production  characteris ­
tics or from the relationship  which  exists  between  the character  
measured  in the rams and further  recorded  in their immediate  
offspring.  This takes a long time to obtain and at present  
we do not know estimates  of heritability  for Irish wool charac ­
ters. In the case of fleece  weight  we will need to have hogget  
fleece  weights  for at least 200 daughter-dam  pairs in our main  
wool-producing  breeds. Taking  work done elsewhere,  we can 
consider  the heritability  of fleece weight  to be 0.4 which is 
fairly high. Again  talking  in practical  terms,  if a ram with a 
fleece  weight  of 1 lb. better  than his contemporaries  is mated  
to ewes which also have a superiority  of 1 lb., their progeny  
will have, on average,  0.4 lb. of fleece above the average  of 
the whole, unclassed  flock. In other words,  the next genera ­
53
tion will have inherited  an additional  0.4 lb. of wool as a direct  
result of our selection  programme.  But since it takes on 
average  4 years, and not one year, to replace  one generation  
of sheep by the next, the annual  genetic  gain will be 0.1 lb. 
and not 0.4 lb.
From a farmer ’s point of view, it is therefore  apparent  
that a worthwhile  increase  in fleece weight  could be obtained  
by flock recording:  in fact, it should  be considered  essential  
for pedigree  and self-maintaining  flocks if they are to keep  
their general  level of production  above that of the flocks to 
which  they sell the breeding  and crossing  rams. Greasy  fleece  
weight  is one of the few economic  characters  of farm animals  
which  is more likely  to respond  to a selection  programme  than  
to changes  in the level of the nutrition  of the flock.
b. Wool Colour
In most wool-producing  countries,  downgrading  wool for 
colour  usually  means rejecting  individual  fleeces  for bacterial  
rot, excess yolk or some obscure  coloration  associated  with  
abnormal  weather  conditions.  In Irish wools all these condi ­
tions are also found but their relative  importance  to the trade  
is completely  overshadowed  by the problem  of black fibres in 
white wools. In the present-day  market,  light grey and grey  
fleeces  are worth at least lOd. per lb. less than white wools.  
Only recently  the public press carried a statement  by the 
President  of the Irish Wool Federation  wherein  he expressed  
a wish to see all the blackfaced  ewes roaming  Kerry, Conne ­
mara and Donegal  done away with. No doubt,  as a merchant,  
he has ample justification  for this sweeping  statement  in that 
43% of the wools going through  Irish stores are downgraded  
greys. The situation  is further  aggravated  by the presence  in 
the national  ewe clip of Suffolk-cross  fleeces  coming  in from  
those farmers  who retain Suffolk-cross  ewe lambs for subse ­
quent breeding.  As in the case of fleece weight,  the problem  
of black fibres in wool is more a breeding  problem  than a 
nutritional  one. We don ’t know the heritability  of black fibres  
because  the problem  does not arise in those countries  where  
active  wool research  is carried  out; the Hill Farming  Research  
Organisation  at Edinburgh  are engaged  on the problem  and our 
own Wool Research  Laboratory  is evaluating  our research  flocks  
for the character. A selection  differential  exists for the 
Institute  was able, in 1959, to select Blackface  ewes in Kerry  
which graded  only 13.9'/( light greys in 160 fleeces. It will 
take at least 3 years to gather  sufficient  data from this flock  
to estimate  the heritability  of black fibres: in the absence  of 
this data we can safely recommend  that culling  be practised  
for the repeatability  of the trait must be very high: those  
hoggets  with black wool will certainly  still have black wool  
at the subsequent  shearing.  The black fleeces from Suffolk
54
crosses  is a very different  problem:  basically,  it stems from  
our absence  of a planned  sheep economy. The Suffolk  is 
primarily  a fat lamb sire combining  excellent  conformation  
with rapid maturity  but its breeders  have never intended  that 
it confer  on a cross the attributes  of a fat lamb ewe—namely,  
mothering  ability,  high fertility  and wool fitted for the worsted  
trade (pick and super quality).  These qualities  are. in other  
sheep-producing  countries,  achieved  by recognised  crosses  such  
as the Cheviot  x B.L., Blackface  x B.L. or Merino  x English  
longwool  breed. Here we have every year a proportion  of 
Suffolk  x ewe lambs which fail to fatten  retained  for breeding  
back to the Suffolk  and their wool included  in the ewe clip. 
From a National  point of view, it is not sound practice  and 
is a principal  reason  why so much of our clip is fit only for 
the mattress,  upholstery  and inferior  carpet  trades.
c. Staple  Length  and Fibre Diameter
These two characters,  together  with an assessment  of 
colour,  determine  largely  the ultimate  utilisation  of a particu ­
lar wool type. Wool for the paper felt and worsted  trades  
must be long-stapled  with a well-defined  number  of crimps  
per inch and no break or tenderness  such as is found in the 
wool of poorly-fed  lactating  ewes. Staple  length  has a greater  
influence  on greasy  fleece  weight  than has diameter  and length
Gerb.  van Engelen
We are now sole Irish distributors  for the world  
renowned  Dutch firm Gerb. van Engelen  . .. Vertas  
and Combi grasses  will meet with new success  in 
Ireland  this year and are the latest addition  to our 
famous range of seeds from the world's  best 
breeders,  selected tested and guaranteed  by 
Townsend-Flahavan.
1
1TOWNSEND-FUlHavaH
cffii S I TilAthenry,  Co. Galway wLLIfV  L I Ubr
f
Telephone:  Kilmacthomas  20 & 22 : Atheniy  71 
5S
will respond  to a selection  programme  more readily than  
diameter.  Length  has approximately  the same repeatability  as 
fleece weight (0.7) and a heritability  of the same order  
(0.3—0.6). Less is known  of fibre diameter  and its heritability  
is though  to be about half that of staple length and fleece  
weight. In our own work with Galway  wools the lack of a 
correlation  between  staple length and fibre diameter  suggests  
that it should  be possible  by selection  to increase  staple length  
without  lowering  the count (increasing  the diameter  of the 
fibres);  Galway  wool is generally  too coarse  in relation  to its 
length  thereby  downgrading  the clip for use in the less profit ­
able woollen  trade,  
fl. Hairy Wools
Wool grows in units knowm  as follicle  groups,  each group  
consisting  essentially  of a primary  follicle surrounded  by 14 
or 15 times as many secondary  follicles  plus assorted  sweat  
glands. The primaries  give rise to fibres with hollow  centres  
which,  when they are still growing,  are known as medullated  
fibres:  if they are detached  and shed into the fleece they are 
known as kemps. The secondary  follicles  give rise to the 
true wool fibres. As far as we know, the ratio of secondaries  
to primaries  is fixed at birth so that we again have a breeding  
problem  if we desire to alter that ratio. Hairy fibres are 
undesirable  except  in carpet  wools and kemps,  which will not 
dye, are even less desirable.  Not all breeds  have kempy  wool  
and in Ireland  it is a problem  only in Blackfaces  and Cheviots.
56
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION
The Irish Grassland  Association  was formed  at a meeting,  
held during  the R.D.S.  Spring  Show  in May 1946. The O’Morchoe  
was elected  president  and the council  was composed  of Professor  
Michael  Caffrey,  Professor  E. J. Sheehy, Professor  Michael  
Gorman,  Messrs.  H. M. Fitzpatrick,  W. Bland,  J. Litton,  R. Bryan,  
Capt. Redmond,  Col. Doherty,  Dr. Kennedy  and Dr. Spain. The 
first honorary  secretary  was Mr. R. I. McCulloch,
This was a period  when the quality  of grassland  in Ireland  
was at a very low ebb. Fertility  was depleted  after the war 
years, fertilisers  were extremely  scarce and ground  limestone  
was, as yet, unavailable.  Still, there was a lively interest  in 
grassland  improvement  among  a limited  group. In particular,  
a number  of farmers  were impressed  by the wartime  grassland  
production  efforts  in Britain:  the views of Sir George  Stapleton  
had stimulated  many and there was keen interest  in assessing  
under Irish conditions  new pasture  strains,  direct reseeding,  
grazing  managing  methods  and the effects  of treating  grass as a 
crop, rather  than as something  which  just grew.
At the first meeting  of the council,  an expert  committee,  
comprising  Professor  Sheehy, Professor  Caffrey, Professor  
Gorman,  Mr. Robert McCulloch,  Dr. Spain and Mr. A. A. Mc- 
Guckian,  was appointed,  and this committee  was asked to 
“ advise on all matters relating to grass seed mixtures,  
fertilisers,  nutrition  of grazing  animals  and strains of grass  
and clover* ’. The committee  reported  to the first technical  
meeting  of the Association,  held during the Horse Show in 
1946. About  twenty  members  attended  and papers  were given  
by Mr. A. A. McGuckian,  Professor  Gorman  and Professor  
Caffrey.
Membership  quickly  grew and in September  of that year  
Dr. Spain called  a meeting  at L imerick  Show,  where  the Golden  
Vale branch  of the Association  was established  and this local  
branch  thrived  for many years, helped  by Dr. Spain,  Mr. Owen  
Binchy  and Mr. T. Ryan. By 1947, membership  had outgrown  
the capacity  of the honorary  secretary  to deal personally  with  
details  and the lively personality,  Mr. R. R. Yates-Hale,  became  
associated  in a secretarial  capacity  with the Association.
By 1948. the secretary  reported  membership  had increased  
to 161, “ fully paid up”. The activities  gradually  extended  to 
farm walks,  a Spring  Show dinner  and one dinner  and evening  
meeting  during  the winter  months.
In those early years a most interesting  meeting  of the 
Association  heard Mr. George Holmes  develop  on grassland  
management  in general  and the improvement  of Irish pastures  
in particular.  Mr. Holmes,  a New Zealander,  had been asked  
by the Government  to report  ” on the present  state and methods  
for improvement  of Irish grassland  ”.
57
In May 1949 the present  Rules and Constitution  of the 
Association  were adopted. Under these Rules, the president  
would retire annually,  to be succeeded  by the vice-president  
and that year The O’Morchoe,  who held the chair since 1946, 
was succeeded  by Lord Carew.
In 1951, Mr. R. I. McCulloch,  who had been honorary  
secretary  to the Association  since its inception,  intimated  that 
he wished  to retire and he was succeeded  by Mr. P. O’Keeffe.
In 1951 the activities  of the Association  extended  to a full 
week-end  meeting,  which was held in Jury's Hotel in early  
December  of that year.
By 1953 two week-end  meetings  were held, one in the 
early winter,  and the other in early spring and this practice  
has continued.  The subjects  discussed  have extended  outside  
the direct subject  of grassland  and grassland  management.  For 
this reason  the Annual  General  Meeting  of the Association  in 
1961 decided  that the sub-title  " Animal  Production  ’’ should  be 
added  to the name  of the Association.
IMPROVEMENT  IN SHEEP  BREEDING
By OSCAR  COLBURN
Many people talk as though  the problem  of the pedigree  
breeder  and the problem  of the commercial  sheep farmer  were  
two entirely  different  things.
Progress  in animal b^reeding  is extremely  slow, and it is 
very necessary  for breeders  to make an accurate  assessment  of 
what the commercial  man is likely to want if suitable  sheep  
are to be available  in ten, fifteen  or twenty  years time.
The United  Kingdom  provides  the largest  market  for lamb  
and mutton  in the world. Consumption  here is of the order  
to twenty-three  pounds  per head of the population.  Of this total,  
British  farmers  produce  about 40%, and about 60% is imported  
mainly  from New Zealand. Consumption  of lamb and mutton  
is increasing  very slowly.
Increase
Since 1950, however,  breeding  ewes in Britain  have increased  
their numbers  by roughly  3% per annum  and there is no sign 
that this rate of increase  is slowing  down to any appreciable  
extent.
The dry year of 1959 showed  the fine balance  between  
supply and demand,  and it seems obvious  that farmers  here  
can only continue  to increase  output  by capturing  part of the 
market  that is now supplied  by New Zealand.
New' Zealand
This is not as easy as it sounds. Ewe numbers  in New  
Zealand  are also rising,  even though  the average  return  to New  
Zealand  producers  last year was !/8d., making  the price per
58
lamb about 48/- and, including  wool, an output  of some £4 per 
ewe.
The New Zealand  Meat Producers  Board  has built up large  
reserve  funds adequate  if necessary  to finance  low prices on 
Smithfield  for three  or four years.
Two Ways
There are two ways to meet a fail in gross returns  per 
ewe, and both are of some urgency  to the sheep farmer. First  
of all it seems  likely  that some of the newer  intensive  methods  
of keeping  sheep  will step up returns  per acre. Secondly,  there  
is a great necessity  for our sheep breeders  to produce  new 
strains  or indeed  new breeds  of sheep  that are more productive  
than those  available  now.
If sheep are thought  of in terms  of functions  rather  than in 
terms of breeds,  objectives  can be immensely  simplified.
The functions  that arc performed  by sheep are five in 
number  and are as follows:
(1) Hill sheep
(2) The sire of the crossbred  ewe
(3) Self-contained  fat lamb producers
(4) Mutton  sires
(5) Out of season  lambing.
Examination
Let us examine  the characteristics  required  by each of the 
categories  of sheep  that have been described.  Hill sheep  require  
hardiness,  prolificacy  and as heavy a fleece as possible.  Those  
breeds  producing  the sires of crossbred  ewes must be able to 
transmit  prolificacy,  milking  capacity  and growth  rate.
Self-contained  fat lamb producers  must be prolific and 
heavy  milking  with high growth  rate and a carcase  of acceptable  
quality.
Those breeds  producing  fat lamb sires to be used on ewes  
of other  breeds  must be capable  of passing  on first of all a high  
growth  rate and secondly  good carcase  quality. Mutton  sires on 
the other hand must develop  carcase  quality  first and growth  
rate in this case is a secondary  consideration.  Those breeds  
suitable  for frequent  or out of season lambing  must obviously  
be able to take the ram throughout  the year and in addition  
must be reasonably  prolific  and milk well.
It would be unrealistic  not to appreciate  that few breeders  
are likely to accept the complications  of full scale progeny  
testing  for these  characters.
But provided  that a sufficient  nucleus  of top quality  flocks  
are able to undertake  this work, the results  of it can be spread  
rapidly  by ram multiplying  flocks  which  in practice  will be the 
main body of pedigree  breeders. I visualise  a three-tiered  
structure  in each breed which  would  operate  as follows.
Key Flocks
The nucleus  ram breeding  flocks would be the key flocks  
for the improvement  of the characteristics  required  for the
59
fulfilment  of each function. Full-scale  progeny  testing and 
individual  ewe recording  would  be carried  out, the actual  breed ­
ing system  to depend  on flock objectives.
It would obviously  be necessary  to identify  all lambs at 
birth. In addition  I would  hope that a general  mark  for animals  
bred in nucleus  ram breeding  flocks  could be agreed  on.
For this purpose  possibly  a tattoo mark at the base of the 
tail would  be effective.  I would also like to see some form of 
recognition  of nucleus  flocks made either by the Ministry  or 
by breed societies  and accommpanied  by a certificate  or licence.  
Regular  veterinary  examination  would be highly desirable  in 
this type of flock.
Recording
In a ram multiplying  flock of any breed,  the complications  
of progeny  testing  with all that implies  in record  keeping  and 
record  analysis  could be dispensed  with. Individual  ewe record ­
ing for the required  characteristics,  however,  would still be 
necessary,  but this is not such an arduous  task.
The system  here would be to use rams that were bred in 
nucleus  flocks of the breed of ewes that, after recording,  had 
proved  themselves  capable  of performing  efficiently  over several  
lactations.  In this way not much genetic  improvement  can be 
expected,  but the work done in the necessarily  few nucleus  
flocks would  be made available  to the breed as a whole.
To sum up—
(1) Management  in all its aspects  can have far greater  
effect on flock productivity  than improved  breeding  
can.
(2) Even with correct  management,  however,  there is still 
a great need for improved  sheep.
(3) In order to stand any chance  of making  worthwhile  
breeding  improvement,  objectives  must be severely  
limited.
(4) There is therefore  great need to re-examine  breeding  
objectives  and to do this in the light of the functions  of 
sheep rather  than on old fashioned  lines of breed  type.
(5) Functional  stratification  can simply  breeding  objectives  
and make progress  possible.
(6) Improvement  of the essential  economic  characteristics  
(proficiency,  milking  capacity,  growth rate, carcase  
quality,  and weight  and quality  of fleece) will necessi ­
tate more accurate  breeding  methods  than those  in use 
today.
(7) Full-scale  progeny  testing  and individual  ewe recording  
will be required  in the key flocks of every breed,  and 
the results  of this can be spread  fairly  rapidly  by wide ­
spread  use of animals  bred in these flocks.
This Paper was read at the Irish Grassland  Association  
meeting  3rd-4th  March  1961.
60
MTASH  LTD.. 16'17  COLLEGE  GREEN.  DUBLIN  2
THE
WORLD ’S GREATEST
d&rdis &ots
SEEDS  LIMITED
15.16 USHERS  ISLAND  QUAY,  DUBLIN. Tel. 70764 (5 lines)  
Also at ASHBOURNE.  Co. Meath. Tel. 10.
Pfinted  by th« R«<ord  Pms Ltd., 8r«y.
