Irish Grassland 
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal  
1985
FARMERS
JOURNAL
inE VO'Cf  Of IRF lANOS  BK.CtSf  iNDUSru*The Road  
to Success
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 19 1985
Printed  by Lithographic  Universal,  Dargle  Vale, Bray
M. J. Drennan  
B. Hickey  
K. A. Linklater  
P. A. Gleeson  
G. A. Stakelum  
K. J. OTarrell
P. McFeely
P. O. Mohn  
J. M. SlaterCONTENTS
Page
Beef production  from the suckler  herd 3
The suckler  herd in the agricultural  economy  14
Disease  control  in the lambing  flock 24
Effect of calving  date on milk production  30
Factors  effecting  herbage  intake of cows 36
Do it yourself  artificial  insemination  
(DIY AI) 43
Financial  management  on dairy farms —the 
weak link?  48
Challenges  to the Irish dairy industry  54
The Management  of a large dairy herd in 
the U.K.  61
Abstracts  of the 11th Annual  Research  
Meeting  66
COUNCIL  1984/1985
President-.  A. Conway  
Vice-President  D. Fay 
Council  Members :
D. Booth, D. Cashman,  J. Dardis,  V. Flynn. D. Grace, G. Kerin,  
J. Leeson,  K. Mathews.  O. Manley,  P. MacCanna,  D. MacCarthy,  
P. McFeely,  M. Murphy,  P. O’Keeffe, The O’Morchoe,  T. Power,
P. Tighe
Hon. Secretary  / Treasurer  
Dr. S. Flanagan,
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Beef Production  from the Suckler  Herd
M. J. DRENNAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Following  increases  in the late sixties and early seventies  the suckler  
herd consisted  of 0.69 million  cows in December  1974 which  represented  
about one-third  of the total cow population.  However,  there was a 
major decline  in beef cow numbers  subsequently  resulting  in only 0.40 
million  in December  1983. The increase  in dairy  cow numbers  from 1974 
was inadequate  to offset  the decline  in beef cows  with the result  that total 
cow numbers  have declined  over the last 10 years. The introduction  of 
the milk super levy means  that dairy cow numbers  will at best remain  
constant  but are more likely to decline  in the next few years due to 
increased  milk production  per cow. Therefore,  if beef production  is to 
expand  in the foreseeable  future  the extra calves  will need to come from  
a source  other than the dairy herd. The most likely source  of these extra  
calves  is the suckler  herd.
The suckler  herd (cow and progeny)  is presently  using the equivalent  
of about  one-sixth  of the total usable  land in the country  but if expansion  
is to take place it is necessary  that acceptable  economic  returns  can be 
obtained  from suckling.
There is no single factor in suckling  which ensures  good economic  
returns. However,  having  a clearly  defined  production  plan involving  
sale of suitable  animals  at the right time is of vital importance.  The most  
important  management  factors  relating  to beef production  from the 
suckler  herd include  the following  :
— Breeds  used
— Re-breeding
— Time of calving
•— Pasture  management
— Winter  feeding
— Type of system.
Breed  of Cow
The most suitable  type of cows available  for single suckling  has been 
Hereford  x Friesians  from the dairy herd. However,  there is now 
increased  usage of continental  sire breeds  on Friesian  cows providing  
progeny  which are also suitable  as suckler  dams. Comparisons  of con­
tinental  (Charolais,  Simmental  and Limousin)  cross Friesian  dams with 
Hereford  x Friesians  are in progress  and the calf gains  pre-weaning  from  
one such study are shown  in Table 1. Averaged  over the first lactations  
the growth  rates of the progeny  of Charolais  cross cows was about 4% 
greater  than those from Hereford  cows. Friesian  cows  were also included  
in this comparison.  While  calf growth  rates were highest  for the Friesians  
due to greater milk intakes,  the weight and body condition  of the
Friesian  cows deteriorated  relative  to the other breed types as the study 
progressed  which  would  exclude  Friesians  as suckler  dams. In addition  
to better  calf growth  the continental  crosses  tend to have slightly  lower 
calving  problems,  their progeny  have better carcasses  but the dams are 
usually  heavier  than Hereford  x Friesians.  However,  the mature  size of 
the Limousin  x Friesian  cow is quite similar  to the Hereford  x Friesian.
Table 1
Year Hereford  x Friesian Charolais  x Friesian Friesian
1977 0.79 0.86 0.95
1978 1.02 1.01 1.11
1979 0.92 0.99 1.00
1980 1.06 1.11 1.13
Mean 0.95 0.99 1.05
Limousin  bull on heifers  (1977)  and Simmental  bull subsequently
Breed  of Bull
When a crossbred  cow is used, the bull should preferably  be from a 
third breed. The two most important  factors  in relation  to the bull are 
high growth potential  in the calves and a low incidence  of calving 
problems.  In addition  to the breed differences  for these factors,  there is 
also wide variation  within any one breed. Iii data collected  by the 
Department  of Agriculture  the incidence  of serious  difficulty  at calving 
varied  from 2.4 with Friesian  bulls to 6.4 with Charolais  bulls (Table  2). 
More important,  however,  is the variation  between  individual  bulls  
within any one breed which  for Simmental  bulls varied  from 0.4 to 12.3 
per cent. Therefore,  when selecting  the bull the most important  point is 
to choose an individual  known to have a low incidence  of calving 
difficulties.
Table 2
Effect  of breed  of bull on calving  difficulties
Breed of BullSerious  Difficulty  (%)
Average Individual  bulls range
Hereford 3.1 0.0 to 7.4
Charolais 6.4 1.0 to 10.4
Simmental 5.1 0.4 to 12.3
Friesian 2.4 0.0 to 9.9
Source  ; Department  of Agriculture  1984
Calving  difficulties  are more common  in heifers  than in cows. The 
large breeds  of bull are therefore  not recommended  for heifers. While
adequate  data were available  on Limousin  bulls from the above survey 
other information  shows  the expected  incidence  of serious  calving  diffi­
culty to lie between  those of Charolais  and Hereford.  Limousin  bulls are 
used at Grange  on heifers  calving  at two years  of age.
Studies  in the U.K. and U.S.A. have clearly  shown that relative  to 
Hereford  bulls an increase  in pcwth  rate and final liveweight  of about  
8% can be expected  from using the better continental  sire breeds on 
suckler  cows (Table  3).
Table 3
Effect  of breed  of bull on birth weight  and final liveweight
Breed of bull Birth wt.
(kg)Final liveweight  
(kg)Difference  in final 
liveweight  (kg)
Hereford 37 469 0
Limousin 38 482 + 13
Simmental 40 504 + 35
Charolais 41 512 + 43
Source  : U.S. Department  of Agriculture,  1974
In addition  the progeny  of continental  sires may be taken to heavier  
carcass  weights  before  excess  fat deposition  occurs. Their suitability  for 
the higher priced markets  on the continent  will likely be of greater  
importance  in the future and hopefully  will be reflected  in a suitable  
price advantage  at meat factories.
Breeding
An obvious  objective  in suckling  is to aim for a live calf per cow 
every 365 days. The most effective  and simplest  method  of breeding  is 
by using a fertile bull. For various  reasons  (e.g. small herd size) a bull 
may not be available  and it is necessary  to use AI. A vasectomised  bull 
with a chin ball marker  is effective  for detecting  cows in heat. However,  
as the cows are generally  at pasture  during the breeding  .season the 
greatest  problem  is assembly  of cows for AI.
Time  of Calving
While this is an important  consideration  for those starting  a suckler  
herd, it also merits attention  from producers  with existing  herds. The 
first essential  is to aim for a specific  3-month  calving  season. There are 
many  arguments  as to what is the best calving  season  and it is extremely  
difficult  to study this experimentally.
The feed allowances  per cow yearly and her calf to 240 days were 
calculated  for spring  (March  1), summer  (June 1) and autumn  (October  
1) calving  herds. While there were no differences  in pasture  land re­
quirements  between  the three systems,  spring calving  herds required
considerably  less silage  than the other  two systems  (Table  4). To provide 
adequate  silage the proportion  of grassland  which must be cut on two 
occasions  is 40, 56 and 59 per cent for spring,  summer  and autumn  
calving  herds respectively.  Concentrate  allowances  of 90 & 270 kg are 
needed  for summer  and autumn  calving  herds respectively.  There is a 
straw  allowance  for spring  and summer  calving  herds.  The main problems  
peculiar  to the systems  are calf scours  when calving  indoors  in spring 
and in autumn  calving  herds  re-breeding  and summer  mastitis.
Recent  data from Northern  Ireland  show that 78 per cent of suckler  
cows calve in the first four months  of the years (Table 5). It is thus 
reasonable  to assume  that about 80 per cent of suckler  cows here are 
also spring  calving.  At Grange,  the suckler  herd is calved  in the months  
February  to April and this ensures  a heavy  weanling  in November.  The 
cow is dry for most of the winter,  therefore  feed inputs  can be kept to a 
minimum  (Table  4). This approach  ensures  that in the winter  when feed 
costs are high requirements  of the cow are least and when requirements  
are high the cow is at pasture. In addition,  earlier  calving  in spring, 
particularly  in smaller herds, allows the possibility  of adopting  an 
additional  calf (or calves)  on to the beef cow before  she is turned  out to 
grass. Such a practice  would  be particularly  attractive  at a time of low 
calf prices.
Table 4
Season  of calving— cow for 1 year and calf to weaning
Season  of calving
Spring Summer Autumn
Mean calving  date
Silage (tonne  DM)
Silage (% of grassland —2 cuts) 
Concentrates  (kg)
Straw (kg)March  1 
1.13
40
180June 1
1.57
56
90
noOctober  1 
1.65
59
270
Table 5
Distribution  of beef cow calvings in Northern  Ireland
Jan./Apr. May/Aug. Sept./Dec.
Percent  calvings 78 12 10
Summer  grazing  and silage  making
As grazed grass is the cheapest  feed for livestock,  it is essential  to 
obtain high animal performance  during  the grazing  season. A major  
factor  influencing  production  per acre is the number  of animals  carried.  
To obtain high production  per unit area, the stocking  rate must be
CASH
FLOW
A complete  financial  
management  kit 
for lararmers.
• Agri-Check  Cheque  Book• Agri-Check  Cash Flow  Sheet• Agri-Check  Farm Diary
Why  every  farmer  needs  Agri-Check:
Careful  planning  and cost control  are 
critical  to the success  of modern  farm  
business.  For that reason,  it is vital for 
farmers  to have an efficient  method  of 
recording  financial  transactions.Bank of Ireland  provides  this with the 
Agri-Check  service.
Call into your local Bank  of Ireland  
branch  today  for further  details.
BanKcrireiana
adjusted  to ensure  that the animals  have adequate  grass at all times  and 
that it is properly  utilised.  Grazing  studies  with spring  calving  cows  have  
shown  that about 0.6 acres  of pasture  (rested  from November  to April)  
is required  per cow and calf from mid-April  when  grass growth  is highest. 
To maintain  animal  performance  at a high level the stocking  rate must  
be reduced  considerably  (approximately  halved)  for the remainder  of the 
.season. Where a herd is carried throughout  the year the silage is 
required  for the cow and weanling  in winter,  1.25 acres are allowed  per 
cow and calf. In the early part of the season,  0.65 acres  is cut twice for 
silage and 0.60 acres is grazed.  The entire  area is grazed  from August  to 
the end of the grazing  season.
In suckling  systems  it is important  that silage fed to the progeny  is of 
high quality  which  necessitates  taking  the first cut early (May 20-25)  and 
ensuring  good preservation.  If the remaining  silage is for dry cows and 
cows in early lactation,  such as with a spring calving  herd, then the 
same emphasis  need not be placed on quality. In such circumstances  
some quality  decline  can be tolerated  with more emphasis  on yield in the 
second  cut which  will be fed to the cows.
Winter  Feeding  of the Cows
Feed requirements  of the cows in winter  will depend  on whether  they 
are dry or lactating.  A suckler  cow rearing  one calf will require  oyer 1.5 
times as much feed as a dry cow. All cows can afford to lose weight  in 
winter  but the time at which weight  is lost and the extent  of the loss is 
important.  Spring  calving,  mature  suckler  cows in gocd Ixidy condition  
at the start of winter  can be restricted  in feed from the time of housing  
to calving  (about  3 months)  without  ill-effects.  As a general  rule, main ­
tenance  of cow liveweight  to calving  is adequate.  This means  that after  
calving,  the cow will be over 50 kg lighter  than at the start of winter.
Table 6
Effect  of restricted  feeding  of cows (500 kg) in the last 2.5 to 3 months  of 
pregnancy  on liveweight  changes  (kg)
Silage fed before  
calving*YEAR 1 YEAR 2
To appetite Restricted To appetite Restricted
Housing  to post-calving + 2 —57 —49 —84
Post-calving  to grazing —28 —21 —34 —32
At pasture -1-55 -1-98 4-80 -1-102
Housing  to 180 days
after calving -1-29 -1-20 —3 —14
♦Silage  fed to appetite  post-calving
When fed mcderatc  quality  silage alone after calving  the cow will lose 
further  weight  resulting  in a total loss of about  75 kg over the winter.
Studies  at Grange  have shown  that beef cows restricted  over the winter  
recover liveweight  during the following  grazing season (Table 6). 
Although  the weight loss in winter in year 2 was greater  than the 
recommended  75 kg loss for mature  cows, the animals  were only 14 kg 
lighter  6 months  after calving  than at the start of the previous  winter. 
These  weight  losses  had no ill-effects  on calf performance  or cow fertility  
when the cows were subsequently  provided  with an adequate  supply  of 
high quality  pasture.
Reducing  feed intake before calving  is likely to reduce  calving  diffi­
culties. It has been demonstrated,  particularly  with heifers,  that animals  
fed on high levels of nutrition  before  calving  have greater  calving  prob ­
lems. With greater  use of the larger breeds  as sires, calving  difficulties 
will increase  somewhat  and it will be more important  to avoid having  
cows fat at calving.  Of course,  at the other  extreme,  very thin emaciated  
cows would  also result in increased  calf mortality.
Spring  Calving  System  — Fattened  at 1.5 to 2 years
While  time of sale can very depending  on farm circumstances  a system  
involving  fattening  at 1.5 to 2 years of age can usefully  be used to 
illustrate  the management  required  at various  periods. The system in­
volves  sale of the heifers  at 18 months  and the steers at end of a second  
winter  (about  25 months).
The cows calving  in February/March  are put to pasture  (which  has 
been rested from November)  in mid-April  when the calves  are 6 to 7 
weeks  old. Calves  of this age at the start of the grazing  season  will be 
able to avail of the increased  milk produced  by the cows on going to 
pasture  and will also be able to use grass themselves.  In addition,  an 
adequate  supply of high quality  pasture at this period ensures  good  
fertility  and rapid weight  recovery  in the cows. As indicated  earlier  a 
cow and calf to the yearling  stage will require  1.25 acres  for grazing  and 
silage. A further  0.55 acres  is required  to graze the yearling  and provide  
silage for steers  during  the second  winter. Thus a total of 1.8 acres of 
pasture  is required  per cow unit, 54 per cent of which is grazed in the 
period April to August  and the remainder  cut twice for silage. The 
entire  area is grazed  from August  until the end of the season.
Mature  suckler  cows are generally  in good body condition  at the start 
of winter  (weaning).  They are fed silage only during  the winter  (about  
150 days) and 5.5 to 6 tonnes  are available  per cow. This means  that 
silage must be fed at a restricted  level until calving,  but it is fed to 
appetite  from calving  to grazing.  However,  cows in poor body condition  
(which  is unlikely  under lowland  conditions)  and first calvers  should  be 
fed silage to appetite  throughout  the entire  winter  period. The cows are 
fed the second  cut silage taken in late July. Mature  cows are fed silage  
alone in winter  whereas  heifers  calving  at two years of age are offered
up to 1.5 kg of barley daily with silage from calving  to the start of 
grazing.
The level of meal feeding  required  in the first winter  with high quality  
silage fed to appetite  will be low (1 kg per head daily) as the yearlings  
will be going  to pasture  in spring. Average  weights  of steers and heifers  
going  to pasture  as yearlings  will be about  330 kg (Table  7). Heifers  are 
sold fat in September  (mean sale date) at a carcass  weight of 236 
(moderate)  to 260 (good)  kg. The steers  are housed  in November  and fed 
4 kg barley  daily during  their second  winter  and sold fat at 25 months  of 
age in spring  when caneass  weights  of 340 (moderate)  to 380 (good)  kg 
can be expected.
Table  7
Animal  weights  (kg)
Steers Heifers
Age at sale (months) 25 18
Weaning  weight 273 250
Yearling  weight 354 309
Final liveweight 600-670 440-485
Carcass  weight 340-380 236-360
Spring  Calving  — fattening  buUs at 16 months  of age
Economic  analyses  suggest  that to achieve  optimum  financial  returns  
the progeny  should  be taken to slaughter  on the producers  farm. How ­
ever, in many instances  this is not possible  and suckled  calves  are often 
sold at weaning  in autumn  at a time of low prices. The provision  of a 
better  market  for these animals  resulting  in higher  economic  returns  to 
producers  will encourage  greater  expansion  in the future; These young 
continental  cross bulls if over 300 kg in autumn  could be considered  
suitable  for fattening  over an extended  winter  feeding  period  (200 days) 
where high quality  feed is available.  The performance  of three-quarter  
continental  cross suckler  bulls from the herd at Grange  fed high quality  
silage and concentrates  over the past two winters  is shown  in Table 8. 
The animals  were 290-300  kg at weaning  and average  daily concentrate  
intakes  per animal  were 4.3 and 4.1 kg in years 1 and 2 respectively. 
Corresponding  figures  were 1.21 and 1.34 kg per day for liveweight  gains 
and 320 and 355 kg for carcass  weights.  The high killing-out  percentage  
(57.1 and 58.4 for years 1 and 2 respectively)  is noteworthy  which  is 4 to 
5 units higher  than for two year old Friesian  animals  of a similar  weight.  
In both years  carcasses  were primarily  2 and 3 for fatness  on the carcass  
classification  scale. In terms  of carcass  conformation  83 per cent of the 
total carcass  were graded  E or U.
10
Table 8
Performance  of young  bulls fed silage  and concentrates
Year 1
1982/83Year  2 
1983/84
Feeding  period (days) 218 238
Concentrates  (kg/day) 4.3 4.1
Silage (kg Dm/day) 4.4 4.2
Initial liveweight  (kg) 297 290
Final liveweight  (kg) 561 608
Daily gain (kg) 1.21 1.34
Killing-out  percentage 57.1 58.4
Carcass  weight  (kg) 320 355
Age at sale (months) 15.5 16
Economic  retunis  from intensive  suckling  systems
Gross  margins  per acre were calculated  for the following  3 systems.
A sale of weanlings  in autumn,
B sale of steers  at 2 years and heifers  at 18 months,
C sale of bulls at 16 months  (350 kg carcass  weight)  and heifers  at 18 
months  (Table  9).
The acres of grassland  (grazing  and silage required  per cow and 
progeny  for Systems  A, B and C) were 1.1, 1.8 and 1.56. At high 
levels of production  without  a beef cow subsidy  gross margins  were 
about £230/acre  for Systems  B and C but only £146 for System  A. 
Thus,  on good lowland  with moderate  levels of nitrogen  application  
(150 units per acre on the grazing  area) economic  returns  are improved  
by taking  the animals  to slaughter.
Table 9
Gross  margins  (£/ac)  from different  systems
Time of saleA
WeanlingsB
Steers  — 25 mths.  
Heifers  —-18 mths.C
Bulls  —16 mths.  
Heifers  — 18 mths.
Acres/cow  & progeny 1.1 1.8 1.56
Gross margin/ac. 146 185-227 230
Effect  on gross  margin  of
Beef cow subsidy  £65 -1-59 -F36 4-42
Heifers-l-22p/kg  carcass 4-16 4-18
Continentals  -1-1 Ip/kg  carcass 4-20 4-21
Steer (or bull) and heifer  carcasses  valued  at 247 and 203 p/kg respectively
11
Factors  affecting  economic  returns  and future  cow numbers
Inclusicn  of a beef subsidy  cf £65 per cow increases  gross margins  per 
acre from Systems  A, B. and C by £59, £36 and £42 respectively.  In 
recent  years the prices  of heifers  have been particularly  poor relative  to 
steers  and an increase  of 22p per kg of carcass  for heifers  would  increase 
gross  margins  from Systems  B and C by £16 to £18. The carcass  fatness  
and conformation  data for the young  bulls indicate  the quality  of those 
three-quarters  continental  cross carcasses  compared  with standard  Frics-  
ians. A premium  for these carcasses  of 1 Ip per kg increases  gross  margins  
per acre from Systems  B and C by about £20. The combined  effect of 
these three factors  amount  to an improvement  in margins  of up to £80 
per acre from suckling,  thereby  improving  considerably  the economic  
environment.  If these conditions  are available  then it can be expected 
that suckler  cow numbers  will increase  as evidenced  by the response  to 
favourable  economic  conditions  in the late sixties/early  seventies.
Cheveley  Johnston  & Company
Agricultural  Consultants  & Land Agents
Farm Reports  and Feasibility  Studies  
Management  Accounts  and Enterprise  Costings  
Farm and Estate  Management  
Staff Selection
Budgetary  Control  and Cash Flow Forecasts  
Land and Stock  Valuations —Farm Sales  and Purchases
26/27 WELLINGTON  ROAD,  CORK  
(Cork 501109)
12
list  year freland^  daii5»  exports;  farw^^ore  
our counhys  economy!
Now we are determined  to maintain  this grovfe  by developir^  a wider": : 
range  of prodiKts  for tire intemadional  martetplace.
IRISH  DAIRY  BOARD
13
The Suckler  Herd in the Agricultural  
Economy
B. HICKEY
The Agricultural  Institute,  Economics and Rural  Welfare  Centre,  Dublin.
There  are 422,000  suckler  cows in the country.  Between  them and their  
progeny  they comprise  approximately  one million  livestock  units and 
occupy  2.5 million  acres  of land. In the national  accounts  the contribution  
of the suckler  herd to agricultural  output  is not identified  separately  but 
rather  is included  with cattle  and beef. The authors  estimate  of the con­
tribution  to gross agricultural  output in 1983 is IR£230  million or 
IR£207  million  net of headage  payments.  It represents  about  9 per cent 
of the value  of agricultural  output  excluding  turf. This compares  with the 
output  from sheep  and lambs  of £75 million.  It will be appreciated  then 
that it is an important  component  of agricultural  production.  As such 
it is worth considering  whether  it should  be actively  encouraged  to de­
velop  and flourish.
Why do we need a suckler  herd ?
When  the suckler  herd is discussed  the point  is often  made  that suckler  
beef production  is biologically  inefficient.  It has also been shown  that 
in the absence  of subsidies  it is not generally  competitive  with other  
farm enterprises  in terms  of profitability.  One may then ask why it should  
be actively  promoted  in agricultural  development.  The case for the 
expansion  of suckling  is based on a number  of underlying  facts as 
follows :
(a) unsuitability  of a high proportion  of land for tillage;
(b) restriction  of the dairy herd due to the Super-levy;
(c) household  structure  or off-farm  employment  restricting  farm  
enterprise  options  on many  farms;
(d) lack of tradition  in sheep  on about  75 per cent of farms;
(e) low levels of stocking  rate on the majority  of farms with suckler  
herds;
(f) expansion  of suckling  in the past has not been at the expense  of 
other enterprises.
Given  the trend in EEC cereals  policy  and the pressure  on prices  it is 
likely that in future  cereals  will be largely  confined  to the most suitable  
soils (35% of soils).  This implies  that on a high proportion  of the country  
the options  will be mainly  confined  to some form of livestock  and for­
estry. Milk production  is restricted  by the operation  of the dairying  
Super  Levy. Arising  from this, future  increases  in deliveries  per cow will 
result in a decline  in the total dairy herd while the Super  Levy persists. 
Deliveries  to creameries  per cow increased  at an annual  average  rate of 
2.5% between  1970 and 1982 (Fingleton,  1983). Were this trend in 
deliveries  per cow to continue  until 1990 the dairy cow herd could be
14
reduced  by 16 per cent or by 264,000  head while  maintaining  the present  
level of total deliveries.  Calf prices would tend to escalate,  thus rein­
forcing  the traditional  extensive  systems  of cattle production  and mili­
tating  against  the more intensive  systems  such as accelerated  beef produc ­
tion. A decline  in dairy  cow numbers  would  be accompanied  by increased  
retention  of calves  for rearing  on dairy farms,  resulting  in a future  source  
of decline  in the supply  of calves  to beef producers.
Apart  from restrictions  imposed  by soil type and the milk Super  Levy 
about three-quarters  of farmers  have no tradition  in sheep production.  
Approximately  one-quarter  are part-time  farmers  (Higgins,  1983).  Others  
are restricted  in their farm enterprise  options  due to a household  struc ­
ture, age, etc. For these reasons  there are many farms on which  choice 
of enterprise  is restricted  to some form of cattle  production.
The argument  that suckling  is biologically  inefficient  and uncompetitive  
in the absence  of financial  aids might  be sustainable  if it were established  
that suckling,  which had received  aid, was displacing  other more pro­
ductive  and remunerative  enterprises.  The evidence  however  is very much  
to the contrary.  In a study of suckler  herds in 1980 (Hickey  et al, 1980)  
it was found that farmers  who expanded  their herds did so mainly  
through  intensification  and land reclamation  (86%)  or by substitution  for 
other cattle. Where  the suckler  cow enterprise  was substituted  for other  
cattle this meant that the displaced  cattle were kept on other farms  
instead,  so that there was no corresponding  reduction  in national  produc ­
tion. Only 5% of expansion  was accommodated  at the expense  of 
enterprises  other than cattle. Further  evidence  that expansion  of the 
suckler  herd does not greatly  impinge  on other enterprises  is provided  
by the fact that the total number  of grazing  livestock  units in the country  
was at its maximum  in 1974 when the suckler  herd reached  its peak.
Other  sources  of increased  beef production
Apart from increasing  the size of the breeding  herd there are some 
other potential  sources  of increased  beef production  including  increasing  
the productivity  of the herd, carrying  animals  to heavier  weights  and 
production  of beef from once calved  heifers.
The foregoing  considerations  indicate  that even in the absence  of a 
milk Super  Levy the case for expansion  of the suckler  herd is strong  from  
a national  perspective.  With the Super Levy in operation  the case is 
overwhelming.  However  in order for a national  agricultural  aspiration  
to be realised  it must be translated  into increased  farm outcome.  This 
means that suckler  beef production  must be competitive  with other  
options  available  to those engaged  in cattle  production  in particular.
The suckler  herd nationally
A major expansion  of the beef suckler  herd commenced  in the late 
1960s prior to which  numbers  had been low, although  the Calved  Heifer  
Scheme  did provide  a temporary  impetus  to the herd in 1965-66.  This 
expansion  continued  uninterrupted  until 1974 when the number  reached  
732,000  and accounted  for 33% of the total breeding  herd. A number  of
15
coinciding  factors  favoured  this major  expansion.  Firstly,  the Beef Cattle  
Incentive  Scheme  was introduced  in 1969, which provided  grants for 
breeding  herds not engaged  in commercial  milk production  and was 
available  throughout  the whole country.  The level of grant from 1970 
onwards  was IR£21 for the 3rd cow, 1R£19  for the 4th and IR£16  for 
each additional  qualifying  cow in a herd. Putting  this in the context  of 
present  prices  the IR£16  grant in 1970 is equivalent  to IR£87  at the level 
of agricultural  prices  prevailing  in 1983. A second  important  aspect  was 
the high level of calf prices. Calf price was equivalent  to 154 kg live- 
weight  of finished  beef in 1973, a level which has never since been 
approached.  After 1974 the number  of suckler  cows declined,  at first 
rapidly  and later at a more moderate  pace. This coincided  with a marked  
decline  in calf prices,  which  dipped  to their lowest  level relative  to beef 
prices in 1975. The reduction  in the level of grants payable  under the 
Beef Cattle  Incentive  Scheme  followed  by its abolition  in 1978 also con­
tributed  to making  suckling  less competitive  with artificial  rearing  of 
cattle.
Since 1981 the numbers  of suckler cows has stabilised  at about  420,000.  
This has been accompanied  by an increase  in the calf to beef price ratio.  
The introduction  of the suckler  cow grant would also have been a 
contributory  factor.
Since  keeping  of suckler  cows  can be viewed  as an alternative  to buying  
in calves  and rearing  them artifically,  then the combination  of calf price  
and suckler  cow grant is likely to be important  in determining  the rela­
tive attractiveness  of suckling.  The attraction  of keeping  a suckler  cow 
might be measured  as the saving  arising  from not having  to buy a calf 
plus the value of the grant for keeping  the cow. This is shown  in Table  
1 for the years 1973 to 1984. Calf prices are derived  from the Bandon
Table 1
Calf price plus suckler  cow grant  relative  to beef cattle prices
YearCalf
price
(1R£)Suckler  
cow grant  
(1R£)Calf&
headage
(IR£)Cattle
price
(1R£/
100 kg)Calf & 
headage 
relative 
to cattle 
price  (kg)No. of 
other
cows
(000)
1973 52 16 68 33.70 202 651
1974 26 16 42 29.80 141 732
1975 13 16 29 40.11 72 637
1976 32 11 43 53.10 81 547
1977 49 11 60 64.00 94 537
1978 56 56 76.25 73 502
1979 80 80 78.60 102 484
1980 60 13.18 73 78.10 93 448
1981 80 27 107 94.50 113 424
1982 106 24 130 103.50 126 429
1983 124 25 149 112.30 133 421
1984 131 25 156 116.80 134 422
16
series and are unweighted  averages  for the months  January  to April.  
Beef cattle prices are annual  averages  and are derived  by combining  
bullocks  (66%) and heifers (34%). In 1973 the combined  value of a 
calf plus the suckler  cow grant was equal to 202 kg of beef, its highest  
level of the years shown,  indicating  that the keeping  of suckler  cows was 
relatively  attractive.  The lowest point was reached  in 1975 when the 
combination  of calf price plus grant was equal to only 72 kg of beef 
liveweight.  At that time the number  of suckler  cows was declining  
rapidly In 1984 the calf price plus grant is equal to 134 kg of beef a 
level which  is accompanied  by a stable  suckler  cow herd.
If the price and grant parameters  that prevailed  in 1973 are taken as 
the yard stick against  which  to judge the attractiveness  of suckling,  i.e. a 
combination  of calf price and suckler  grant equal to 200 kg liveweight 
then the corresponding  value at 1984 beef prices  is about IR£230.  The 
grant level required  to achieve  this combined  value  would  depend  on the 
level of calf prices,  but taking 1984 calf prices a total of approximately  
IRflOO  IS implied.  The two components,  namely  calf price and suckler  
cow grant operate  in different  ways in affecting  the competitiveness  of 
suckling.  By contrast  an increase  in the price of calves  improves  the com­
petitive  position  of suckling  by reducing  the profitability  of artificial  rearing.
Suckler  herds  in the country
There were 74,000  holdings  in the country  in 1983 with cows other  
than dairy  cows and with an average  herd size of 5.4 (Table  2). Of these  
56,000  with 6.5 cows on average  were eligible  for the suckler  cow scheme. 
It is clear then that the beef cow herd is broadly  based indicating  that 
the possibilities  for expansion  are considerable  provided  the circum ­
stances  are favourable.  The average  herd size is very small and this 
would  not be conducive  to the use of more modem  production  methods.
Table 2
The suckler  herd nationally  1983
No. of 
herds 
(000)No. of
cows
(000)Average 
herd size 
(No.)Amount  grant  
per cow 
(1R£)
Total 74.2 402.7 5.4
Suckler  cow scheme 56.3 363.0 6.5 25.0Beef cow scheme 9.1 58.7 6.5 20.8
Source  : Department  of Agriculture
Of the total 422,000  other cows in the country  in 1983, 363,000  or 
86% received  grant under  the suckler  cow scheme.  The remainder  were 
either  in herds with creamery  or liquid milk or where  the farmer  was a
17
part-time  farmer  (i.e. less than 50% of his time and less than 50% of 
his income  from farming).
Approximately  70% of suckler  cows are in the disadvantaged  areas  
including  54% in the severely  handicapped  areas and 16% in the less 
disadvantaged  areas.
Suckling  as a fann enterprise
Moving  from the national  situation  to that of the individual  farm two 
of the main aspects  that arise are :
a) suckling  as an alternative  to other cattle or farming  enterprises;  
and
b) increasing  the numbers  of suckler  cows through  intensification.  
First it is of some interest  to consider  the general  level of returns  being 
achieved  on farms keeping  suckler  cows. Table 3 shows the average 
levels  of output,  costs and margins  for 1983 from farms  engaged  in single  
suckling  in the Farm  Management  Survey.  The generally  low level of out-
Table 3
Output,  costs and margins  — single  suckling  by soil group,  1983
SOIL GROUP Wide use
rangeLimited  use 
rangeExtremely
limited  
use range
No. of farms 47 70 58
Average  farm size (acres) 47 38 50
Per livestock  unit*
Output 231 231 227
of which Fleadage  grants 14 29 27
Direct  costs 84 64 66
Gross margin 147 167 161
Forage  acres 1.85 2.43 3.56
Per acre :
Gross margin 79 69 45
Regular  overheads 28 20 12
Return  to land, labour.
33 management  and investment 51 49
Note : * A livestock  unit is one 533 kg animal  kept for one year 
Source  : Farm Management  Survey  Data, An Foras Taluntais
put and margins  is striking  as well as the extensive  nature  of stocking  
rate. Even on good soils the average  level of stocking  rate is 1.85 forage  
acres per livestock  unit. The combination  of low output  per livestock 
unit and low stocking  rate results  in very low income  per acre, despite  
very moderate  farm overheads.  The result is a return to land, labour,  
management  and investment  of approximately  IR£50  per acre on soils
18
with a wide to limit use range and IR£33  per acre on those soils which 
are extremely  limited  in use range.
A comparison  between  the average  returns  from Single  Suckling,  Mul-  
tip e Suckling  and Artificial  Rearing,  as they occur in farms on good  
soils IS shown  m Table  4. The net returns  to land, labour,  management  
and investment  are IR£51,  IR£69  and IR£80  per acre for Single  Suckling, 
Double/Multiple  Suckling  and Artificial  Rearing  respectively.  The lower  
level of margin  from Single  Suckling  is partly  due to a poorer  stocking  
rate and partly  due to lower  margins  per livestock  unit.
The fact that a difference  in margins  exists between  single suckling  
and artificial  rearing  implies  that at the standards  of management  pre­
vailing  grant aid is required  in order to make suckling  more generally  
difference  in gross margin  per livestock  unit of 
1K£46  and the common  system  of suckling  involving  sale at about one 
and a half years representing  1.5 livestock  units per cow the resulting  
difference  per cow is IR£72,  or a total of IR£90  to IR£100  when account  
IS taken of exiting  suckler  cow grants  as generally  available  throughout  
the country.  This of course,  is not to say that suckling  is not appropriate  
at lower  levels of grant  in certain  circumstances.
Table 4
Returns  for suckling  compared  with artificial  rearing,  1983
Mainly
single
sucklingMainly 
double  & 
multiple 
sucklingMainly
artificial
rearing
Per livestock  unit :
Gross  margin  (IR£) 147 171 195Forage  acres 1.85 1.66 1.66Per acre (IR£) :
Gross margin 79 103 117Regular  overheads 28 34 37Returns  to land, labour.
management  and investment 51 69 80
It would  be interesting  to compare  survey  results  from single suckling  
involving  sale of progeny  at different  stages,  namely  weanlings,  stores or 
hmshed  animals.  In the survey  farmers  sold the progeny  predominantly  
as stores and hence there are not sufficient  observations  for the other  
stages m the various  soil categories  to give conclusive  results  on this 
aspect. Sale of progeny  as weanlings  is concentrated  in poorer  soils and 
this may be the most appropriate  system  where  soil and topography  im­
pose severe  restnetions  in the options  available.  On soils with a limited  
use range the results  are somewhat  in favour  of earlier  selling while in 
the better  soils bringing  the progeny  to finish  gave better  results.
19
Range  in returns
As in the case of farm  enterprises  generally  a wide range  occurs  around  
the average  due both to difference  in returns  per animal  unit and varia ­
tion in stocking  rate. This is shown  in the case of Single Suckling  on 
better soils in Table 5. Farms  in the bottom  group not only achieved
Table 5
Output,  costs and margins  (1R£) per acre for single suckling  on soils with a wide
use range,  1983
Bottom  group Middle  group Top group
Number  of farms 11 22 11
Per livestock  unit :
Output 159 257 301
Direct costs 100 75 74
Gross margin 59 182 228
Forage  acres
Per acre :2.36 1.98 1.50
Gross margin 25 92 152
Source  ; Farm Management  Survey,  An Foras Taluntais
lower levels of output  per animal  unit but also had higher  costs and a 
poor stocking  rate. By contrast  farmers  in the top group  produced  higher  
levels of output  per animal  unit, while keeping  costs at an average  level 
and also had a better  than average  stocking  rate to generate  an average 
gross margin  of IR£152  per acre. Even  amongst  this group  stocking  rates  
are still moderate  at 1.5 acres per livestoek  unit.
Suckling  as an alternative  to 2-year  beef
Beef producers  are particularly  concerned  with the increasing  price of 
calves. This is especially  relevant  in the light of the trend in milk de­
liveries  and the possibility  of a future  decline  in the supply  of calves  from 
the dairy herd. In the light of this farmers  engaged  in 2-year-beef  may 
consider  the possibilities  of well managed  suckling  as a partial  alternative  
in order  to reduee  their exposure  to high calf prices.
Table 6 sets out margins  based on results  from well managed  com-  
mereial  2-year beef produetion  in BEEFMIS  and returns  from better  
managed  suckler  herds in the Farm Management  Survey  with the sale 
of progeny  at one and a half years old on average. For cornparison  
purposes  margins  per animal  sold are adjusted  to an equivalence  in 
of livestock  units. It must be pointed  out that it cannot  be claimed  that 
the standards  in both are exactly  comparable,  since they are based on 
different  sources.  Nevertheless  they may be of use as a general  guide ­
line. At the standards  and prices  prevailing  the gross margin  less interest  
on livestock  and working  capital  per livestock  unit is IR£210  for 2-year
20
beef as compared  with IR£160  for Single  Suckling.  The calf price in the 
2-year  beef budget  is IR£140  net of subsidy  while returns  from suckling  
are inclusive  of IR£25 suckler  cow grant, but would not include  other  
headage  payments  such as the beef cow grant. In the absence  of extra  
suckler  cow grant the suckling  system  would  give an equal return with 
the 2-year beef system at a calf price of approximately  1R£190  for 
Friesian  bulls. With the extra suckler  cow grant  of IR£70  included  in the 
National  Plan for 1986 the returns  from the better  managed  suckling  sys­
tem would  be roughly  comparable  with that cf the 2-year  beef enterprises  
as budgeted.
Table 6
Budget  to assess suckling  as performed  in better managed  units compared  with  
well managed  two-year  beef
2 year 
beefSingle  suckling  
cow and calf 
to 18 months
Sale weight  (kgs) 590
Concentrates  per animal  sold (kgs) 650
Sale price (IR£/100  kgs) 130 n.a.
(p/lb carcase) 110
Calf price net of grant (IR£) 140
Gross margin  per animal  sold (IR£) 355 355
Interest  on livestock  and working
capital  @ 14% pa (1R£) 90 115
Gross  margin  less interest  (1R£) 265 245
Livestock  units per animal  sold 1.25 1.5
Gross margin  less interest  per
livestock  unit (1R£) 210 160
Effect of 1R£I0  calf price change
including  interest  (1R£) 11
Effect of IR£70  suckler  cow grant (1R£) 45
Another  reason  why suckling  may be favoured  is that it can be self 
contained  and would not require  increasing  borrowings  to finance  the 
purchase  of young  stock which  may be increasing  in price.
Intensification
It is clear from Table  4 that the majority  of farms  engaged  in suckling  
operate  at a low level of intensity.  The general  level of development  is 
also low. Considering  the low stocking  rates it is likely that in a great  
many instances  stock numbers  could be increased  and that considerable  
expansion  could be accommodated  without  major investment  in farm
21
buildings.  Increasing  stock numbers  however  means either foregoing  
income  resulting  from keeping  extra  stock for breeding  rather  than selling  
them, or borrowing  the money  both for stock and buildings,  where er- 
quired. In view of the low levels  of income  in general  on farms  engaged 
in suckling  the scope for financing  increases  in stock numbers  from own 
resources  is likely  to be very limited.
Conclusions
The arguments  for increasing  the suckler  herd are compelling  nation ­
ally, especially  since the introduction  of the Milk Super Levy. There  
are 74,000  herds in the country  with some beef suckler  cows and with 
generally  low levels of stocking  rate. It is thus a broadly  based enter ­
prise with considerable  scope for expansion  under favourable  circum ­
stances.
It is competing  mainly  with other systems  of cattle production,  insofar  
as there is any competition  involved.  At calf prices  and levels  of suckler  
cow grants  available  in recent years and up to 1984 it is not generally  
competitive  with the purchase  of calves  coming  from the dairy herd and 
rearing  them artifically,  which  is seen as the main alternative,  although  
it may be more appropriate  on many individual  farm situations.  How ­
ever the increase  in headage  payments  from 1R£32 to IR£70  for beef 
cows in the disadvantaged  areas from 1986, as outlined  in the National  
Plan, should considerably  improve  the outlook  for suckling  in these 
areas which  contain  approximately  70% of the herd, especially  in view 
of the strengthening  of calf prices. In the remainder  of the country  calf 
prices would have to increase  further  before single suckling  would be­
come an option  on the generality  of farms.
Future  expansion  of suckling  is likely to be most appropriate  in less 
developed  farming  situations  or where  soil and topography  impose  limi­
tations,  and more generally  in disadvantaged  areas with the increase  in 
grants  which  have been outlined  in the National  Plan.
References
1. Fingleton,  W. (1983).  Dairying —Changing  Structure  and Performance;  adjust ­
ment and structural  problems  in the agricultural  sector. An Foras Taluntais,  
Economics  and Rural Welfare  Centre,  10th Annual  Conference.
2. Higgins,  J. (1983). A study of part-time  farmers  in the Republic  of Ireland. 
An Foras Taluntais,  Economic  and Rural Welfare  Centre; Socio-Economic  
Research  Series No. 3.
3. Hickey,  B., Connolly,  L., Riordan,  B. (1980).  Beef Cow Study-Prospects  and 
Problems  of Expansion.  Report  prepared  by An Foras Taluntais  E.R.W.R.C. 
for Irish Meat Exporters  Society.
22
trust
NET
A
5 EEC FERTILISER  W^ mEEC FERTILISER  *
theONiy
Irish  nitrog&i
23
Disease  Control  in the Lambing  Floek
K. A. LINKLATER
Veterinary  Investigation  Centre,  East of Scotland  College  of Agriculture.  
Greycrook,  St. Boswell ’s, Roxburghshire.
While there are few alternatives  to keeping  sheep on hill land in this 
eountry,  in the lowland  and upland  situations  they have to compete  with 
arable crops and cattle for land use. Admittedly,  sheep have added  
benefits  in improving  soil fertility  but their level of production  must be 
high enough  for the gross  margins  per hectare  to match  other enterprises  
on the farms. It is important  therefore  to consider  performance  figures 
which  are required  for them to do this (Table  1).
Table 1
Target  production  figures  per 100 ewes to ram
Barren  ewes 3
Ewe deaths 2
Productive  ewes 95
Total lambs born 181
Lambs  born dead 4
Lambs  died around  birth 5
Lambs  surviving 172
Later lamb deaths 2
Lambs weaned/sold 170
Lamb growth  rate to 1st August 300 g/day
Target  weight  at 1st August 41 kg
Proportion  sold fat at 1st August
Remainder  sold fat by 30th September50%
The major  factor  in the profitability  of sheep flock is the number  of 
lambs  sold. We have set a target  of 170 lambs  sold per 100 ewes mated  
but the majority  of flocks are not achieving  this as we see from recent  
MLC  data (Table  2). Yet with crossbred  ewes  this target  should  be quite  
feasible.
Table 2
Number  of Iambs  reared  by recorded  lowland  flocks  (MLC  Sheep  Yearbook)
Average  number  of lambs reared/ 100 ewes to ram 
Top third of these flocks1981
143
1491982
148
156
The main components  affecting  sheep  reproduction  and hence number  
of lambs  reared  are :—
1) Ram fertility
24
2) Ewe  fertility  (number  of ewes which  lamb)
3) Ewe fecundity  (number  of lambs/pregnancy)
4) Perinatal  mortality.
Components  1-3 are outside  the scope  of this paper. I should  therefore  
like to spend most of the time discussing  various  aspects  of perinatal  
mortality,  i.e. deaths  in lambs  which  occur  around  lambing  time. Results  
of a survey  we carried  out over a three year period  in the Borders  and 
Half Bred and Greyface  flocks  arc shown  in Table 3. Stillbirths  are the 
largest category.  Most of these were associated  with dystokia  despite  
intensive  shepherding  at lambing  time. The most common  form of 
dystokia  involved  large single lambs which were presented  with both 
fore-legs  back resulting  in the so-called  “hung lamb ”. These  often result  
from overfeeding  of ewes carrying  singles  as the whole  flock is normally  
fed as if all the ewes are carrying  twins.
Table 3
Summary  of causes  of perinatal  mortality  in seven Halfbred  and Greyface  flocks  
in the Scottish  Borders  1974-76
Diagnosis Percentage  of deaths
Stillborn 36.5
Starvation/chilling 32.7
Infectious  disease 17.3
Misadventure 4.9
Congenital  abnormalities 3.7
Others 4.9
If the twinning  rate in the flock can be increased,  obviously  these deaths  
can be reduced. However,  more emphasis  should be placed on the 
selection  of breeding  stock from strains  with low incidence  of dystokia.  
Selection  for fashionable  conformations  in certain  breeds  also probably  
exacerbates  the condition.
Of lambs  bom alive it can be seen that by far the greatest  number  die 
from starvation  and chilling  or hypothermia.  Recent  work from the 
Moredun  shows  that over 80 per cent of these lambs  could be saved by 
careful  management  at birth. This includes  providing  adequate  shelter  
with facilities  for warming  if necessary  in a flew of warm air at 40 to 
45°C. Hypothermia  occurs  at two main periods.  Firstly,  before  they are 
adequately  dried through  direct  loss of body heat and secondly,  after 10 
hours of life when body energy  resources  are quickly  used up. In the 
latter instances  injections  of 20 per cent glucose  must be given before  
warming  and adequate  supplies  of milk must be available  afterwards  or 
hypothermia  will recur. Use of a stomach  tube on the end of a large 
syringe greatly  facilitates  feeding  weak lambs. Hence the reason for 
grouping  starvation  and chilling  together.
25
Infectious  disease,  while accounting  for approximately  half as many  
deaths  as starvation  and chilling,  is still very important  in a lowground  
situation  where  normally  ewes are brought  into closely  confined  quarters  
for lambing.  The most common  conditions  seen are scours,  navel ill and 
joint ill.
Scouring  is due to a variety  of organisms  including  E. coli, viruses  and 
protozoa.  Only the first of these is sensitive  to antibiotics.  It should  be 
remembered  that E. coli is a normal  inhabitant  of the gut and only a few 
strains  cause disease.  Spcicjal  laboratory  procedures  are required  for the 
detection  of these strains.
With the navel ill/joint  ill syndrome,  infection  gains  entry through  the 
umbilicus  (navel)  soon after birth. The bacteria  then migrate  to the liver 
or joints  to produce  abscesses.  In some instances  these may occur  in the 
spinal cord leading  to posterior  paralysis  which may be mistaken  for 
swayback  unless  a careful  examination  is carried  cut. In other cases the 
bacteria  which are introduced  through  the navel may multiply  in the 
blood stream causing  fever and death unless suitable treatment  is 
instigated.  Antibiotics  by injection  are the most effective  way of treating  
these infections  but they must be given early in the course  of the disease 
to be effective.
Watery  mouth  is an interesting  condition  which  has long been recog ­
nised in South  East Scotland  but has now apparently  become  widespread  
throughout  the country.  Characteristic  signs include  dullness,  drooling  of 
saliva and distension  of the belly. The lamb ceases  to suck and, if not 
treated,  its condition  deteriorates  quickly.  The condition  is due to slowing  
down of gut movement  which in turn encourages  the multiplication  of 
bacteria  within  the gut. It is important  to remember  that the abdominal  
distension  is partly due to gas formation  in the stomach  and despite  
appearing  to be full, the affected  lamb may actually  be starving.  There ­
fore treatment  is aimed  at reversing  these processes  as follows  :—
1) Treatment  with suitable  antibiotic  both by mouth  and by injection.
2) Attempting  to encourage  gut movement  by means  of an enema —20 
ml of soapy  water  administered  by means  of a syringe  and cut down 
stomach  tube placed  about  5 cm into the rectum.
3) Feeding  the lamb by stomach  tube. A mixture  of glucose  and salt 
in water is recommended  (10% glucose  and 0.9% salt—i.e. 10()g  
glucose  and 9 g common  salt per litre of water). Three  times  daily  
feeding  of from 50 to 150 ml of the solution  is desirable  with the 
larger  volume  being required  if the lamb is not sucking  at all.
Treatment  should  be continued  until the lamb is sucking  well from the 
ewe and apparently  back to normal.
As with most sheep diseases,  prevention  of these neonatal  problems  is 
the best course  to take. As there are few specific  remedies  for most of 
the conditions  discussed,  general  principles  of good husbandry  and man­
agement  are essential.  Perhaps  the most important  factor is adequate  
feeding  of the ewes before  and after lambing  to produce  strong  lambs  at
26
birth and adequate  colostrum  of good quality. Recent  work has shown 
the importance  of high quality  protein  such as fish meal and soyabean  
meal in the ration. Therefore  as well as good quality  silage, hay or 
roots, the ration should  be supplemented  with a concentrate  containing  
high quality  protein. This can either be a proprietary  sheep feed or a 
hcmemix  if cereals  are available  on the farm. The homemix  which is 
recommended  by the East of Scotland  College  of Agriculture  is shown  in 
Table 4. These  concentrates  should  be fed from four weeks  pre-lambing  
until the end of the first month  of lactation  starting  at about 200 g per 
head per day and going  up to about  600 g per head per day at and after  
lambing.
Table 4
kg per tonne
Barley 750
Sugar beet pulp 100
Soyabean  meal 75
White fishmeal 50
Mineral/vitamin  supplement 25
Having  got the ewes to produce  ample  colostrum  it is essential  to see 
that the lambs  get an adequate  supply  as soon as they are able to suck.  
This will be greatly  facilitated  if the ewe and her lambs  are moved  to a 
small pen after lambing  and kept there for about 36 hours  or until the 
lambs are strong and the ewe/lamb  bond is well established.  As a 
general  rule one small pen about 1.5 m square  is required  for every  eight  
ewes in the flock. Ideally  pens should  be cleaned  out between  each ewe. 
Should any disease occur, pens must be thoroughly  disinfected  after  
cleaning  and, if possible,  left empty  for a few days. It is important  that 
ewes have ad lib access  to clean  water  at all times  even when  restricted  to 
small pens.
Any lamb  which  has net sucked  colostrum  one to one and a half hours  
after birth should  be fed by stomach  tube. Ewes ’ colostrum  is obviously  
best but as a substitute  cow colostrum  may be used. If possible  this 
should  be collected  from a cow which  has been vaccinated  with a mul­
tiple clostridial  sheep vaccine  before  calving  — 10 ml of the same pre­
paration  as used for the ewes on three occasions,  i.e. three months,  one 
month  and two weeks  before  calving.  It is best to avoid animals  of the 
Channel  Island breeds  as some problems  have been reported  in lambs  
which  have received  colostrum  from certain  animals  of these breeds. As 
a general  rule the amount  of colostrum,  whether  it be from a ewe or a 
cow, required  for a lamb  varies  with the size as follows  :—
Small triplet  
Average  twin 
Large single100 ml 
125 ml 
150 ml
27
To prevent  infections  occurring,  navels  should  be treated  with a strong  
iodine solution  as soon as possible  after birth. As well as acting  as an 
antiseptic  this has astringent  properties  to promote  sealing  of the um­
bilical vessels. The whole navel, including  the junction  with the body,  
should be immersed  in the solution  and allowed  to soak for several  
seconds.
It has been shown that anything  which interferes  with the intake of 
colostrum  is likely to predispose  to watery  mouth and possibly  other  
neonatal  conditions.  Therefore  manipulations  such as castration  and 
docking  by rubber  rings should  be avoided  for as long as possible  and 
certainly  not carried  out within the first two days of life. They must,  
however,  legally  be done within  a week of birth.
Antibiotics  should only be used when required.  In certain circum ­
stances  they provide  the only hope in controlling  diseases  such as watery  
mouth and scours. However,  if used unnecessarily  they allow the 
infectious  organisms  to develop  resistance  to them so that when required  
they are no longer  effective.  Therefore  they should not be used indis ­
criminately  at the start of lambing  but reserved  until first signs of trouble  
are observed.  Thereafter  it may be necessary  to use antibiotics  routinely  
to every lamb bom to try to prevent  some of the diseases.  However,  it 
must be remembered  that there are no substitutes  for good husbandry  
and hygiene.
To increase  numbers  of lambs  reared it is essential  to have adequate  
facilities  for fostering  orphan  lambs  and triplets. While the traditional  
methods  such a using the skin of the foster  ewe ’s dead lamb can be very 
effective,  they are time consuming  and not always  successful,  by far the 
best method  is the use of fostering  pens. In this the ewe is held in a 
neck yoke and not allowed  to smell the lambs  for 48 hours. After this 
time the ewe ’s head is released  and one creep  bar is removed  and the ewe 
and lambs  are left in the pen for a further  24 hours. Ideally  lambs  should 
be a matched  pair, not one strong  lamb  and one weak  triplet.
Perinatal  care is therefore  crucial  for maximising  the number  of lambs  
reared and hence the profitability  of the flock. It must be remembered  
that good feeding,  management  and hygiene  are of paramount  importance  
and should  take precedence  over drug therapy.  There are neither  drugs  
nor vaccines  which  can compensate  for bad husbandry.
28
CBF-lrish  Livestock  
and Meat Board
The link to 
the marhetplace
CBF —The  Irish Livestock  and Meat  
Board,  is the truly  effective  and vitally  
important  link between  the industry  and the 
marketplace.
It continually  monitors  market  potential,  
assists  in market  development  and promotes  
the name  of Irish  cattle,  beef  and lamb  
wherever  there  is a realistic  prospect  of trade.
Through  its offices  in London,  Paris  and 
Dusseldorf,  and by regular  participation  in 
food  fairs  and special  promotions,  CBF  is in 
constant  touch  with  all aspects  of the 
industry,  at home  and abroad.
It is well equipped  to serve  Ireland ’s biggest  
and most  important  industry.
CBF
Irish  Livestock  and Meat  Board,
Clan  will!  am Court,
Lower  Mount  Street, Dublin  2.
Tel. 01-685155  Telex  24440
29
Effect of Calving  Date on Milk  
Production
P. A. GLEESON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Introduction
In Ireland,  about 80% of the manufacturing  milk is delivered  to the 
processing  factories  during the six month period April to September  
inclusive,  resulting  in a constantly  changing  daily volume  of milk being 
processed  with utilisation  of about  52% of plant capacity  (1). Marketing  
difficulties  are also encountered  arising  from the requirements  to store  
large quantities  of products  during  the peak production  season  in order  
to maintain  an orderly  distribution  of product  to the various  outlets  dur­
ing the off-peak  season.
Price  incentives  to influence  the pattern  of milk supply
Until the 1970 ’s, the Irish dairy industry  generally  paid an even price  
for manufacturing  milk throughout  the year and provided  no seasonal  
price incentives.  In contrast,  the liquid milk trade have always  paid 
incentives  for the “out-of-season ” months  to ensure  adequate  milk sup­
plies for consumer  needs during  the winter  months.  In recent  years the 
liquid  milk price has been 97% of the EEC target  price,  while the manu ­
facturing  milk price about 87% of target  (2). The 10% higher  price for 
liquid milk represents  the price required  by farmers  to produce  milk 
during  the winter  months.
The highly seasonal  nature  of manufacturing  milk supplies  imposes 
severe limitations  on the product  mix, as short-life  products  cannot  
generally  be manufactured  due to inadequate  supplies  and/or  chemical  
quality  of winter  milk. During  the last decade  many co-operatives  have 
introduced  price incentives  to increase  milk supplies  during  the winter  
months.  The initial  approach  in most cases  was to offer a bonus  payment  
for milk produced  in January  and February  and in some instances  also 
during  November  and December.  The purpose  of these bonus  payments  
were two-fold;  firstly  extra milk was produced  during  the winter  months  
and secondly  lactation  lengths  of the cows were lengthened,  thus increas ­
ing the overall  yield of the cows. These incentive  schemes  have had 
modest  success  in the last decade.
In more recent  times,  some co-operatives  have introduced  substantial  
bonus  schemes  to encourage  some autumn  calving.  The incentives  range  
from an additional  16-18p/gallon  bonus  on all milk supplied  during  the 
months  of October  to March  inclusive.  This incentive  is paid provided  
the farmer  meets a specific  quota requirement.  Usually  this means  that 
at least 40% of the farmers  total annual  delivery  is supplied  during  the 
months  October-March.  In addition,  most co-operatives  specify  that at 
least 10% of the annual supply is delivered  in November-December.
30
These specifications  arc modified  during  a specified  transitional  period.  
While many co-operatives  introduced  these schemes  in recent years  
there appears  to be less enthusiasm  for these bonus payments  by some 
co-operatives  at present  which may be influenced  by poor monetary  re­
turns from products  manufactured  during  the off-season  months.
Comparison  of three calving  patterns
A study was begun at Moorepark  in 1983 to compare  early and late 
spring  calving  and in addition  a combination  of autumn  and spring  calv­
ing was also studied.  The purpose  of the study is to define  the inputs  
and outputs  of the three different  calving  patterns  and provide  production  
data for the economic  assessment  of the three systems.  The data gener ­
ated will allow ari assessment  of the present  bonus  payments  as they in­
fluence  the financial  returns  form dairying.
Three  herds were established  during  1983 but full lactation  data were  
available  only at the end of 1984 and are presented  in this paper. The 
three calving  patterns  had mean calving  dates of 28 January,  16 March  
and 19 October/ 27 January  for treatments  ES, LS and AS, respectively  
(40 and 60% of herd AS had mean  calving  dates in October  and January,  
respectively).  A total of 78 Friesian  cows balanced  for lactation  number  
were allocated  to the three  treatment  groups.  Each treatment  had its own 
farmlet  of 18 paddocks,  stocked  at 2.90 cows per hectare  and 395 kg N 
per hectare  were applied.  Silage  was conserved  from 8 and 6 paddocks,  
for the first and second  silage cuts, respectively.  The grazing  areas of 
each farmlet  received  18.5 kg P and 37.1 kg K per hectare  in the autumn.  
The cutting  areas received  25 kg P and 111.2 kg K per hectare  in the 
autumn  and a further  17.3 kg P and 74.1 kg K per hectare  after the first 
silage  cut. Slurry  was applied  to all silage  areas  in the autumn.  The silage  
areas were grazed  once in spring  time before  closing  for silage in treat ­
ments ES and AS but were ungrazed  in treatment  LS. Earlier  housing  
in the autumn  and later turnout  in spring  increased  the silage require ­
ments  of the LS treatment,  hence the silage areas were not grazed  in the 
spring. When the silage areas were closed  for first cut silage,  cows had 
access to 10 grazing  paddocks  in each treatment  spending  2 days per 
paddock.  Twelve  paddocks  were available  during  the second  cut silage 
period  and access  time per paddock  was one and a half days. In late July,  
all paddocks  were available  for grazing  with 1 day access  per paddock. ’ 
The chemical  composition  of the silages  made in 1984 and the grass dry 
matter  yields  for silage  are shown  in Table 1.
Concentrate  feeding
In-calf  heifers  and first lactation  cows were fed 1.8 kg of concentrates/  
head/day  in the pre-calving  period. Post calving,  cows were fed 7.3 kg 
of 16% crude protein  concentrate  with ad libitum  access  to grass silage.  
The concentrates  were phased  out after turnout  to pasture  except  for 
treatment  LS where 1.8 kg/head/day  were fed to cows from early Octo ­
ber until the end of lactation.  Concentrates  were fed to all treatments  
from 10 July to 30 August  at 3.2 kg/head/day  due to drought  conditions.
31
Table 1
The chemical  composition  in g/kg DM (unisss  specified)  of silages  and grass dry
matter  yields  for silage
ES LS AS
1st cut 2nd cut 1st cut 2nd cut 1st cut 2nd cut
Dry matter  (g/kg) 228 204 236 202 206 204
Crude  protein 164 141 165 150 172 149
Volatile  N (g/kg TN) 89 75 82 81 93 82
Ash 119 85 100 79 112 77
MAD fibre 302 312 290 312 314 325
DMD 740 690 756 661 737 675
ph 3.84 3.61 3.66 3.62 3.78 3.69
Grass dry matter  
(tonne/ha) 6.94 5.46 7.36 5.16 6.82 5.83
Results
All silages  were well preserved  but dry matter  digestibilities  were higher  
for the first than second  cut silages. The first silage cut for each treat ­
ment was taken on 17 May and the second  cut on 11 July. First cut 
silage yields were increased  in treatment  LS by not grazing  the area 
before  closing  but second  cut yields  were reduced  in this treatment  giving  
similar  overall  yields  for each treatment  for the two cuts.
The lactation  performance  for each treatment  is shown  in Table  2. The 
milk yield of the AS treatment  was higher  than the other  two treatments  
but there was no significant  differences  between  treatments.  Milk fat, 
protein  and lactose  yields were not significantly  different  between  treat ­
ments  but the early spring  calving  group (ES) had a significantly  higher  
fat and lactose  concentration  than the late spring calving  group (LS).
Table 2
Lactation  performance
ES LS AS SE of dif
Milk yield (kg/annum) 4841 4902 5212 233
Peak yield (kg/day) 23.2 25.9 21.3—
Fat yield (kg/annum) 182 175 188 8.3
Fat cone, (g/kg) 37.6 35.8 36.1 0.8
Protein  yield (kg/annum) 164 163 172 6.8
Protein  cone, (g/kg) 33.8 33.4 33.2 0.6
Lactose  yield (kg/annum) 222 221 241 10.4
Lactose  cone, (g/kg) 46.0 45.2 46.3 0.4
Concentrate  (kg/annum) 815 641 1149 75.4
Calf weight  (kg) 38.1 40.0 39.2 1.4
Lactation  length  (days) 295 305 306 —
Calving  to service  interval  (days) 87.3 89.9 91.7 —
U.M.E.  (GJ/ha) 104 111 99 —
32
Concentrate  intakes  differed  significantly  between  treatments  due to calv­
ing date and the length of the concentrate  feeding  period. Calf birth  
weights  and calving  to service  intervals  were similar  for all treatments.
The milk proportions  produced  at periods  during  the year are pre­
sented  in Table  3. ,Table 3
Milk production  profile
ES LS AS
January  - March .28 .11 .29
April - September .65 .73 .55
October  - December .07 .16 .16
Discussion
The results  presented  are for one year only and the study  will be con­
tinued  for a further  two years.
At high stocking  rates it is essential  to obtain  high silage yields for 
adequate  winter  feed. For this reason,  the silage area of the late spring  
calving  herd (LS) was not grazed  before  closing  in spring. First cut silage 
yield was increased  in this treatment  but the yield of the second  cut was 
less than that recorded  for the other two treatments,  thus giving  similar  
overall  yields for the combined  first and second  cuts for all treatments.  
The reduced  yield in the second  cut of the LS group  may be due to the 
high first cut yields and needs further  study during  the next two years  
of the experiments.
The highest  milk production  per cow was achieved  in the AS treatment  
although  lactation  lengths  were similar  for the three calving  patterns.  
Tbe milk yield of the ES and LS treatments  was similar.  The high milk  
yields of the LS treatment  was achieved  by feeding  silage and concen ­
trates  from early October  until the cows finished  their lactations  in Janu ­
ary/February.  In farm practice  late spring  calving  cows dry off in the 
autumn  due to insufficient  feed to maintain  milk production.  Feeding  
silage in early October  is feasable  only if adequate  silage has been con­
served. The additional  feeding  allows cows to have a long lactation  
length of about 300 days. The highest  peak yield was achieved  by the 
LS treatment  and this combined  with a long lactation  length  gave as high 
a milk yield as the ES treatment  with a lower  input  of concentrates.
The pattern  of milk production  over the year has a major influence  
on the price received  for milk. The yield of milk constituents  did not 
differ  between  treatments  but their value was influenced  by the seasonal  
pattern  of their  production  as influenced  by milk bonus  schemes  operated  
by the co-operatives.  Milk fat and lactose  concentrations  were signifi ­
cantly  lower  in the late spring  versus  the early spring  group.
The level of concentrates  fed to each group  reflected  the calving  pat­
tern. In 1984, 162 kg of concentrates  was fed to each group  due to the 
drought  condition  prevailing  during  July and August  of that year. A 
lower UME value was obtained  by the AS group due to the higher  
element  of concentrates  in their diet.
33
The data on the milk production  profiles  in Table 3 show the high 
proportion  of milk produced  by the LS group during  April-September  
and in addition  milk production  was sustained  during  October-December.  
The AS treatment  produced  45% of total production  between  October-  
March  and would  qualify  for the winter  calving  bonus  schemes  operated  
by some co-operatives.  The ES treatment  had produced  93% of their  
total production  by the end of September.
Financial  implications
The milk production  patterns  influenced  the milk receipts  of the three  
calving  groups. Higher  input costs were incurred  by the AS and ES 
groups  due to extra concentrate  feeding  when compared  with LS group.  
In all treatments  replacements  were costed at £510. Cull cows were 
valued  at £300 in January,  rising to £400 in July and falling  to £320 in 
December.  Spring-bom  calves were priced at £130 and £75 for male  
and female,  respectively  for those born in January  and February  and at 
£120 and £65 in March. Autumn  born calves were priced at £145 for 
males  and £85 for females.
Milk was priced  at 15.6 p/kg (73.0 p/gal)  for 3.60%  fat. A milk bonus  
of 1.5 p/kg (7 p/gal)  was added  to milk delivered  in January  and 1.71 p/ 
kg (8 p/gal)  in February  for treatments  ES and LS. A bonus  of 3.4 p/kg  
(16 p/gal)  was added  to milk delivered  from October  to March  inclusive 
for treatment  AS. Milk price was adjusted  each month  in relation  to its 
fat content. Concentrates  were costed at 17.6 p/kg for all treatments.
Table 4
Variable,  fixed and depreciation  costs — £/cow
ESTreatment
LS AS
Variable  costs
Concentrates 158 127 221
Fertilisers  and lime 98 98 98
Replacements 106 107 106
Machinery  hire 6 6 6
Silage 42 42 42
Vet., medicine,  AT 20 20 20
(P/gal) 430 (37.1) 400 (33.9) 493 (40.0)
Fixed  costs
Car and insurance 37 37 37
Electricity  and phone 28 28 28
Machinery  operation 87 87 87
(p/gal) 152 (13.1) 152 (12.9) 152 (12.4)
Depreciation  charges
Machinery 43 43 43
Buildings 41 41 41
(p/gal) 84 (7.2) 84 (7.1) 84 (6.8)
Total costs (p/gal) 666 (57.4) 636 (53.9) 729 (59.2)
34
The variable,  fixed, depreciation  and total costs/cow  are presented  
in Table  4. All variable,  fixed and depreciation  costs were the same for 
each treatment  except  for concentrate  costs which  varied  according  to the 
calving  pattern. These costs excluded  labour,  repayments  on borrowed  
capital  and income  tax liabilities.  The receipts  minus  variable,  fixed and 
depreciation  costs are shown  in Table 5. Interest  earned  on cash flow 
was also included  to calculate  net profit  per cow but excluded  labour  and 
repayments  on borrowed  capital.
The late-spring  (LS) calving  treatment  had the lowest  production  costs 
but due to lower milk price and yield had a lower net margin  than the 
autumn/spring  treatment  (AS). To maintain  the highest  net margin,  the 
AS treatment  required  the bonus  of 16 p/gallon  for milk produced  during  
October  to March  inclusive.  There  was no difference  in the net margins  
between  the ES and LS treatments  even though  the ES treatment  received 
a higher  milk price it was offset  by higher  concentrate  costs.
Table 5
Financial  costs and returns  — f/cow
ESTreatments
LS AS
Milk sales 848 837 955
p/gal (net) 72.3 70.2 77.6
Livestock  sales 170 170 175
Total receipts 1018 1007 1130
Variable,  fixed and depreciation  casts 666 637 730
Interest  earned 19 10 21
Net profit 371 380 421
Conclusions
The first year results  of a long term study are presented  on the effect  
of date of calving  on milk output  for creamery  milk production.  The 
experiment  compared  early and late spring calving  and in addition  a 
combination  of autumn  and spring  calving  was also studied.  Similar milk  
outputs  were achieved  for each treatment  group but the proportion  of 
total yield produced  varied  during  the year and this influenced  the price  
received  due the bonus payments  paid by the Co-Operatives.  Eligher 
feed costs were associated  with autumn/spring  and early spring  calving 
groups  and must be taken into consideration  in any milk pricing  policy.
References
1. Keane,  M. (1980).  Economic  aspects  of seasonality.  Seasonality  of milk supply 
in the Irish airy dairy industry.  Dairy Industry  Technical  Study Group  Series  
No. 14, An Foras Taluntais.
2. Keane,  M. and Lucy, D. I. F. (1984). The UK liquid milk sector and the 
Common  Agricultural  Policy. Agribusiness  Discussion —Paper No. 2. Dept,  
of Dairy & Food Economics,  U.C.C.
35
Factors  Effecting  Herbage  Intake  
of Cows
G. A. STAKELUM
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Introduction
Maximising  the grass and silage component  of the total annual feed 
intake  of the dairy cow improves  the profitability  of the milk production  
enterprise.  Such factors  as silage  quantity  and quality,  early spring  grass, 
low concentrate  Inputs  and good grassland  management  help to achieve 
this aim.
The cow ’s requirement  for nutrients  is determined  principally  by such 
factors  as milk yield, stage of lactation,  metabolic  size and condition  
(degree  of fatness).  At pasture,  however,  a variety  of sward  and manage ­
ment  factors  operate  to effect  the herbage  intake  of the cow.
Sward  factors
The main sward  factors  which  effect  the intake  of the gazing  dairy  cow 
are digestibility  of the herbage,  the mass and spatial  distribution  of the 
herbage  and the species  of plants  present  in the sward.
Sward  mass
The effect of sward mass on intake  was examined  in two trials in the 
spring  and summer  of 1984 at Moorepark.  Table  1 outlines  the digestibility  
of the sward  grazed  by the cows in both spring  and summer.  The digest ­
ibility figures  refer to the top and bottom  of the grazed horizon.  The 
primary  spring sward showed  no differentiation  in digestibility  as the 
animals  grazed  down  the horizon  in contrast  to the summer  sward  which 
was very much depressed  in digestibility  as the animals  grazed  closer  to 
ground  level.
Table 1
Digestibility  of the grazed  horizon  of the sward  (OIVlD%)
Spring Sumer
Top of sward 82.0 76.0
Bottom  of sward 81.0 65.0
Average 81.5 70.5
Tables  2 and 3 outline  the intakes  of the  various  groups  of cows  for the 
spring  and summer  periods  respectively.  Increased  herbage  mass in both 
seasons  increased  intake  of herbage  especially  at high herbage  allowance. 
The increased  intake with increased  herbage  mass was associated  with 
increased  rates of herbage  utilisation  reflecting  the fact that the spatial
36
distribution  (particularly  height  of sward)  was now more favourable  for 
ease of prehension  by the animal. The much reduced  intakes  at high 
herbage  allowance  with low herbage  mass is considered  significant  as it 
clearly demonstrates  that although  effective  stocking  rate (herbage  
allowance)  may be adjusted  in a practical  situation  due to scarcity  of 
herbage,  restricted  herbage  intake could still result due to the aerial  
distribution  of the herbage.
Table 2
Daily intake (kg organic  matter/head)  of cows grazing  two contrasting  herbage  
masses  (kg organic  matter/ha)  at two daily herbage  allowances  (kg dry matter/
head) in spring
2900Herbage  mass
3500
Allowance
16
24
( ) % utilisation11.8 (88) 
14.7 (73)12.6 (93)
16.2 (77)
Table 3
Daily intake (kg organic  matter/head)  of cows grazing  two contrasting  herbage  
masses  (kg organic  matter/ha)  at two daily herbage  allowances  (kg dry matter/
head)  in summer.
3500Herbage  mass
4600
Allowance
16
24
( ) % utilisation11.6 (79)
13.6 (62)12.5 (85)
16.6 (76)
Concentrate  feeding
Responses  in milk production  from concentrate  feeding  of cows at 
pasture  has generally  been poor and uneconomical.  It is widely  reported  
in the literature  that concentrate  feeding  reduces  herbage  intake but 
there is little information  in the case of grazing  cows at very high stock ­
ing rates (low herbage  intake).  Experiments  were conducted  in 1983 and 
1984 to examine  the effect of grazing  dairy cows in spring,  summer  and 
autumn  at high and low herbage  allowances.  Table 4 shows  the effects  
of concentrate  feeding  at high daily herbage  allowance  (24 kg herbage  
dry matter).
The concentrate  consisted  of a barley  molasses  nut (95 : 5) and was 
fed daily at 3.2, 3.6 and 3.8 kg organic  matter  per head in spring,  summer  
and autumn  respectively.  The concentrate  increased  total intake in all 
seasons  but with a much  reduced  herbage  intake. The herbage  intake  for
37
Table  4
The effect  of concentrate  feeding  on daily herbage  intake  (kg organic  matter/head)  
at high herbage  allowance
Spring
Summer
AutumnHerbage  intake 
Grass  only Grass + Cone.Total intake
Grass + Cone.
16.2
16.6
16.914.1
14.1
15.017.8
17.8
18.2Replaeement
rate
0.57
0.67
0.59
the grass only groups  was high. The results indicate  very substantial  
replacement  of concentrate  for herbage  at high herbage  intake.
Table  5 shows  the effect  of concentrates  at low daily  herbage  allowance  
(16 kg of herbage  dry matter).  Concentrates  again  reduced  herbage  intake  
but by a much smaller  amount.  The replacement  rates were about half 
of those found in the previous  case. The existence  of substitution  rates  
of this degree  at these low intakes is surprising.  Smaller  substitution  rates  
may be the case with higher  yielding  cows. However,  the principal  result  
is that substitution  of concentrates  for grass occurs  regardless  of season  
(sward  type) and its magnitude  depends  upon the level of herbage  intake.
Table 5
The effect  of concentrate  feeding  on daily herbage  intake  (kg organic  matter/head)  
at low daily herbage  allowance
Herbage  intake 
Grass  only Grass + Cone.Total intake
Grass + Cone. Replaeement
rate
Spring
Summer
Autumn12.6 11.4 14.9
12.5 11.0 14.7
12.8 12.0 15.20.34
0.40
0.28
Factors  of animal  origin
Previous  work at Moorepark  found that lactating  pregnant  cows con­
sumed 22% more herbage  than pregnant  dry cows. However,  with 
lactating  animals,  the level of milk production  and the stage of lactation  
have a substantial  effect  on the intake  of nutrients.  Peak intake  of dairy  
cows lags behind peak milk yield. High producing  dairy cows do not 
reach peak intake  until 100 days post-calving.  Information  sugges^  mat 
the lag between  peak intake and peak yield may be longer  with hrst 
lactation  than with other  animals  and shorter  with  low yielders  compared  
to high yielders.
The relationship between  level of milk production  and intake  is difficult  
to define  as the effects  on milk production  due to lactation  stage and the
38
The  AIB Guide  
to Farm  Finance  gives  
you  a heiping  hand.
In the farming  business,  an extra 
helping  hand  is always  welcome  
—particularly  when  you’re 
dealing  with a specialist  area like 
farm finance.
That ’s why  you need  the Al B 
Guide  to Farm Finance —a 
concise  and practical  guide  to 
efficient  financial  managementonyourfarm.  In it you’ll find very 
useful guidelines  on farm 
accounting,  planning  and many  
other  subjects  relevant  to your 
livelihood:  plus information  on the 
various  financial  services  and 
grants  available  to farmers.
Pick up your  copy  of this vital 
booklet  at any branch  of Allied  
Irish Banks.
Fora  betterfuture  on  yourfarm
effects  on milk production  due to genetical  factors  are often confounded  
in experiments.  Additionally,  when cows are fed according  to yield it is 
difficult  to construct  relationships  between  yield and intake. Metabolic  
size and liveweight  are highly  correlated  and at comparable  degrees  of 
fatness  large cows  eat more  food than small  cows.  The degree  of increased  
feed intake  with increasing  size depends  on the source  of feed (roughage 
concentrate  ratio or mixed  diets).
An experiment  carried  out at Moorepark  in 1984 examined  some of 
animals ’ factors  which determine  the herbage  intake of stall-fed  cows.  
Four feeding  periods  of twelve  days in duration  were used. The sward  
was composed  mainly  of perennial  ryegrass  and white  clover  and herbage  
was cut fresh each day of each feeding  period and fed indoors  to tbe 
cows. The intake  and digestibility  of the herbage  were measured.  Cutting  
and feeding  took place in spring,  early summer,  late summer  and autumn.  
Herbage  was fed to 10 large and 10 small cows balanced  for lactation  
number,  calving  date, current  milk yield and degree  of fatness.  Herbage  
was fed additionally  to four milking  cows to measure  the in vivo digest ­
ibility  of the cut herbage.  Average  liveweights  over the feeding  periods  
were 570 and 510 kg for the large and small frame size cows respectively. 
This difference  in bodyweight  was reflected  in a large difference  in the 
height  and length  of the cows. The large category  were on average  139 
cm in height  and 130 cm in length. Average  lactation  number  was 5 and 
average  calving  date was the end of January.
Table 6 outlines  the composition  of the herbage  fed during  the four 
feeding/cutting  periods.  The crude protein  content  of the primary  spring 
cut was very low. Ash and dry matter  content  were variable  but the small  
range in ash content  reflected  the drier than normal  weather  conditions  
in 1984.
Table 6
Composition  of the cut herbage  (g/kg)
Cutting  period
S ES LS A
Dry matter 203.0 175.0 220.0 155.2
Ash 84.0 113.6 108.6 91.5
Crude  protein 136.2 180.2 183.9 204.2
MAD-flbre 214.2 298.7 250.3 262.0
Tn-vivo ’ DMD 784.5 768.6 695.5 766.3
Tn-vivo ’ 821.8 798.1 750.3 801.2
S = Spring;  ES = Early Summer;  LS = Late Summer;  A = Autumn
The digestibility  values showed  very similar  trends to those found  
previously  in other cutting  and feeding  experiments  at Moorepark.  The 
primary  spring  sward  was very high in quality  and progressively  declined 
throughout  the summer  and recovered  somewhat  in the autumn.
40
Table 7
Total  milk production  characteristics  (kg) of the two groups  of cows  
(compositional  percentage  in brackets)
Large category  (C) Small category  (Cj)
Milk
Fat
Protein
Lactose4262
155 (3.64)  
146 (3.43)  
196 (4.60)4244
154 (3.63)  
153 (3.61)  
191 (4.50)
Prcduction  of milk and milk constituents  was similar  for both groups  
of cows except  that the small cows yielded  slightly  more protein  and 
lactose  due to higher  protein  and lactose  percent  in the milk. Daily  milk  
production  during  the feeding  periods  was similar  for both groups  and 
averaged  20.0, 17.0, 14.0 and 10.0 kg of milk/cow  for spring, eaily  
summer,  late summer  and autumn  respectively.
Table 8
Daily  intake  of nutrients  per animal  over the season
Feeding  periods
S ES LS A
Dry matter  (kg) 16.7 17.3 16.9 16.2
Organic  matter  (kg) 
Digestible  organic15.3 15.3 15.0 14.7
matter  (kg) 12.6 12.2 11.3 11.8
Digestible  energy  (MJ) 230.2 237.7 220.7 221.8
Feeding  periods  S, ES, LS, A as per Table 6
Intakes  over the four feeding  periods  for both groups  are shown  in Table  
8. Peak intake  of dry matter  and digestible  energy  was achieved  in June  
(120 days approximately  from calving).  Intakes  of organic  matter  and 
digestible  organic  matter were modified  due to ash content  and dig­
estibility.
Table 9
Daily intake of nutrients/cow  for both large (C.) and small cows (CJ
Feeding  period
ES LS
c, c. c, c. c, C3 c, C,
Dry matter  (kg) 17.0 16.3 17.5 17.1 17.0 16.7 16.6 15.7
Organic  matter  (kg) 15.6 15.0 15.5 15.1 15.1 14.8 15.1 14.3
Organic  matter/ 100 kg 
Liveweight  (kg) 2.85 3.01 2.78 2.98 2.64 2.87 2.61 2.77
Digestible  energy  (MJ) 235.0 225.4 240.1 234.4 222.7 218.7 227.8 215.8
Feeding  periods  S, ES, LS. A as per Table 6
41
Table 9 shows that over all the feeding  periods  the large cows con­
sumed  0.5 kg of dry matter  and 8 MJ digestible  energy  more than the 
smaller  cows. However,  the small cows consumed  more herbage  per unit 
of metabolic  size than the large cows. The differences  in intakes  were  
small in all cases  and amounted  to about  0.8 kg dry matter  per extra 100 
kg liveweight  above  500 kg.
The ranges  in intake  between  cows within  a given category  were quite  
large reflecting  the wide spread  of calving  dates and level of milk yield.  
An example  of this for dry matter  intake  is shown  in Table 10.
Table 10
Ranges  of daily milk yield and intake  of dry matter  (kg) for both categories
of cows
Period Milk yield Intake
S 25.0 - 10.8 20.4 - 13.7
ES 22.8 - 9.2 20.4 - 13.4
LS 18.5 - 7.2 19.4 - 12.4
A 15.8 - 4.3 18.8 - 10.5
The range in milk yield was 13 kg per day while the range in intakes  
was 7 kg per day. These ranges  show that within a herd some cows  
consume  about  50% less feed than other cows. This assumes  a random  
spread of milk yields around  the mean. The average  increase  in dry 
matter  intake  for each one kilogram  increase  in daily milk yield was 0.35.  
An extension  of this work has commenced  in 1985 with the assembly  of 
a high yielding  herd of cows in order to measure  their maximum  intake  
of a high concentrate  to roughage  ration over the whole year and to 
compare  this to the maximum  intake  achievable  with a similar  group  of 
cows on unrestricted  herbage  during  the grazing  season  and conventi(^nal  
silage/concentrate  rations  indoors  prior to turn cut.
CondusioRS
1. Sward mass (kg organic  matter/ha)  has a significant  effect on the 
herbage  intake of grazing  dairy cows. Reduction  in herbage  intake  
occurs  at low sward mass even though  herbage  allowance  may be 
liberal.
2. Concentrate  feeding  to grazing  dairy cows depresses  their herbage  
intake. The magnitude  of the depression  depends  on the level of 
herbage  intake which in turn is largely determined  by herbage  
allowance.  Substantial  replacement  of herbage  by concentrate  occurs  
even at low levels  of herbage  intake.
3. Milk  yield and liveweight  differences  account  for significant  differences 
in herbage  intake between  cows, 0.8 kg dry matter  intake/ 100 kg 
liveweight  above 500 kg and 0.35 kg of intake  for each additional  1 
kg increase  in milk yield.
42
Do it Yourself  Artificial  Insemination  
(DIY AI)
K. J. OTARRELL
The Agricultural Institute.  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
The recent  introduction  of legislation  allowing  the use of “do it yourself ” 
Insemination  (DIY AI) by farmers  for use in their own herds,  has stimu ­
lated considerable  Interest. Already  after only one season  of training  
courses  the Department  of Agriculture  has received  100 applications  for 
licences.  From the dairy farmer ’s point  of view there are several  reasons  
why he might  wish to become  involved  in DIY AI. These  reasons  are :
1. Better  timing  of AI;
2. Convenience;
3. Improving  conception  rates;
4. Disease  control;
5. Costs.
While some of these reasons  are more valid than others,  all should be 
considered  carefully  before  making  the final decision.
1. Better  timing  of AI
In the dairy cow ovulation  occurs 26 to 32 hours after heat onset  
(Hafez,  1980). The fertile life of the ovum lasts for approximately  24 
hours and the spermatozoa  have a fertile life span of approximately  30 
to 48 hours. However  it is suggested  that optimal  fertility  is achieved  
when insemination  takes place 6 to 24 hours  before  ovulation.  This in­
formation  is of little value to the dairy farmer  since he has no means  of 
knowing  when this will occur. On the other  hand it has been suggested 
that optimal  fertility  will be obtained  if inseminations  are performed  12 
to 24 hours after heat onset. In those herds where  frequent  heat obser ­
vations  are made during  the day it would  be possible  to be reasonably  
accurate  as to when  heat onset  began. However  since 50% of heats  occur  
in the period 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. it is much more difficult  to be precise. 
Bull fertility  has also an important  affect on time insemination  since it 
has been shown  that high fertility  bulls are less affected  by early post 
oestrous  inseminations  than low fertility  bulls. The difference  in fertility  
appears  to be related  to sperm  livability  with the high fertility  bulls pro­
ducing  semen  with longer  viability.
2. Convenience
In addition  to possibly  providing  a better  timed  AI service,  DIY AI is 
also more convenient.  It avoids  having  to hold in cows for quite pro­
43
longed  periods  of time and also reduces  any associated  stress  which  may 
have a detrimental  effect  on fertility.
3. Improving  conception  rates
With the possibility  of better  timing  of AI through  using DIY the in­
ference  is that conception  rates will be improved  relative  to the commer ­
cial AI service. While there are little published  data available  on direct  
comparisons  between  DIY AI and the commercial  service,  what informa ­
tion is available  would suggest  that fertility  on average  is reduced. A 
comparison  of DIY AI and the inseminator  service  in the UK showed 
that more services  were required  per conception  and more cows failed  
to conceive,  as a result of DIY AI (Lamont  and Foulkes,  1981). AI 
technician  and dairy men insemination  comparisons  in the US have also 
shown  similar  results. On average  it would  appear  that conception  rates  
to DIY AI are 10 to 15% lower  than to commercial  AI. However  some 
farmers  may get better results  but in general  fertility  levels would tend 
to drop.
Another  reason  why fertility  on average  would  tend to dis-improve  is 
because  there is no standard  set for DIY AI. The DIY training  pro­
gramme  which costs £170 provides  training,  a booklet,  and a certificate  
but no evaluation  of skill or competence  is made. Thus the licence  only 
means  that the person  has gone through  a training  course  and is now 
licenced  to practice  DIY AI in their own herd. Since no evaluation  is 
made or standard  set during  this course,  it is likely that people  who are 
totally  incompetent  at the technique  will obtain  licences.  Thus the likeli ­
hood of conception  rates improving  as a result of converting  to DIY AI 
would  seem to be fairly  remote  for some farmers.
4. Disease  control
While  disease  control  would  not be one of the main reasons  for con­
verting  to DIY AI, it would  be advantageous  in a situation  where  move ­
ment was restricted  due to disease  control  regulations.  The possibility  
of disease  being introduced  to a farm by an AI operator  is also possible  
but very remote. What danger  exists in this regard could be removed 
through  going  to DIY AI.
5. Costs
The major reason  for converting  to DIY AI would be the potential  
savings  in economic  terms. The current  commercial  AI fee of £11 in­
cludes  the first service  and two free repeats,  but semen is extra, except 
for bull of the day and for some beef bulls. Thus the average  cost of a 
nominated  service  for commercial  and DIY AI is £19 and £8 respectively. 
For bull of the day and beef bulls the cost for commercial  AI and DIY 
AI is £11 and £3 respectively.  Taking  a 100 cow herd, 1.65 services  per 
pregnancy  and where  50% of inseminations  are nominated,  20% bull of
44
the day, and 30% to beef bulls, the relative  costs of commercial  AI and 
DIY Al are calculated  in Table 1. The capital  costs of the DIY course  
and the nitrogen  container  is £150 and a years supply  of liquid  nitrogen  
is included  + £100 per year. The costs per cow in calf for commercial  
AI and DIY AI are £18.44  and £11.52  respectively.  This saving  of £7 
is substantial  but is only true if existing  pregnancy  rates are maintained  
by changing  to DIY AI.
Table 1
Comparative  costs of commercial  AI and DIY Al in a ICO cow herd with 50%  
nominated  semen (£19), 20% bull of the day (£11) and 30% beef sires (£11).
(Assuming  1.65 services/pregnancy).
Commercial  AI DIY AI
£ £
50% nominated 1250 656
20% bull of the day 242 99
30% beef sires 352 147
SUB TOTAL 1844 902
Capital  Costs
Course  and container
(depreciated  over 5 years) 150
Nitrogen  supply/year 100
TOTAL 1844 1152
Cost/cow  in calf £18.44 £11.52
If on the other hand, as seems  to be the more likely case, a 10% fall 
in fertility  occurs,  the costs per cow in calf including  milking  days lost 
as a result of later calving  is almost  £22 (Table  2). Thus DIY AI costs  
an extra  £3 per cow in calf over the commercial  service.  In this situation,  
the other reasons  mentioned  for converting  to DIY AI would hardly  
justify  this additional  cost.
One of the other  factors  which  must be considered,  especially  for those  
dairy farmers  serviced  by the Munster  Cattle Breeding  Society,  is the 
loss of the fresh semen  service.  This fresh semen  service  provides  semen  
from the top quality  dairy bulls during the peak breeding  months  at 
relatively  low cost. This is something  which  has not been included  in the 
initial comparative  costs of the two systems.  The final decision  as to 
whether  a farmer  should  convert  to DIY AI depends  on his herd size and 
whether  he would be capable  of maintaining  current  conception  rates.  
For those farmers  who have the technical  skill and expertise  necessary  
for good AI, the benefits  would be substantial  but for those who lack 
ability,  the costs would be prohibitive.  An assessment  of a farmer ’s 
potential  skill as an AI operator  should  be made at the end of the train ­
45
ing programme  and rated against  a set standard.  Only those fanners  
who achieve  this standard  should  consider  converting  to DIY insemina ­
tion service.
Table 2
Comparative  costs of commercial  Al and DIY AI in a 100 cow herd (as in Table  
1) except  with a 10% drop in conception  rate for DIY AI (1.65 services  per
conception  versus  1.82)
Commercial  Al DIY AI
£ £
50% nominated 1250 720
20% bull of day 242 109
30% beef sires 352 162
SUB TOTAL 1844 991
Capital  Costs (Table 1)250
Milking  days lost
(630 days @ 2 gals./day  x 0.75p/gal.) 945
TOTAL 1844 2186
Cost/cow  in calf £18.44 £21.86
References
Lamont,  P. H. and Foulkes.  J. A. (1981).  Bovine  Infertility.  Vet. Rcc. 1, 41.
Hafez,  E. S. E. (1980). Reproduction  in Farm Animals.  Lea and Febiger,  Phila ­
delphia,  4th Edition.
46
t
• Three-quarters  of your 
calcium  needs
• One-third  of your protein  
requirements
• Many  vitamins
• Several  minerals
• A major  contribution  to 
daily energy  and vitality
• An important  part of a 
balanced  diet
• A cool refreshing  drink
nricWATER  • PROTEIN  • 
FAT®  CARBOHYDRATE*  
CHOLESTEROL  • 
SODIGM  • 
POTASSIUM  • 
MAGNESIUM  IRON • 
ZINC • CALCIUM  • 
PHOSPHOROUS  • 
THIAMIN  •
I RIBOFLAVIN  •
I FOLIC  ACID  •
VITAMIN  B,2 • 
VITAMIN  A • 
^^TAMIN  D
National  Dairy Council  Infornnation  Centre  on Nutrition  & Health  
Grattan  House,  Lower  Mount  Street.  Dublin  2.
47
Financial  Management  on Dairy  Farms  
-The  Weak  Link?
P. McFEELY
Bank  of Ireland,  Regional  Office,  Wexford.
Financial  management  is as important  in farming  as in any other  
business.
It is primarily  of importance  to the farmer  himself,  whether  or not he 
has any borrowings,  to facilitate  an accurate  appraisal  of the current  
state of his business  and to help him plan the future  effectively.
Most business  people,  and especially  dairy farmers,  that 1 have met 
are hard-working.  However,  not all dairy farmers  have been successful.  
Therefore,  the first point I wish to emphasise  is that the ability  to work  
hard should  not be confused  with the ability  to manage  a farm business  
successfully.  There  is a German  saying,  ‘All intelligent  people  are lazy . 
The intelligent  lazy manger  gets the maximum  output  from the minimum  
hours and he exploits  the time that he is not ‘working ’ by using the 
intelligence  which  won him the time; in other words  he thinks. As pu 
think you will demand,  and ultimately  provide,  the essential  ingredient  
for managing  a successful  business  — INFORMATION.  Provision  of 
information  begins  with accurate  record-keeping  or as a visiting  speaker
(1) at a previous  Grassland  meeting  put it — ‘a short pencil  is better  than 
a long memory ’. Cheque  books should  be used to record all payment  
transactions  and all receipts  should be lodged to individual  customer  
bank accounts;  the true business  turnover  can be confirmed  in these 
circumstances.
Let us examine  briefly  the farm business.  However  large and diverse 
(in terms of enterprise  mix) your dairy farm is, it ultimately  reduces  to 
OUTPUT  and INPUT  terms. The successful  manager  is the one who 
consistently  maximises  the difference  between  the two sides of the 
equation.  This difference  is the ultimate  aim of any business,  i.e. to 
make adequate  CASH  PROFIT  to meet essential  commitments  such as : 
living  expenses,  interest/repayments,  savings,  re-investment  and taxation.  
The need for greater  efficiency  in terms  of cost control  is more necessary 
than ever in a Super  Levy environment,  hence  the relevance  of improved  
financial  management.  Skills such as farm planning,  cash flow control,  
and the keeping  of detailed  management  records  form a package  which 
the dairy farmer  of today  needs  to identify  increased  profitability  oppor ­
tunities. Unfortunately  too often in the past these were regarded  as 
unnecessary  and the emphasis  was exclusively  on technical  coefficients.  
Many  dairy farmers  seem to excuse  the absence  of financial  information  
by suggesting  they have a ‘feel’ for the way the business  is going.
48
Typical  profile  of a difficult  farming  account
1. Absence  of Records  and/or  Milk Statement  not used effectively.
2. No recent  Farm Accounts.
Accounts  are important  to the farmer  (businessman)  because  they 
show :
(i) The financial  strength  of the business  at the time of preparation  
of Accounts —Balance  Sheet;
(ii) The trading  performance  over whatever  period the Accounts  
cover,  i.e. Profit  and Loss Statement.
(iii) Quantification  of fixed costs and drawings.  Fixed costs usually  
range from £50/£100  per acre owned (excluding  non-family  
labour  and con-acre).
3. Absence  of any Farm Plan.
Most dairy farmers  have not taken farm planning  seriously  and more  
often than not they perceive  it as a necessary  evil to keep Bank  
Managers  satisfied  . However,  in other  situations  problems  have arisen  
despite  preparation  of Farm Plans due largely  to inadequate  expen ­
diture  control.
4. Failure  to monitor  progress  and react. Examples  would  be :
(a) Inadequate  control  of costs,  e.g. over-feeding,  inflated  machinery  
running  costs,  etc.
(b) Changed  circumstances  which  may require  adjustment  in or even 
drastic  revision  of what  was originally  a soundly  based plan,  e.g. 
Super  Levy.
(c) Low retention  of profits  in easily realisable  assets,  e.g. stock vs. 
concrete.
5. Unbudgeted  expenditure  from cash flow :
(a) Inclusion  of extra development  work which was not part of an 
original  Farm Plan, e.g. erection  of a 100-space  cubicle shed 
rather than a 60-space  and additional  yard concrete  / slurry ac­
commodation.
(b) Change  of car/machinery  without  proper  appraisal  resulting  in a 
shortage  of working  capital  or the emergence  of a hard core in 
the overdraft.
(c) Construction  of new dwelling  house or substantial  extension  to 
original  without  appropriate  financing  arrangements.
6. Misuse  of sanctioned  funds :
Loan used for purpose  other than that requested,  e.g. Stocking  Loan  
used to discharge  undisclosed  creditors.
7. Dispensation  with the rules of logic and economics,  e.g. expectation  
that milk yield will improve  by 200 gallons  per cow within  one year 
despite  the fact that silage quality,  herd composition,  and calving  
patterns  were to remain  essentially  unchanged.
49
8. Drawings :
These have to be related  to the stage of development  and the profit 
margins  being  generated  on the farm. The German  standard  of living,  
however  desirable,  may not be possible  on Irish farming  margins.
9. Split Financing  ;
Loans  from several  sources,  e.g. Bank,  A.C.C.,  Co-Op,  Merchant,  H.P. 
Company,  etc.
In many cases, at any given time, the farmer  simply  did not know 
how much money  he owed and to whom. Strict Current  Account  
control  and/or  refusal  to sanction  further  funds  by the Bank has too 
often in Ireland  been interpreted  by individual  dairy farmers  as a 
restriction  on their ‘spirit of independence ’. Instead  of pausing  to 
examine  whether  such a negative  response  might  validly  represent  an 
accurate  assessment  of their repayment  position  they have sought  
further  finance  from whatever  source  and sometimes  at substantially  
higher  cost.
Cash  flow forecasting
A Cash Flow Projection  is simply  a Statement  setting  out the expected  
cash receipts  and payments  for a future  period. A Cash Flow disregards  
all non-cash  elements,  e.g. stock changes.  It not only projects  the 
amount  of cash required  over the year but more importantly  it identifies 
the seasonal  flow pattern  which  can provide  the following  information  .
(1) An indication  whether  there are any periods  where cash may be 
scarce  or run out.
(2) Confirmation  of Overdraft  required  or ether seasonal  financial 
needs. Most farmers  under  estimate  the difficulty  of accurately  
planning  their financial  requirements.
(3) Aid to proper  Planning  of Capital  Expenditure  Programme,  e.g. 
indication  of a cash shortage  early in the season  would suggest  
deferral  of equipment  purchase  until later or alternatively  the 
need for a loan to cover such requirement.
(4) Indication  of surplus  which  can be used for any necessary  capital  
expenditure  or to take advantage  of discounts  from suppliers  for 
immediate  payment.
(5) Confirmation  to Lending  Institution  of customer  who is on ‘top 
of the job’, thereby  improving  credit rating.
(6) Facilitates  comparison  between  projected  and actual  performance.  
On a monthly  basis this is the most effective  financial  control  
mechanism  available  to any dairy farmer.
As a means  of spotting  trouble,  the measurement  of cash flow is vital. 
Despite  the fact that dairying  is a relatively  strong  cash-flow  business  the 
periods  of major  inflow  are not synchronised  with the periods  of major  
outflow.
50
The amount  of information  sought  by a bank is sometimes  claimed  to 
discourage  the potential  borrower.  He may feel that the preparation  of 
a detailed  submission  is a waste  of management  time. If a farmer  cannot  
provide  all the requested  information  for his Bank Manager  easily,  then 
the Manager  knows  that the farmer  cannot  provide  it easily  for himself — 
he does not know all that he should  about  running  his own business.  It 
is information  the farmer  should  know. If it takes time to uncover  all 
the details,  then it is time well spent. Dairy farmers  can no longer  leave 
their financial  planning  to their local branch  managers.  Failure  to dis­
charge  fully a seasonal  loan which  may relate to fertiliser/feed  purchase  
and/or  stock retention  and an evident  build-up  of hard core overdrafts  
should  be recognised  as at least a hiccup  in the business.  Early  questions  
/answers  on the reasons  are a more sensible  approach  to dealing  with a 
potential  problem  which may not go away. Reluctance  to face up to 
impeding  financial  difficulties  often leads  to friction  and misunderstanding  
between  dairy farmers  and their lending  institutions,  partly because  “by 
the nature  of their work,  bankers  must reduce  everything  to figures.  They  
are made uneasy  by factors  which  cannot  be measured ”. (2)
Regular  communicaticn  is the key to a good working  relationship  
between  a farmer  and his Bank Manager.  Some  farmers tend to the view 
that the less they meet the bank the better. This is a mistaken  approach.  
In communication  terms it is even more important  that there should  be 
a strong  family  involvement  in the farm business  — this is a feature  of 
successful  dairy farms  and the converse  is true of problem  cases in many  
of the latter we have found that wives had not been aware of the full 
extent  of the financial  situation  until a crisis  had arisen.
Financial  analysis
In this section  I have summarised  three large dairy farm situations  
where  farm accounts  were available.  The financial  information  has been  
extracted  selectively  to illustrate  profit performance  over a 3-year  period  
and to examine  certain  ratios which can assist in an evaluation  of the 
financial  stability  of the farms. The adjusted  profit  is defined  as net profit  
+ interest  + depreciation,  i.e. cash flow. Current  assets  consist  largely  of 
livestock  but valuations  differ somewhat  due to accounting  treatment  
between  farms.
Farm 1 would represent  an acceptable  debt : disposable  asset ratio in 
the context  of a well-managed  farm. On the other hand. Farms  2 & 3 
are over-borrowed  and represent  high risk lending  situations  on the basis  
of this ratio. However,  top efficiency  has enabled  Farm 2 to meet com­
mitments.  The interest : G.F.I. ratio comparisons  similarly  indicate  the 
marked  contrast  between  Farm 1 and the other two. Generally,  an 
interest : G.F.I. ratio of 20% upwards  rings the warning  bells whereas  
10% would  be a comfortable  situation.  The gross profit  margin  indicates  
the proportion  of total output  absorbed  by direct (variable)  costs, i.e. 
the higher  the ratio the better  the efficiency  on the farm.
51
EXTRACTS  FROM  FARM  ACCOUNTS  (200 acres,  mainly  dairying) :
FARM  1 (100 cow-herd  @ 1,100 gallons  + tillage)
YEAR  ENDING 31.3.1982 1983 1984
Adjusted  Profit £ 31,500 47,500 34,500
Interest 11,000 12,000 7,000
Drawings/Tax 9,000 12,000 17,000
Surplus  (Deficit) 11,500 23,500 10,500
Current  Assets 74,000 81,000 65,000
Total Liabilities 75,000 65,000 57,500
Debt : Disposable  Asset  Ratio  (%) 101 80 88
Gross  Farm Income  (GFI) 80,500 106,000 115,500
Interest : G.F.I.  Ratio (%) 13 11 6
Gross Profit Margin  (%) 59 64 52
FARM  2 (100 cow-herd  @ 950 gallons  -H beef)
YEAR  ENDING 31.3.1981 1982 1983
Adjusted  Profit £ 31,000 30,000 36,500
Interest 16,000 18,500 20,000
Drawings/Tax 9,500 10,000 9,500
Surplus  (Deficit) 5,500 1,500 7,000
Current  Assets 70,500 59,500 59,500
Total Liabilities 122,000 119,000 122,000
Debt : Disposable  Asset  Ratio  (%) 172 200 205
Gross  Farm Income  (GFI) 75,000 81,000 88,000
Interest : G.F.I.  Ratio (%) 21.5 23 22.5
Gross  Profit Margin  (%) 59 56 60
FARM  3 (100 cow-herd  @ 850 gallons  -t- pigs)
YEAR  ENDING 21.12.1981 1982 1983
Adjusted  Profit £ 27,000 24,000 40,500
Interest 24,000 27,500 13,000
Drawings 8,000 10,000 14,500
Surplus  (Deficit) (5,000) (13,500) 13,000
Current  Assets 80,500 84,000 100,000
Total Liabilities 164,000 183,000 188,000
Debt : Disposable  Asset  Ratio  (%) 204 217 187
Gross  Farm Income  (G.F.I.) 68,000 92,500 98,500
Interest ; G.F.I.  Ratio (%) 35.5 30 13
Gross  Profit Margin  (%) 57 39 57
52
Summary  : Financial  Management  Guidelines
1. Provide  up-to-date  information  by keeping  good records.
2. Have farm accounts  prepared,  preferably  within  3 months  of trading  
year end.
3. Consider  the preparation  of a monthly  cash flow projection  for effect ­
ive financial  control  on your farm.
4. Do not undertake  major  expenditure  from cash flow.
5. Adhere  to budgets  and loans sanctioned.  Don ’t discard  a farm plan 
after facilities  have been sanctioned.
6. Non-conforming  overdrafts  should not be ignored  by recourse  to 
other sources  of finance.
7. Identify  your icost structure  so that you can take steps to improve  
enterprise  efficiency.
8. Be aware of level of drawings.  In general,  many farmers  have little 
accurate  estimate  of living expenses  and frequently  under estimate  
them by overlooking  items  such as educational  expenses.  The opening  
of a separate  household  account  to which regular  (monthly)  agreed  
transfers  are made,  simplifies  considerably  the control  and budgeting  
of drawings.
References
1. Deighton,  J. (1983). Flock productivity  — components  of success.  Paper pre­
sented  at I.G.A.P.A.  Sheep  Conference,  Portlaoise,  October,  1983.
2. Sampson,  A. (1981).  The Money  Lenders.  Coronet  Books.
53
Challenges  to the Irish Dairy Industry
P. O. MOHN
Senior  Visiting  Fellow,  Bank of Ireland  Centre  for Co-operative  Studies.
University  College,  Cork.
During  the past two years I have been meeting  with Dairy Co-operative  
leaders  in a number  of capacities.  Out of these discussions  a number  of 
issues relating  to the future of the Irish Dairy Co-operatives  have sur­
faced. Interestingly,  I recently  met with two dairy co-operatives  in Nova  
Scotia,  Canada,  which are about the same size as the co-operatives  in­
cluded  in the so-called  ‘Big Six’ here in Ireland.  It was a unique  oppor ­
tunity  to compare  the co-operatives  in Nova  Scotia  and the co-operatives  
here in Ireland. My observations  are based upon : discussions  with 
leaders  in the Irish co-operative  community;  analysis  of the annual  re­
ports  of several  major  co-operatives  including  all of the “Big Six”; limited  
research  in which  Dr. Garoyan  and I have been involved;  some 30 years 
of experience  in working  with boards  and management  of agricultural  
co-operatives  including  many dairy co-operatives  and the recent meet ­
ings in Nova  Scotia.
Firstly,  the dairy co-operatives  in Ireland  are alive and well. They  
can have a great furture  as is clearly  demonstrated  by their growth  — 
some greater  than others. Most have latent growth  in contrast  to those  
in other countries  where growth  is in mature  stages and fine tuning is 
taking  place. In Ireland  there are a number  of opportunities  for the dairy  
co-operatives  which have not been fully exploited.  There are adjust ­
ments  that must be made by the co-operatives  to take full advantage  of 
the potential.  Adjustments  by other  integers  of the dairy community  are 
also needed,  i.e. Bord Bainne,  to provide  a more complete  service  to the 
dairy industry.  Farmers  themselves  may have the biggest  adjustments  to 
make.
The asset base for each co-operative  has grown  materially.  As a group  
for the “Big Six”, total assets  grew from £161.9  million  in 1977 to £365.5  
million  in 1983. This was far greater  than inflation.  Co-operative  boards,  
farm organization  leadership,  labour  and bankers  can contribute  to in­
creasing  this asset base by accommodating  to prudent  requirements  for a 
healthy  growth. Let us first examine  the public flnancial  statements  of 
the “Big Six” in the context  of the growth  issue. An analysis  was made  
for the ten year period 1974-1983.  During  this period out of £363.8  
million  funds raised by the “Big Six”: 66.2% came from operations,  
22.3%  came from borrowings,  8.0% came  from grants,  3.5% came from  
members:  69% was used for fixed assets,  29.6% was used for working  
capital  and 1.4% was invested  in other businesses.
The shocking  statistic  is that only 3.5% of the capital  raised during  
this period  came from the members.  This is probably  the lowest  in the 
world.  Only two co-operatives of the “Big Six” have had a revolving  fund
54
in recent  times. Avonmore  had a revolving  capital  fund (discontinued  in 
1984) and Waterford  has a revolving  loan fund. There are two other  
alarming  trends. Cash flow as a percentage  of sales is trending  sharply  
downward  and trading  surplus  as a percent  sales is also trending  sharply  
downward.  Both of these trends  continued  downward  in 1984. If these 
trends continue,  how will future investments  be funded?  Or how will 
debt be serviced?  Currently,  interest  is devouring  a large proportion  of 
trading  surplus.  Another  statistic  that is a warning  signal is the size in 
creditor  financing.  In terms of total liabilities,  creditors  as a percentage  
of Total Liabilities  have increased  from 18.5% in 1977 to 26% in 1984.  
Some  serious  questions  need to be raised  relative  to this statistic,  although  
just looking  at in the raw form does not tell us what the construction  of 
that creditor  number  is.
If there is to be continued  development  of the industry  to the extent  
to which it is capable,  major  input of additional  capital  is needed.  This 
infusion  of new capital  would be used for research  and development,  
capital  cost in relation  to new value-added  products  and new processes,  
including  brand names,  rationalization  of assembly,  processing,  and dis­
tribution  facilities,  energy  conservation  measures,  and investments  in new 
technology  for existing  processes.
To obtain the most advantagous  financing  for these investments,  
co-operatives  might pool their needs. By this I mean that if all of the 
co-operatives  were to combine  together  and seek a pool of funds for 
their total needs  the chances  of their entering  some of the  capital  markets,  
not only in Ireland  but in other European  markets,  would be much  
greater. Interest  rates might very well be lower and the length  of term 
of the borrowings  might also be longer particularly  long term bonds.  
The Irish banking  industry  could very well examine  innovative  financing  
programmes  of co-operative  banking  systems  that exist in most other  
countries.  I believe  that long term loans —up to 30 years—are  needed  
for the co-operatives  in Ireland  to plan effectively  and to develop  like 
their competitors  in other  countries.
Another  area which  bears some study  is that related  to overhead  costs  
and profit  centre  analysis.  Such analysis  might  lead to more rationaliza ­
tion but I have not studied  this area. Performance  is frequently —and 
mistakenly —measured  only on trading  surplus. Trading  surplus  is only 
one dimension  of economic  results  of a co-operative.  Another  relevant  
measure  is price paid to suppliers  for their milk or prices charged  for 
purchases  by them. It is probable  that some co-operatives  paid a rela­
tively higher  blended  price with a resultant  lower surplus. Other co­
operatives  may end the year with a relatively  higher  surplus  but farmers  
on the whole  may have received  a lower blended  price.
In a true co-operative  this phenomena  would  have made  no difference 
because  the surplus  would  be allocated  at the end of the year. In Ireland  
patronage  refunds  are not paid to farmers.  There are two reasons  why 
this might be the case (perhaps  neither  one of them was in fact the
55
reason  why patronage  refunds  are not paid) : (1) that a high price is paid 
at the delivery  of milk —sometimes  at a price higher  than is justified  since  
it is not known  whether  or not there will be a surplus  earned  during  the 
year and (2) that if patronage  refunds  are paid to farmers  the farmer  
incurs  a tax liability.  Again  Ireland  is unique  in this regard  because  m 
most countries  the tax is paid either at the farm or at the co-operative  
level. In Ireland,  if it remains  in the co-operative,  for the most part no 
tax is paid.
In most other  countries  the price paid initially  is a competitive  price. It 
is not set by the Board  of Directors.  It is set by Operating  Management  
and at the end of the year any surplus  generated  by the co-operative  is 
distributed  as patronage  refunds.  This means  that in the final analysis  
the prices  received  by farmers  are increased  once the patronage  refund  is 
distributed —partly in cash and partly  in equity  paper —at the end of the 
year.
By taking the responsibility  and authority  of setting periodic  milk 
prices  the Board  cannot  hold management  accountable  for year end re­
sults because  a major  function  of the size of surplus  or deficit  is the up 
front price paid for milk. As in co-operatives  and companies  in most  
other countries  operating  management  of ordinary  companies  in Ireland  
—not the Board —sets the price.
From a broader  perspective  I would  now like to identify  what causes  
stagnation  in agricultural  industries.  Based upon about 20 years of 
analysis  and observation  I can safely say that some of the reasons  for 
stagnation  are : weak management,  low member  equity,  high cash pat­
ronage  refunds  (same  as high price),  and being  slow to adjust  to changing  
economic  and market  conditions.  The question  could be raised : “Why  
grow? ” There are some important  reasons  for growth. They include  
opportunity  for diversification,  economies  of scale, more flexibility  to 
implement  opportunities,  reduction  of the need for price competition  
(competition  rather  that relates  to more services,  broader  lines of pro­
ducts,  etc.).
There are some dangers  to growth,  however. These include  an in­
creased  tendency  toward  bureaucracy,  possible  loss of member  control,  
and earnings  becoming  the sole goal.
It is difficult  to distinguish  between  the economic  position  of dairy  
co-operatives  and the industry  of which  they comprise  a dominant  P®®*'  
tion. The production  sector (farmers)  have been experiencing  reduced  
production  and lower  returns  and many  are financially  weak.  Many  dairy  
co-operatives  are also in a poor financial  condition  due to problems  
within  the dairy industry.  While  some of the big dairy co-operatives  are 
diversified  into non-dairy  products,  the heavy dependence  on the dairy  
industry  far overshadows  any non-dairy  revenues.  While profits  from  
non-dairy  activities  are always  helpful,  questions  remain  about  the profi ­
tability  potentials  of existing  non-dairy  ventures.  Some co-operatives  
appear  to be in lower margin  activities.  These ventures  often require  a
56
Where  
there ’s growth  
—there ’s 
Grasslcind  
fertilizers
HEAD OFFICE;
75 Mercion  Square,  Dublin  2.
Tel. (01) 600011/680788  Telex 24130
FACTORIES
Carrigrohane  Road,  Cork. Tel. (021)44188  
Dock Road, Limerick.  Tel. (061)27788  
The Pound  Road. Slane,  Co. Meath.  
Tel.(041)24124  & 24160
Grassland  
covers  Ireland.
Grassland  Fertilizers  Ltd. The Pound Road. Slane Tel. (041) 24124 & 24160
57
level of managerial  skill not yet proven  in the existing  co-operatives.  
Retail  activity  of co-operatives  often competes  with supermarket  chains  
—the co-operative ’s customers.  Finally,  the risks of capital  losses  in soine  
of the non-dairy  ventures  seems  to be larger  than the potential  gains in 
annual  profits.  Although  dairy  production  has slowed,  the huge inventory  
of products  available  world-wide  still serves  as a dampness  on profitabil ­
ity. Production  is down within  the E.E.C.  and the IJ.S. Production  was 
up in Australia,  New Zealand  and Canada.  There  are signs of increased  
consumption  for some  products  — mainly  cheeses  — while  lower  demand  
exists for butter  and skim milk powder.  How quickly  the world-supply  
demand  comes into balance  will determine  how profitable  will be the 
Irish dairy industry.
The industry  in Ireland  seems to be driven  by production  considera ­
tions rather  than by markets.  Apparently  excess  capacity  exists and co­
operatives  are manoeuvering  to obtain volume  from a shrinking  total 
supply  base. Some wounds  exist but they are minor  compared  to future  
conflicts  that may arise unless the industry  comes to grip with the 
problems.
As co-operatives  becomes  more concerned  about producing  products  
for consumer consumption  rather  than for intervention  storage,  a number  
of changes  will follow. Shifts will be required  from butter-powder,  to 
various  types of cheeses  and other consumer  products.  They may even 
learn that the market  for yoghurt  is limited,  too. As production  shifts to 
more perishable  products,  basic changes  in seasonal  farm milk supplies  
will be needed.  The supply  base for the industry  will need to change,  i.e. 
the nature,  type and size of dairy farm will change  to produce  a more  
uniform  seasonal  milk supply.  Co-operatives  will need to reward  farmers  
for responding,  as several  co-operatives  are now doing.
There  is a need to move  more to value added  products.  This does not 
mean  value added  in the sense of only consumer  products.  It might  mean  
value added  in the industrial  line such as where  some increased  process ­
ing takes place but the product  is sold to other  firms for further  process ­
ing into consumer  or other  end products.
Joint marketing  might be another  way of approaching  the export  
issue. An Bord Bainne  is in place as the marketing  arm. However,  co­
operatives  are not fully utilizing  Bord Bainne.  Each seeks  to find its own 
markets  for its own products  and only a limited  amount  of product  
produced  by the co-operatives  is going through  Bord Bainne. This is 
highly  unfortunate  since a marketing  organisation  can only be effective  
when  it has the whole  of the production  of its owner-members  to market  
so that negotiations  can effectively  be made with buyers. Unless  the 
co-operatives  make a major  change  in this direction  Irish exports  from  
the dairy industry  will continue  to deteriorate  against  other  eompetitors.  
If Bord Bainne  is not doing  the job the co-operatives  wish it to do, they 
should  in fact require  that necessary  changes  take place —they sit on the 
Board  of Directors  of Bord  Bainne.  The bottom  line is that “Bord Bainne  
is not being  given  a chance  by the co-operatives  to perform ”.
58
The Directors  of co-operatives  have a major  responsibility  of shifting  
the utilization  of their energy  and time resource.  Rather  than taking  time 
each month  to set the price of milk (this can easily  be done by operating  
management  within parameter  policies  established  by the Board of 
Directors),  they should  devote  more attention  to carrying  out the major  
functions  of Boards,  i.e. planning  and control.  They should  also identify  
their information  needs.  Model  information  systems  exist that are specific 
on key performance  areas  and provide  key indicators  that are appropriate  
for planning  and control  as well as other decision  making  by Boards  of 
Directors.  Virtually  no Board  of Directors  in Ireland  has set performance  
goals  for their co-operative  and then monitoring  the achievement  of those 
goals. Some of the key issues that were found in the two years of dis­
cussions  with co-operative  leadership  are :
(1) there is a deep rooted  mistrust  between  members  and the Board/  
Management  team;
(2) there appears  to be a total lack of sense of ownership  of their co­
operative  by members;
(3) strategic  planning  may be in the minds of operating  management  
but Boards  are not involved  in setting  directions  for those plans  and 
evaluating  the implementation  consequences;
(4) today ’s co-operative  structures  may not be suitable  to take advan ­
tage of the opportunities;
(5) should  Irish farmers  create  bargaining  associations  and let co-opera ­
tives become  companies?;
(6) the decision  process  within  co-operatives  becomes  highly  interwoven  
with agricultural  politics,  i.e. groups  of producers  take actions  which 
damage  their own co-operative;
(7) clear understanding  of the rights of the member  in relationship  to 
his co-operative,  the responsibilities  of the co-operative  to the mem ­
ber, the rights of the co-operative,  and the responsibility  of the 
member  to his co-operative  appear  to be absent.
Summary
(1) A number  of co-operatives  are large enough  as dairy processors — 
none are large enough  to be a significant  force in export  markets.  
Either  joint efforts  are needed  by co-operatives  or they must  continue  
individually  to find specific  market  niches  for a specific  product.
(2) Value added products  offer significantly  greater  profitability  but 
require  marketing  skills, heavy investments,  and entail risk. Addi ­
tionally  the question  needs to be raised, “are the co-operatives  
equipped  with the necessary  managerial  and marketing  com­
petencies ”?
(3) Low retention  levels and lack of members  contributed  equited  capi­
tal and sources  for long term financing  will result  in the industry  not 
being  able to move  forward  competitively.
59
(4) It is doubtful  if any of the co-operatives  studied  (in the Sources  and 
Uses publication)  can continue  needed  growth  by holding  fast to 
traditional  capitalisation  and financing  methods.
(5) Concurrent  with new approaches  to financing,  two additional  moves 
are needed : away  from production  orientation  to market  orientation  
and change  from fierce individualism  by co-operatives  in marketing  
to more group  or joint effort  in export  marketing.
(6) Polarisation  between  diverse  groups (which as a whole own the 
co-operatives)  create the most adverse  climate  for orderly  growth  
and competition  I have ever seen. One option  might  be to convert  
the co-operatives  to companies —so that they could perform  as a 
business  with all of its attendant  competitive  consequences,  and have 
farmers  form bargaining  associations.  This is not too far from where 
you are today  and countries  which  use this approach —or modifica ­
tions thereof  seem to be managing.
(7) One or more of the co-operatives  might  use a strategy  of picking  off 
the largest,  most efficient  producers.  This approach  could result in 
greater  economic  benefit  to both the co-operative  and the supplier-  
member.  It would  play havoc  in the industry,  though.  This becomes  
particularly  relevant  as co-operatives  must establish  policies  and 
criteria  to meet the constraints  dictated  by the Super Levy. This 
approach  could result  in fewer  but larger  co-operatives.
(8) The alternative  co-operative  approach  would  be for the co-operatives  
to work together  for the benefit  of their members —a study may be 
undertaken  on how to rationalise  milk supply  on a geographic  basis  
to minimise  transport  costs (in a study for Oregon  dairy co-opera ­
tives, rationalising  milk routes saved about eight cents per gallon  
back in 1967/68).  Another  study would  be to assess  the differences 
in manufacturing  costs of each product  by each co-operative  to 
determine  which co-operative  has lowest manufacturing  costs per 
unit. Also, which of the lowest cost co-operatives  had available  
capacity  to expand.  Finally,  a third study would  be to take a look 
at making  it economically  profitable  for higher  cost units to function  
as a standby  and use lowest  cost to capacity  under  contract  to share  
benefits  of economies  of scale. Implementing  results  of these studies  
could materially  improve  the competitive  posture  for Irish dairy  
products  and world  markets.
(9) Having  raised all of these questions,  one might  ic,onclude  that I am 
pessimistic  about  the future  of dairy co-operatives.  Well, I am not; 
I am very optimistic.  However,  there will be many changes.  I am 
confident  in the leadership  that continues  to rise to the top. Many  
in this Association  will be agents  of change  which  can result in the 
Irish dairy farmer  and his co-operative  becoming  more competitive  
and stronger  in world markets.  What those changes  will be is left 
to good judgement  and leadership.
60
The Management  of a Large  Dairy  
Herd in the U.K.
J. M. SLATER
I.C.I. Ltd., Dairy House  Farm, Stanthorne,  Middlewich,  Cheshire.
England.
Dairy House  Farm has been owned by ICI for 50 years and over that 
time has been used for many fertiliser  experiments,  and in the last few 
years has been run as a commercial/demonstration  farm. The research  
work for the Company  is now carried  out at Jealott ’s Hill in Berkshire  
and Ravenscroft  Hall Farm in Cheshire.
Dairy House  Farm comprises  400 acres of grassland  and 50 acres of 
buildings  and woodland.  The farm is a compact  block of ground  with 
the main London  to Glasgow  railway  line and the Shropshire  Union  canal  
running  through  it. The majority  of the land is typical  of the Cheshire  
Plain,  heavy  clay. A small percentage  of the farm, however,  is on steep  
slopes  falling  to the River  Weaver  and this land is particularly  light and 
sandy. There are two main sets of buildings  centrally  placed  within  the 
farm boundaries,  with all the dairy cows now housed  at Dairy House  
itself, where  three dairy men look after 320 cows milked  through  a one- 
man ojjerated  24/24  Gascoigne  parlour.  All silage is forage  box fed and 
the cows are housed  in kennels  and a clear span cubicle  building.  There  
is accommodation  for 3500 tonnes of silage at Dairy House and it is 
proposed  to raise this to 5000 tonnes  within  the next year.
The main aim of the farm is to maximise  grass  output  and farm profit ­
ably, and this necessitates  on heavy wet soils large storage  capacity  for 
both silage and slurry. The total farm staff comprises  five men, three  
herdsmen  previously  mentioned  with a tractor  driver/relief  milker  and a 
full time tractor  driver.
With the necessity  for maximising  grass  yields  on heavy  land floatation  
equipment  is used to enable  fertiliser  to be applied  in the early part of 
the year when conventional  equipment  would  cause damage.  As part of 
the grassland  management  within  the farm, zero grazing  is practised  at 
the start of the season  and at the end, and here again tyre configurations  
are most important  to allow zero grazing  to start in the early spring. 
There are some 60 acres of land bordering  roads that we cannot  stock  
and these are continuously  cut for either  zero grazing  or silage. The leys 
comprise  predominantly  Augusta  with a small quantity  of RVP Hay 
Pasture  and Frances. The ability to zero grass at this time of year 
enables  economies  in concentrate  use and total silage use.
Most of the farm is sown to a mixture  of late and intermediate  rye­
grasses. This is used for either  cutting  or grazing.  The current  mix is 9 
lbs of Melle,  Meltra  Morenne  and Talbot  to give a total seed rate of 36 
Ibs/acre.  The very heaviest  fields  are sown to a mixture  of late perennials  
to allow an extra week in the spring  before  first cut silage.
61
With a heavy soil and a moderately  high rainfall  there is a high risk 
of sward  damage  due to ruts. Therefore,  as the only time in the rotation  
to reetify  this problem  is at reseeding,  we conventionally  plough  and take 
the opportunity  to level the soil surface. Also, as we need to break a 
soil pan in many fields,  subsoiling  is carried  out prior to ploughing.
Our heavy  clay soils are inherently  difficult  to break  down into a fine 
firm seed bed and therefore  we aim to plough  in mid-August  and allow 
any rain in late August  to aid tilth formation.  Autumn  sowing  of grass  
seed is conducted  in the last week of August  and the first week of 
September  A minimum  of 60 units of P2O5 and KjO are applied  to the 
seed bed along with 12-15 units of nitrogen  to help the young  plant get 
established.
Post emergence  care of the ley is most important  with weed control  
primarily  for chickweed  and pest control  for fritfly necessary  in most  
autumns.
The general  fertiliser  policy  on the farm is to aim for an average  of 
400 units  / acre on the cow grazing  area and up to 450 units on the zero- 
grazed  Augusta  leys. The aim is to apply  two-thirds  of the total nitrogen  
by end of May and thus enable  the nitrogen  to be around  the rooting  
zone of the grass  during  the middle  of the summer.
On silage fields for four cuts up to 400 units of nitrogen  are applied  
along  with 180 units of KA A typical  fertiliser  policy  would  be
N P K
1st cut 145 32 56
2nd cut 110 0 72
3rd cut 85 0 54
4th cut 60 0 0
Of the total grass acreage  the aim is to conserve  as silage approxim ­
ately 75% of the total with some 25% only allocated  to grazing  up to 
the end of first cut silage. This creates  a large logistical  problem  in 
handling  approximately  2500-3000  tonnes  of grass for silage in the late 
May period. Our own silage making  team comprises  a 8' 6" mower  
conditioner  and a precision  chop  forage  harvester  serviced  by three silage  
trailers.  With this team approximately  1750 tonnes of silage  can be made  
within a given period  at a given quality. Therefore,  we call in a con­
tractor  to harvest  a proportion  of our first cut. In 1984 by following  this 
practise  we were able to harvest  all first cut at a quality  of 71 D.
Silage  performance  in 1984 was :
Acres  cut Tonnes/Acre Total  Tonnage
1st cut 
2nd cut 
3rd cut 
4th cut260
220
60
609.2
7.3
3.3 
5.02400
1600
200
300
62
Immediately  following  the clearing  of a silage field fertiliser  will be 
applied  to enable  the next cut to get away just as quickly  as possible.  In 
this way three or four cuts of silage are taken throughout  the growing  
period.
The current  stock numbers  at Dairy House are 320 dairy cows with 
198 young stock. The cows are split into two herds, the first calving  
September/October  and early November,  and these have been managed  
this last winter  on an ad lib silage and flat rate concentrate  level of 4 kg/ 
head/day.  The anticipated  silage  consumption  per cow will be 12 tonnes  
for the winter  period. During  the summer  this herd is set stocked  aiming  
at a maximum  stocking  rate for the early part of the season of no 
more than 0.3 of an acre per cow. The milk yield of these animals  at 
turn-out  will be 4 gallons. With the potential  in grass of over 5 gallons,  
this stocking  density  must be held as tight as possible.
The spring herd calving  January/February  and early March are on 
easy fed silage and concentrates  flat rate of 5 kg/head/day.  At turn-out  
these animals  will be stocked  at 0.35 of an acre per cow as their demand  
is slightly  greater  than the autumn  calving  animal  and they will have 
consumed  approximately  10 tonnes  of silage through  the winter  period.  
At the present  time the margin  per cow over bought  feed is £585. This 
figure is steadily  rising as our margins  recover  from the effects  of the 
poor silage fed in the 1983/1984  winter. The stocking  rate for the cows  
is 0.9 of an acre and thus the margin  over feed and fertiliser  costs is £580  
per acre.
The heifer calves  produced  by one herd are reared and return to the 
same herd at 2 years old to calve down. To achieve  good weights  at 
calving  a target is set at 350 kg for heifers  at 15 months  being served. 
The necessitates  a live weight  gain of 0.7 kg/day.  The calves  are reared  
on cold acidified  milk replacer  and weaned  by weight  at 85 kg when they 
should  be consuming  0.9 kg per day of dry feed. By 8-9 weeks of age 
they are switched  on to a grass cube/cereal  cube mix reducing  concen ­
trate costs. At 11-12 weeks silage is introduced  for the rest of the first 
winter.
In the second  winter  if good silage is available  minimal  extra feeds  
will be needed.
For the first three weeks  heifers  are served with Friesian  semen and 
then we allow the beef bulls to sweep  up. This coupled  with a six week 
period  for the cows  ensures  that all heifer  calves  are born in two periods  : 
September  to the first half of October  and January  to the first half of 
February,  allowing  two definite  batches  to be reared  per year.
There are changes  occuning  within the industry  that have to be 
planned  for now and we must all face up to the new financial  situation  
for dairying.  Our total output  of milk has been capped;  we have lost 4.5 
pence/gallon  on our milk value. Therefore,  to maintain  margins  is 
difficult  and to improve  them to cover  the increase  in labour  and machin ­
63
ery costs is exceptionally  difficult.  For anyone  with a tight stocking  rate 
the production  of extra grass and the reduction  of the concentrate  input  
must be the answer.  For some people  there could be no alternative  but 
to go to a no concentrate  feeding  system. The most worrying  aspect  of 
the changes  in costs is within the fixed cost structure  and many dairy  
farmers  will have to look to reducing  paid labour and simplifying 
machinery  within  their own systems.  It could be a great advantage  for 
farmers  to not have so heavily  invested  in building  and machinery  and 
that their dairy industry  is on a much lower capital  base. We find it 
necessary  for some operations  to use a contractor  and in the future this 
may become  a larger  part of many  farm operations.
Looking  to the future the aim must be to improve  the quality  of the 
cattle that we have so that they can utilise  large quantities  of forage  and 
depend  very little on concentrate  feeding.  Margins  of £550 and above 
will be needed  to cover  the true fixed costs and this will only be achieved 
with respectable  yields  and low feed costs. One of the major  difficulties 
farming  with cows in Cheshire  compared  with southern  Ireland  is that 
we have to budget  for a 200 day winter  and thus our conservation  of 
grass primarily  as silage has to be a very efficient  and effective  job. 
The current strengthening  of controls  on slurry and silage effluent 
disposal  will have a serious  impact  on all our operations  and there will 
be some cases where  slurry  systems  will have to be abandoned  in favour  
of straw bedded  systems  of housing.
Having  painted  a fairly  gloomy  picture  let us hope that we can produce  
as much milk from our own resources  as possible.  The target should  be 
900 gallons  per acre and above  to produce  a margin  of over £600 per cow 
and thus enable  the dairy industry  to remain  profitable  for the future
64
ureenvale  
ANIMAL FEEDS
PRODUCT  RANGE:
Calf  Nuts
Cal Mag  Nuts
Beet  Pulp  Nuts
Low  Calcium —High  Phos.  
Min.ViLSuppls.
Dairy  Nuts
Beef  Nuts
Molasses
Horse  Conditioner
Superpressed  Pulp
• HIGHLY  PALATIBLE,  HIGHLY  
DIGESTIBLE  FEEDS  — FROM  
GREENVALE —-THE EXPERTS  
IN FEEDING.
• A DIVISION  OF 
SIOCRE  EIREANN,  OPT
ABSTRACTS
THE  EFFECT  OF SWARD  MANAGEMENT  AND  COMPANION  
GRASS  ON THE  PERFORMANCE  OF WHITE  CLOVER  
A. J. BRERETON
The Agricultural Institute,  Johnstown Castle,  Wexford.
The research  was undertaken  to obtain  data on the factors  affecting 
the ecological  stability  of grass/white  clover  swards. The objective  was 
to monitor  the changes  in the level of clover dominance  within and 
between  seasons  under different  managements.  The changes  were com­
pared with concurrent  changes  in the density  of grass tillers. The results  
showed  that clover dominance  was reduced  as grass tiller density  in­
creased. Management  and companion  grass effects were explained  in 
terms of their effect on grass tiller density. Clover dominance  was 
maintained  over three years in swards  cut at 28-day  intervals  during  the 
growing  season. Clover  declined  progressively  in swards  cut at 14-day  
intervals.  This decline  was related  to an increase  in grass tiller density. 
Under  the conditions  of the experiment  clover  was suppressed  when grass 
density  exceeded  5,000 m"l At lower  tiller densities  clover  was generally  
dominant.  The transition  from clover  to grass dominance  was sensitive  
to small changes  in grass  tiller density  in the region  of 5,000  m~^ It was 
concluded  that the instability  observed  in grass/clover  swards under  
rotational  grazing  is due to the sensitivity  of clover  to grass tiller density  
within  the normal  range  found in swards.  The results  provide  a basis for 
developing  management  practices  suited to the establishment  and main ­
tenance  of the grass/clover  association.
INCREASING  EFFICIENCY  OF GRAZED  SWARDS  
O. CARTON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
The primary  factor  affecting  the output  of animal  product  per hectare  
in a grazing  system  is the amount  of herbage  produced.  The efficiency  
with which  this herbage  is utilized  is controlled  by stocking  rate (SR). In 
the standard  rotational  grazing  system  stocking  rate is adjusted  during  
the season  as the silage  ground  becomes  available  for grazing.  While  this 
system  achieves  a reasonable  balance  between  feed supply  and herd feed 
requirements,  periods of feed surpluses  and deficits  occur. Deficits  
imply  reduced  animal  performance  while surpluses  imply  grass is carried  
from one grazing  to the next with associated  losses  in feed value.  Ideally  
the SR should be adjusted  continuously.  Thus a balance  is achieved 
between  feed supply and demand  and all the herbage  produced  is 
utilised. The inherent  flexibility  of the paddock  system  of grazing  can 
be used to adjust the grazing  time per paddock  therefore  achieving  a 
continuously  adjusted  SR. However  within this system surpluses  (too 
many paddocks)  and deficits  (too few paddocks)  can occur. In times of 
surplus  the excess  herbage  can be conserved  and this can then be fed in 
times  of deficit.
66
THE EFFECT  OF HERBAGE  ALLOWANCES,  HERBAGE  MASS  
AND CONCENTRATE  FEEDING  ON THE INTAKE  OF COWS  
GRAZING  MID-SUMMER  PASTURE
G. STAKELUM
The Agricultural Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
An experiment  is described  in which  40 spring-calving  dairy cows  were 
on four grazing  treatments  (two levels of daily herbage  allowance  with 
and without  concentrate  feeding).  The treatments  were imposed  for 16 
days in August  1984.
Daily herbage  allowances  from ground  level were 24 and 16 kg dry 
matter/head.  Concentrates  were individually  fed once daily to two 
groups  at 4.5 kg/head.  Daily intake of concentrate  organic  matter  was 
3.8 kg/head.  Herbage  intake  was measured  by estimating  herbage  before 
and after grazing.
Herbage  mass increased  significantly  (p<0.001)  from 3394 to 4319 kg 
of organic  rnatter/ha  for the 1st and 2nd half of the experimental  period.  
Realised  daily herbage  organic  matter  allowances  were 21.9 and 14.6 
kg/head  for the high and low allowance  groups,  respectively.
Herbage  mass, herbage  allowance  and concentrate  feeding  all had a 
sgnificant  effect (p<0.001)  on herbage  intake. There was a significant 
interaction  between  the effects  of herbage  mass and herbage  allowance  
(p<0.001)  and between  herbage  allowance  and concentrate  feeding  
(p<0.05)  on herbage  intake.
Increased  herbage  mass increased  herbage  intake  from 13.6 to 16.6 and
11.6 to 12.5 for the unsupplemented  groups  at high and low herbage  
allowance,  respectively.  The increase  for the supplemented  groups  was 
11.0 to 14.1 and 10.6 to 11.0 for the high and low allowance  groups,  
respectively.  Concentrate  feeding  reduced  herbage  intake by 0.67 and 
0.33 per kg of concentrate  fed at high and low herbage  allowance,  
respectively.
CROP  LOSS  MODEL  FOR  SILAGE  MECHANISATION  
S. M. WARD
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department,  U.C.D.,
Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin  2.
A microcomputer  based model  for evaluating  the opportunity  cost of 
crop losses, arising from delayed  silage harvesting,  is described.  The 
algorithms  of the model  determine  the equivalent  quantity  of concentrate  
feedstuffs  required  to offset a good reduetion  in the net-energy  value of 
forage. Three enterprise  types are considered,  viz. beef and dairying  
(autumn  and spring-calving);  and the inclusion  of this model  in the total 
cost analysis  of a silage  mechanisation  system  is explained.  Examples  are 
given cf the application  of this model  : Results  indicate  that a minimum  
harvest  area of 20 ha./yr.  is required  in order  to justify  system  ownership.  
In addition,  it was found that the opportunity  cost of crop losses,  arising  
from delayed  harvesting,  is a critical  factor in the evaluation  of silage  
mechanisation  systems;  and can account  for up to 50% of the total 
system  cost.
67
PREDICTION  OF 1st CUT SILAGE  QUALITY  FROM  THE RATE  
OF DECLINE  OF GRASS  DIGESTIBILITY  FOR THE YEARS
1982  - 4
J. O’SHEA.  P. O’KIELY
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
The aim of this study was fourfold.
1. To establish  year to year variability  in the decline  of grass DMD  
prior to first-cut  silage making.
2. To compare  patterns  obtained  in the East as against  the West of 
Ireland.
3. To contrast  results  from farms  with Grange  data.
4. To determine  the decrease  in DMD  at farm level between  first-cut 
grass and silage made from it.
The procedure  adopted  was to sample  grasses  throughout  the country,  
in collaboration  with ACOT  and other bodies. Samples  were taken in 
the early part of May and at cutting  time and dispatched  to Dunsinea  for 
DMD analysis.  Later on each year silage made from these grasses  was 
also sampled  for analysis.
The results showed  that considerable  year to year variability  exists.  
The rates of decline  in digestibility  measured  for 1982, ’83 and ’84 were 
0.58, 0.2 and 0.33 respectively.  Comparison  of patterns  between  the East 
and the Western  regions  revealed  little difference  when swards  of a 
similar nature were considered.  In general  samples  taken at weekly 
intervals  at Grange  tended  to have higher  DMD values  than those from  
the farm study. Some surprisingly  high differences  in DMD were ob­
served between  grass cutting  time and silage made from it, the mean  
values  for 1982, ’83 and ’84 being 2.5, 4.5 and 4.5 units respectively.
68
MICROSCOPIC  AND  CHEMICAL  CHANGES  DURING  THE  FIRST  
22 DAYS  IN SILAGES  MADE  IN LABORATORY  SILOS
ANA WINTERS  and P. A. WHITTAKER  
Biology  Department,  College  oj St. Patrick,  Maynooth,  Co. Kildare.
R. K. WILSON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
Two factorial  experiments  (2x8x2) were carried  out where  ryegrass  
(Lolium  multijorum,  CV Meritra)  and cocksroot  (Dactylis  glomerata,  
indigenous)  were ensiled in laboratory  silos (capacity  0.2 kg) under  
pressure  (0.7 kPa) using two treatments  (with and without  85% formic  
acid at 3.3 1/t) by eight sampling  intervals  (1. 2, 3, 4, 7. 10, 14 and 21 
days) in duplicate.
Chemical  and microscopic  changes  were followed,  the latter by hand-  
sectioning  blade transverse  sections,  mounting  them, followed  by 
photography  through  a microscope.  The negatives  were projected  and 
the diameters  of cells and their protoplasts  measured  in two directions  at 
right angles.
Both grasses  at day 21 had undergone  lactic acid type fermentation  
but the same amount  of lactic acid gave a pH of 4.3 in ryegrass  but only
4.6 in cocksfoot.  The formic  acid treatment,  relative  to the untreated  
grass, gave a rapid (1 day) shrinking  of the protoplast  within  the cell, a 
quicker  release  of effluent  and loss of cell turgor  pressure,  and an increase 
in electrical  conductivity  due to additional  ions in solution.  All the above 
were statistically  significant  (p<0.01)  for the first 4 days.
The results  suggest  that formic  acid penetrates  the plant cuticle,  dam­
ages the mesophyllic  cell membrane  and causes  a leakage  of cell nutrients  
for subsequent  fermentation  as well as provide  H+-ions  to lower  pH.
69
USING  SILAGE  EFFLUENT  
P. O’KIELY  and V. FLYNN  
The Agricultural Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Interest  has been expressed  in using a layer of straw under silage to 
collect/trap  effluent  so as to reduce  the effluent  problem  and improve  
straw quality. An experiment  was conducted  to quantify  the value of 
such a practice.
One layer of barley straw bales were placed beneath  herbage  being 
ensiled in an unwalled  clamp in October.  Both ammoniated  (54.4%  
DMD)  and non-ammoniated  (47.5% DMD)  bales were used and each 
was placed  either  on the flat or on its side. The silage DM content  was 
15% and it contained  26% crude protein.  The untreated  straw retained
1.7 kg and 1.1 kg effluent  per kg straw when placed  on the flat or on its 
side respectively.  The ammoniated  straw had corresponding  effluent 
retentions  of 2.4 and 2.3 kg effluent  per kg straw. Effluent  increased  the 
crude  protein  content  of straw  dry matter  by 7.6 per cent units  on average. 
Untreated  straw digestibility  (in vitro DMD)  was 3.9 units higher  and 
ammoniated  straw digestibility  was 5.2 units lower following  storage 
under  silage.
Friesian  stores  (500 kg) were fed 6 kg barley  and 2 kg straw per head  
daily. Fresh water and silage effluent  were both available  ad libitum.  
Animals  consumed  up to 10 gallons  per day of well preserved  effluent  but 
only 1 gallon  per day when preservation  was bad. There was a growth 
response  to the effluent  consumed.
Due to the great variation  of the output  effluent  per tonne herbage  
ensiled  and because  of the large amount  of straw required  to retain all 
of the effluent  from wet herbage,  this technique  of retaining  effluent  is 
both impractical  and unreliable.  Feeding  silage effluent  to beef cattle  
would  not be applicable  on most farms  due to the problems  of storing  a 
large volume  of effluent  until it would  be practical  to feed it. Spreading  
silage effluent  onto grassland  still seems the most realistic  method  for 
disposing  of it on the beef farm. However,  it may be easier  to organise  
the feeding  of silage  effluent  to cows on a dairy farm as they come in for 
or go out from milking.
70
EFFECT  OF ENVIRONMENTAL  FACTORS  ON ANIMAL  
PRODUCTION
WM. O’KEEFFE  and M. RYAN  
The Agricultural Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
Heat-energy  exchange  between  animals  and their surroundings  are 
governed  by the laws of thermodynamics.  Homeotherms  maintain  a 
stable  deep body temperature  over a range cf environmental  conditions.  
There  is a critical  temperature  at the lower  end of the range below  which 
the energy  required  to maintain  deep body heat increases.  Critical  tem­
perature  may be calculated  from Baxter ’s equations.
To=Tr-l-HIt  + (E—H) lo where  T„=critical  temperature  °C;
Tr=Rectal  temp.  = 39°C;
H = Heat arising  from metabolism  (Mj It = Tissue  Insulation
CC m ’’ d
E = Minimal  loss of heat by vaporising  moisture  (Mj m"^d" ‘);
I<,=Extemal  insulation  (°C m^ d Mj’’)
Adverse  environmental  conditions  affect animal  production  by raising  
the critical temperature.  Critical  temperature  is influenced  by several 
factors  including  coat thickness,  insulation,  wind, wetness,  etc. When  
critical  temperature  is higher  than environmental  temperature  homeo ­
therms  use some of their total energy  intake  to maintain  deep body heat.  
This may mean loss cf LWG  or ill-health.  Data from the 1st cycle of a 
grazing  experiment  at Johnstown  Castle 1977- ’84 were used to study this 
effect. Blaxter ’s equations  were used to calculate  critical  temperature  for 
2 coat thicknesses,  with and without  continuous  wetting  at variable  wind  
speeds. The calculations  showed  that coat thickness  has a greater  effect  
than wetness  but this effect declines  as wind speed increases.  Critical  
temperatures  higher  than environmental  partly  explained  some losses in 
ADG  in 1978, ’79 and ’83. More  detailed  studies  of environmental  effects  
over the grazing  season  are planned.
71
THE  CELLULARITY  OF MUSCLE  DEVELOPMENT  IN MALE
CATTLE
M. J. CLANCY
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
D. HARRINGTON
The Agricultural Institute,  19 Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin 4.
Skeletal  muscle,  produced  by cattle,  sheep,  pigs and poultry,  is the raw 
material  of the meat industry.  The practical  goal of animal  production  
is the production  of lean meat in an efficient  manner.
Basic factors,  which limit the rate and extent  of muscle  growth  and 
protein  synthesis  in meat animals  need to be defined.  An understanding  
of these factors  in cellular  and molecular  terms  would  permit  the optim ­
isation  and maximisation  of meat production.  In keeping  with such a 
requirement,  this communication  reports  results  from two studies  on the 
cellularity  of skeletal  muscle  development  in male cattle, during  which 
samples  of L. dorsi  muscle  taken at 24 h post mortem  from carcasses  of 
bulls and steers were examined.  The histochemical  muscle  fibre types,  
/3-Red,  a-Red  and a-White  were identified  and quantified.
The cardinal  finding  in one study was that both endogenous  and 
exogenous  anabolic  agents  increased  significantly  the sizes and propor ­
tions of Red, or aerobically  metabolising,  myofibres,  thereby  facilitating  
a more efficient  deposition  of protein  in the myofibers.
In another  study,  during  which the effects  of genotype  and slaughter  
weight  were examined,  significant  genetic  differences  in the myofibre  type 
profiles  were observed.  Considerable  and distinctive  breed differences 
were found  in the development  patterns  of all myofibre  types.
Our findings  indicate  that the radial and longitudinal  components  of 
myofibre  growth  operate  in different  modes  for Hereford  x Friesian,  
Charolais  x Friesian  and pure Friesian  steers.
72
RESPONSES  OF FINISHING  STEERS  TO EXOGENOUS  GROWTH  
HORMONE  AND  OESTRADIOL
J. F. QUIRKE',  L. G. KENNEDY,  J. F. ROCHE^  I. HARTER  
W. SHEEHAN,  A. COERT  and P. ALLEN
'The Agricultural Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
"Faculty  of Veterinary  Medicine,  U.C.D.,  Ballsbridge,  Dublin  4.
^National  Institute  for Research  in Dairying,  Shinfield,  Reading,
Berkshire.
The admifiistration  of exogenous  growth  hormone  has been shown  to 
stimulate  nitrogen  retention  and enhance  growth  rate in a number  of 
species. There  is however,  comparatively  little information  regarding  its 
effects  on growth  in cattle. The present  experiment  examined  the effects  
of growth  hcmone,  either alone or in combination  with oestradiol,  on 
growth  rate and a number  of endocrine  and metabolic  parameters  in 
growing  Friesian  steers.
Groups  of steers (N = 16) were either kept as untreated  controls  
implanted  with 45 mg oestradiol,  injected  daily with bovine GH of 
pituitary  origin  or treated  with a combination  of oestradiol  and GH. The 
growth  hormone  was administered  subcutaneously  in the neck region in 
a carbonate  buffer  vehicle  (pH 10.0 = daily at 9.00 h for a period  of 22 
weeks. The dose of GH (0.05 u/kg/day)  was adjusted  bi-weekly  to the 
mean liveweight  of the animals  under treatment.  The animals  were tied 
up in individual  stalls and their intake  of grass  and silage  and supplemen ­
tary concentrates  was recorded  3 times weekly. After 22 weeks, GH 
treatment  was terminated  and the animals  retained  for a further  week ’s 
observation  following  which  they were slaughtered.
Blood samples  for determination  of oestradiol  and growth  hormone  
concentrations  as well as levels of glucose,  non-esterified  fatty acids,  
blood urea nitrogen  and creatinine  were taken from all animals  on a 
number  of occasions  during  the experiment.
Treatment  with oestradiol  alone significantly  improved  growth rate 
and feed efficiency  by 13.6 and 8.3% respectively;  the responses  in these 
parameters  to treatment  with GH were 5.6 and 4.8% respectively  but 
neither  were statistically  significant.  The responses  to the combination  
treatment  indicated  that the effects  of oestradiol  and GH on growth  rate 
and feed efficiency  were additive.  There was a carry-over  effect of GH 
treatment  on carcass  composition  in terms of the % internal  fat which 
was reduced  in response  to this treatment.
Plasma  levels  of GH were elevated  within 15 minutes  of GH injection  
and were 3-7 ng/ml  higher  than the controls  for >8 h following  which  
they returned  to baseline.  Endogenous  GH secretion  was stimulated  by 
implantation  with oestradiol.  Blood urea nitrogen  levels were reduced  
by both oestradiol  and GH treatment  and the effects  of the two hormones  
were additive  in this respect.  There  was no evidence  for treatment  effects  
on plasma concentrations  of glucose,  non-esterified  fatty acids or 
creatinine.
73
RESIDUE  ANALYSES  FOR ANABOLIC  AGENTS  IN BEEF
M. O’KEEFFE
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
Anabolic  agents are used widely  in beef production  where they arc 
found  to give increased  carcase  yield. Two anabolic  agents  of particular  
interest  are the synthetic  agents trenbolone  (“Finaplix ”) and zeranol  
(“Ralgro ”) since their continued  usage is being considered,  currently,  by 
the EEC. These  two anabolic  agents  are given as ear implants,  often in 
combination,  and carry a recommended  with-holding  period  of 60 to 65 
days..
The residue  levels of trenbolone  and zeranol  were determined  in the 
edible tissues (muscle,  fat, kidney and liver) of 12 Friesian  steers at 
slaughter.  6 being  non-implanted  (control)  animals  and 6 being  implanted  
with 300 mg trenbolone  ricetate and 36 mg zeranol  67 days before 
slaughter.  Residue  analyses  were canied  out on small samples  of tissues 
(2-3 g) by extraction,  purification  and radioimmunoassay.
The results  of the analyses  show that significantly  higher (P<0.01)  
residue  levels are determined  for trenbolone  in muscle,  fat and kidney  
samples  and for zeranol  in kidney and liver samples  from implanted  
animals,  compared  with samples  from control  animals.  Use of an anti­
serum  specific  to the major  liver metabolite  of trenbolone,  17a-trenbolone,  
would be expected  to show significantly  higher residue  levels in liver, 
also, as has been reported  in other studies.  Zeranol  levels  in muscle  and 
fat are not different  from tissue  blank  levels  (i.e. levels  in control  animals)  
after the with-holding  period. In all cases residue  levels are at less than 
0.3 ng/g ppb) at slaughter.
74
EVALUATION  OF COMPUDOSE  200 AS AN ANABOLIC  AGENT  
FOR  CALVES,  GROWING  AND  HNISHING  STEERS
M. G. KEANE
The Agricultural Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Three  experiments,  one each with entire  male calves,  yearling  steers  at 
pasture  and housed finishing  cattle fed silage plus cpncentrates  were 
carried  out to evaluate  Compudose  200, a silicone  rubber  ear implant  
impregnated  with 24 mg oestradiol  (Elanco,  Dun Laoghaire,  Ireland).  Its 
stated duration  of effectiveness  is 200 days. The animals  were predom ­
inantly  Friesians.
In Experiment  1, 204 calves  (initial  liveweight  100 kg) were assigned 
at random  to the following  3 treatments  for a 168 day experimental  
period  : (1) Control,  (2) Compudose  200 on day 0, (3) Ralgro  on days 0 
and 82. Liveweight  gains for the treatment  groups  as listed were 125.8,  
121.5 and 127.8 (SE=1.85)  kg respectively.  There was no significant 
effect  of either  implant  treatment.
In Experiment  2, 264 yearling  steers (initial  liveweight  303 kg) were 
assigned  at random  to the following  4 treatments  for a 168 day experi ­
mental  period  : (1) Control,  (2) Compudose  200 on day 0, (3) Compudose  
+ Finaplix  on day 0 and Finaplix  on day 82, (4) Ralgro  + Finaplix  on 
days 0 and 82. Liveweight  gains for the groups,  as listed were 141.1  
153.2, 174.7 and 174.7 (SE=3.02)  kg respectively.
In Experiment  3, 250 finishing  steers (initial  liveweight  468 kg) were 
assigned  on the basis of weight  to the following  5 treatments  for a mean  
163 day experimental  period  : (1) Control,  (2) Compudose  200 on day 0, 
(3) Compudose  200 + Finaplix  on day 0 and Finaplix  on day 70, (4) 
Ralgro  + Finaplix  on days 0 and 70, (5) Synovex-S  + Finaplix  on days  
0 and 70. Carcass  gains for the groups  as listed were 63.9, 84.7, 92.5,  
91.4 and 94.2 (SE  = 2.93) kg respectively.
There was a significant  (P<0.05)  response  to Compudose  200 alone  
and a further  significant  response  to the use of Finaplix  with Compudose  
200 in both yearling  and finishing  steers. Responses  to Compudose  200 
+ Finaplix,  Ralgro  + Finaplix  and Synovex-S  + Finaplix  were similar.  
A total of 10 (3.3%)  of the 300 Compudose  200 implants  inserted  were 
not palpable  in the animals ’ ears 10-12 weeks  after implantation.  It was 
assumed  that these implants  were lost but all the data were included  in 
the analyses.
75
PHENOTYPIC  AND  GENETIC  PARAMETERS  OF CARCASS  AND
MEAT  QUALITY  TRAITS  IN PROGENY  TEST  CATTLE
G. J. MORE  O’FERRALL,  R. L. JOSEPH,  P. V. TARRANT  
and P. McGLOUGHLIN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
The overall appearance  and eating quality  of beef is of increasing  
importance  to consumers.  This paper  reports  the phenotypic  and genetic 
parameters  of carcass  and meat quality  traits in 2 groups  of progeny  test 
cattle in 1982 and 1984. Meat quality  was assessed  in the intact carcass  
by measuring  the pH value ot 3 hr and 48 hr post slaughter  and on fibre 
optic probe values  at 48 hours p>ost slaughter,  and on samples  of the 
longissimus  dorsi (LD) muscle  taken  at the 12th/13th  rib, for shear  force, 
drip loss and taste panel assessment.
A total of 182 samples,  representing  3 breeds  and 32 sires (Friesian  
27), Charolais  (4) and Hereford  (1)) were analysed  by the method  of 
least squares.  Because  of the small number  of Charolais  and Hereford  
sires genetic  parameters  were calculated  among  Friesian  sires only. The 
effect of breed,  year and breed x year interaction  were accounted  for in 
the complete  data set, and year in the genetic  analysis.  The inclusion  of 
a regression  on slaughter  age or slaughter  weight  had no effect on the 
meat quality  traits. The only significant  differences  between  breeds  in 
meat quality  traits was for drip loss % and drip loss g/100 cm^ with 
Charolais  x steers having  twice the drip loss of Friesians  (2.31% and 
2.84 vs 1.12% and 1.34 respectively).  Drip loss in Herefords  was inter ­
mediate  (1.66%  and 2.02). This higher  drip loss in Charolais  indicates  
poorer  water holding  capacity  of the muscle  and this could have con­
siderable  commercial  significance  for the vacuum  packing  and supermar ­
ket trades. Due to negative  sire variances,  heritabilities  could not be 
calculated  for many of the meat quality  traits. The heritabilities  and 
their standard  errors  obtained  were pH„=0.25  ± .27; cooking  loss % = 
0.19 + .26; texture  = 0.09 ± .24; flavour  intensity=0.45  + .30; and accept ­
ability  = 0.09 + .24. Estimates  of phenotypic  and genetic  correlations  
between  carcass  and meat quality  traits tended  to be low also. These 
results  (based  on a relatively  small  number  of sires and progeny  per sire) 
indicate  a relatively  low level of genetic  determination  of meat quality  
traits and relationship  between  carcass  perfonnance  and quality  traits.  
The breed  difference  in drip loss requires  further  investigation.
76
A COMPARISON  OF THREE  CALVING  PATTERNS  ON THE  
PRODUCTION  OF DAIRY  COWS
P. A. GLEESON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fennoy,  Co. Cork.
Milk for manufacture  is produced  from seasonally  calving  herds in 
Ireland  with distinct  seasonal  patterns  of milk supply. The present  study  
examined  three calving  patterns.  A total of 78 Friesian  cows were allo­
cated to three treatments  with a mean calving  date of 28 January,  16 
Mareh and 19 October/27  January  for treatments  ES, LS and AS, 
respectively  (40 and 60 per icent of herd AS calved in Oetober  and 
January  respectively).  Each treatment  had its own farmlet  of 18 pad- 
docks,  stocked  at 2.90 cows per hectare  and 395 kg N per hectare  was 
applied.  Silage was conserved  from 8 and 6 paddocks,  for the first and 
second silage cuts respectively.  Cows were fed 7.3 kg/head/day  of 
eoncentrates  post calving  with ad libitum  aocess to grass silage. The 
concentrates  were phased  out after turnout  to pasture  except  for treatment  
LS where 1.8 kg/head/day  were fed to cows from early October  until the 
end of the laetation.  The mean lactation  milk, fat, protein  and lactose 
yields (kg) were 4841, 4902, 5217 (SE 223), 182, 175, 188 (SE 8.3), 164, 
163, 172 (SE 6.8), 222, 221, 241 (SE 10.4) and the mean  milk fat, protein  
and lactose  concentrations  were 37.6, 35.8, 36.1 (SE 0.8), 33.8, 33.4, 33.2 
(SE 0.6), 46.0, 45.2, 46.3 (SE 0.4) for treatment  ES, LS and AS, respect ­
ively. The ES group  had significantly  higher  fat and l.-ictose  concentration  
than the LS group. Concentrate  intakes  of 815, 641 and 1149 (SE 75.4)  
for treatments  ES, LS and AS respectively  differed  significantly.  The first 
year ’s results  show that ealving  patterns  had little influence  on lactation  
performance  but autumn  and early spring  calving  cows had higher  feed 
inputs.
77
THE SLOPED  FLOOR  CATTLE  HOUSING  SYSTEM
A. V. FLYNN  and A. J. KAVANAGH  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
About  half the national  beef cattle herd is outwintered  in the fields, A 
lot more winter  housing  is needed  for cattle. Various  alternative  housing  
systems  exist,  e.g. straw bedded  shed, cubicle  yard without  or with roof,  
all three in combination  with either mechanical  feeding  or self-feeding 
of silage,  slatted  house. All have several  positive  features  in their favour  
but most also have several  negative  features.  The slatted  system  is widely 
accepted  as the ideal but it has one major negative  feature,  i.e. high 
capital  cost.
In 1980 we began  to develop  a new alternative  housing  system  which 
would incorporate  many of the positive  features  of the ideal slatted  
system  but which  would  be a cheaper  system  to construct.  About  half the 
capital cost of the slatted system is spent on housing  and feeding 
arrangements  for the animal,  the other half is spent on the collection  
and storage  of slurry. The alternative  system  retains  positive  features  of 
the slatted  system  like : minimum  floor area per animal,  minimum  roof 
area per animal,  minimum  perimeter  fencing  and service  roadways  per 
animal,  and seeks to combine  these with a cheaper  slurry collection  and 
storage  system.
It achieves  the latter objective  by :
(a) Eliminating  slats,
(b) Eliminating  underground  reinforced  concrete  tank and its internal  
slat support  walls,
(c) Replacing  the tank floor with a floor at ground  level which  is cast in
sections  which slope towards  channels  cast into the floor which 
collect the waste from the floor and channel  it to a slurry store 
outside  the building  with compacted  earth.
A preliminary  experiment  with cattle compared  sloping  floor sections 
which  were either  4m or 2m wide. The results  showed  that the 2m floor  
sections  produced  cleaner  cattle which  grew faster.
Ideally  pen dimensions  are as in qonventional  slatted  houses.  Channel  
dimensions  are 300 mm wide and at least 300 mm deep. The channel  is 
covered  with a steel grid. The channel  collects  slurry  from floor sections 
1.5m wide on either  side of it. The slope in the floor towards  the channel  
is about 1 in 12.
Four animal  production  experiments  have shown  similar  animal  per­
formance  on the sloped floor as described  above and the conventional  
slatted  floor (similar  floor area per animal  in both systems).  Daily live- 
weight  gain averaged  0.87 and 0.84 kg and final earcase  weights  averaged  
260 kg and 262 kg on the sloped  floor and slatted  floor respectively.  Hide  
weights  were recorded  at the end of all experiments  as an index of 
cleanliness.  Hide weights  have averaged  40.6 kg and 39.1 kg off the 
sloped  floor and slatted  floor respectively.
TTie sloped floor system  may be considered  as either a new housing  
system  or as a system  for incorporation  to existing  haysheds/lean-to ’s to 
convert  them to animal  housing,  particularly  on smaller  farms.
Gross  capital  cost of the sloped  floor system  is at least £70 per animal  
(2 floor) cheaper  than the slatted  system.
78
EFFECT  OF IMMUNISATION  AGAINST  SOMATOSTATIN  AND  
BREED  ON GROWTH  RATE  AND  CARCASS  COMPOSITION  OF
LAMBS
J. M. FITZSIMONS,  J. P. HANRAHAN  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam.  Co. Galway.
P. ALLEN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
The object of the ex|^riment  was to examine  the effect of immunis ­
ation against  somatostatin  on growth  rate and carcass  composition  using  
different  breeds. Thirty  lambs were given an injection  of 750 /xg of a 
somatostatin  - human serum albumin  conjugate,  made up of 5 ml in 
Freunds  Complete  Adjuvant,  at 3 weeks of age followed  by 4 booster  
injections  of 250 /rg conjugate  at 14 day intervals  in Freunds  Complete  
Adjuvant.  Twenty-nine  control  animals  were given placebo  injections  at 
similar  intervals.  The 59 animals  comprised  12 Texels,  16 Suffolks  and 
31^ Scottish  Blackface  X Suffolk  crossbreds.  At the time of primary  
injection  the ewes and lambs were housed and the lambs were given  
access  to a concentrate  pellet. Tlie lambs  were weaned  at about  5 weeks  
of age and group  fed for one week. All lambs  were then individually  
penned  and feed intake  was recorded  for 4 days per week over a period  
of 10 weeks. The lambs were slaughtered  when they reached  38 kg, 
approximately.  After slaughter  half-carcass  dissection  was carried  out 
on 26 animals.
There was no significant  breed or treatment  effect on final weight  or 
on daily growth  rate from initial injection  to final weighing  84 days later 
although  immunised  animals  did grow at a lower  rate than controls  (248 
versus  233 g/day). Immunisation  did not affect feed intake. However,  
there was a breed effect with Texel lambs consuming  significantly  less 
than the crossbred  group (P<0.01).  Mean daily feed intakes  (g) were 
919±52.  105±45,  1140±33,  1017±34  and 1059±35  for Texel. Suffolk,  
crossbred,  immunised  and non-immunised  animals,  respectively.
Immunisation  against  somatostatin,  while not affecting  growth  rate, 
did increase  caocass  length (58 versus 56 cm; p<0.05)  and total bone ’ 
weight  (P<0.05)  but had no effect on any other carcass  traits measured.  
The carcasses  of Texel lambs contained  significantly  less fat (P<r0.01)  
less bone (P<0.05)  and more lean meat (P<0.001)  than Suffolk  lambs.
79
INCREASING  REPRODUCTIVE  PERFORMANCE  BY 
IMMUNISATION:  FACTORS  INFLUENCING  THE  
RESPONSE  TO FECUNDIN
J. P. HANRAHAN,  J. F. QUIRKE  and J. FITZSIMONS
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Steroid  hormones  are part of the complex  network  of physiological 
controls  on the process  of reproduction.  Hormone  binding  antibodies  
provide  a convenient  tool for manipulating  reproductive  function  and 
both active and passive  immunisation  against  cestrogens  and androgens  
has increased  ovulation  rate in sheep. An immunogen  for raising  anti­
bodies  against  androstendione  in sheep has been developed  for comrner- 
cial application  and is called Fecundin  (Glaxo  Animal  Health). The 
recommended  procedure  for immunisation  involves  two s/c injections  
(2 ml each),  4 weeks  apart,  in the first year while one booster  injection  
suffices  in subsequent  years.
Starting  in 1982 we have used this immunisation  procedure  m con­
junction  with various  mating  protocols  and incjuding  a comparison  with 
PMSG. Breeds  studied  have included  Galway,  S. Blackface.  Greyface,  
Belclare  Improver,  Improved  Galway  and Finnish  Landrace.  In most  
trials involving  Institute  flocks both ovulation  rate and litter size were 
measured  but for farm trials  only litter size was obtainable.
An overall  summary  of litter size of Galway  ewes shows  that Fecundin  
gives  a significant  and consistent  increase  in litter size of the order  of 25% 
of the control  mean. When  estrus  is synchronised  with progestagen  spon ­
ges, both the incidence  of estrus  and conception  rate are depressed  unless 
the’interval  between  booster  injection  and synchronised  mating  is greater  
than 21 days. For ewes conceiving  at 14 days post-booster  the results  
suggest  that embryo  survival  is impaired.
With S. Blackface  ewes significant  responses  in ovulation  rate have 
been obtained  consistently  but results,  to date, on litter size have been 
disappointing.
While  most of our trials have involved  mature  parous  ewes, results  in 
two trials involving  2-tooth  multiparous  and older parous  ewes failed to 
show any interaction  between  age and ovarian  response  to Fecundin.  The 
results  of a trial involving  Belclare  Improver  and Improved  Galway  ewe 
lambs  showed  that both breeds  responded  to immunisation.
Immunisation  can also be used to increase  ovulation  rate in out-of ­
season  breeding  and the effects  on ovulation  rate are additive  with the 
effects  of PMSG.Our conclusions  at this stage are that Fecundin  will increase  ovulation  
rate in all breeds regardless  of age or physiological  state and is an 
effective  tool for increasing  lamb output  per ewe in the spring  lambing  
flock.  With proper  choice  of boost-to-join  interval  the incidence  of barren  
ewes is reduced  by Fecundin  treatment.
80
APPRAISAL  OF CURRENT  DEVELOPMENTS  IN SHEEP
HOUSING
P. DUIGNAN,  V. A. DODD  and D. J. RUANE  
University,  College,  Dublin.
The provision  of housing  for overwintering  sheep has recently  gained  
acceptance  in Ireland  as an integral  part of intensive  sheep production.  
It was considered  necessary  to determine  the state of development  of 
housing  in the country  and to evaluate  the environment  prevailing  in the 
houses  built in order  to objoi;;tively  plan further  development  in this area.  
This project  sets cut to identify  and evaluate  the house  types  being  used.
A survey  of sheep  houses  in Galway  and Wicklow  was carried  out and 
the main house types identified  as being of the A-roof  type and the 
haybarn  type, with a tendency  towards  the former  in Wicklow  and the 
latter in Galway.  Internal  layouts  and management  techniques  associated  
with these houses  were also recorded.
In order to determine  whether  or not the house types identified  were 
providing  a satisfactory  environment  for the external  relative  humidity  
and temperature  were recorded  in four typical  sheep houses  during  the 
winter  of 1983/84.  The environment  prevailing  in each of the houses  
monitored  was found  to be consistent  with the environment  recommended.
Airflow  patterns  in sheep houses  were studied  in Water  Table,  and a 
ventilation  problem  in a sheep house in Wicklow  was identified  and 
solved using the table.
Feeding  routines  were also observed  in a number  of houses  and hay 
feeding  was found  to be significantly  faster  than silage feeding.
THE MEASUREMENT  AND  DISPERSAL  OF AGRICULTURAL
ODOURS
P. G. CARNEY  and V. A. DODD  
Agriculture  and Food Engineering  Department,  U.C.D.
Malodours  from livestock  units,  particularly  pig and poultry  have been 
the subject  of increasing  controversy  in Ireland  in the past five years. 
Resolution  of controversy,  including  litigation,  can be helped by an 
objective  measurement  of the odour. An olfactometer  is the term used 
to describe  an apparatus  for the measurement  of odours.
An olfactometer was constructed  by the Department  of Agriculture  and 
Food Engineering  at U.C.D.  giving  dilution  factors  of up to 6000. Samp ­
les of contaminated  air (i.e. the malodourous  air) are collected  at the 
source  in a teflon  coated  bag and brought  to the olfactometer.  The olfac ­
tometer  is designed  to expose  4 panellist  to the malodour  simultanously.  
The samples  are analysed  in terms of detectability,  intensity  and offens­
iveness. Each sample is analysed  by a panel of 6-8 persons  and is 
replicated  3 times. In this way samples  collected  from pig, poultry,  eattle,  
sheep,  slurry  tanks  and even samples  from air contaminated  by spreading  
operations  are collected  and analysed.
In addition  to the measurement  of odours  generated,  their rate of 
dispersal  is also under study. A dispersal  mathematical  model adapted  
from one developed  for the atmospheric  pollution  industry  is being 
tested with a view to identifying  the areas of nuisance,  the level of 
nuisance  and the number  of occurrenee  thereof,  around  an existing  unit 
or a proposed  unit.
81
I LION  E ALBISETA  — POTENTIAL  BIOLOGICAL  CONTROL  
AGENT  OF LIVER  FI>LKE  ?
M. J. GORMALLY
The Agricultural  Institute.  Dunsinea,  Castleknock.  Dublin  15.
Studies  over the last 30 years have shown that all reared sciomzyids 
such as llione albiseta  feed exclusively  on molluscs  as larvae. Ihe 
quantitative  data needed to evaluate  the potential  effectiveness  ot 
Sciomyzidae  in biological  control  began  to accumulate  with preliminary  
observations  of sciomyzid  life-cycles  and biology. The significance  ot 
these observations  however  was limited  because  of variable  temperature  
and light conditions.  When it was discovered  that 1. albiseta  predated  
Lymnaea  truncatula  (vector  of fascioliasis  in Ireland),  research  into its 
biology  was initiated  under controlled  conditions  of tem^rature  arid 
light. This type of information  gained  under controlled  conditions  aids in 
defining  optimal  laboratory  rearing  conditions  which would provide  an 
essential  foundation  for the culture  of the organism  on a continual  basis.
Each stage of the year-long  life-cycle,  i.e. (a) adult fly, (b) egg. (c) the 
three larval instars  and (d) pupae were subjected  to a range of constant  
temperatures  (14°, 17°, 20°, 23°, 26° C) under a 16 hour light - 8 hour  
dark lighting  schedule.  By using the following  combination  of temi^ra-  
tures it was discovered  that it was possible  to complete  the life-cycle  in 
approximately  half the time taken by individuals  in the field (% suryiv^  
::^70%)  • (a) 17°C,  (b) 23°C,  (c) 23°C (first and second  instar)  and 17 C 
(third instar),  (d) 26°C. In the case of egg incubation  penod,  it was 
found  that 70% of embryonated  eggs hatched  after 15 days when placed 
in reducing  medium  of 0.1% ascorbic  ticid at 23"C This is considerably  
shorter  than the duration  of the egg stage m the field (67.3 days). Adult  
fecundity  was highest  at 17°C where  a mean  of 57.8 eggs per female  was 
laid It was also discovered  that newly  hatched  larvae  can survive  up to 
a month  without  food at 14°C. The rate at which  I. albiseta  larvae  pre­
date snails increases  as temperature  rises but the total weight  ot snail 
tissue consumed  during  the larval stage remains  approximately  the same  
regardless  of temperature.  This may help to assess  the number  of mrvae  
needed  to control  a known  snail population  over a given period  ot time 
during  a biological  control  experiment.
82
THE EFFECT  OF AGE AND LIVEWEIGHT  AT STIMULATION  
BY BOAR  CONTACT  WITH OR WITHOUT  PMSG  + HCG ON
PUBERTY  ATTAINMENT  AND REPRODUCTION  IN GILTS
P. J. BURNETT  and N. WALKER
Agricultural  Research  Institute  oj Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  
Co. Down.  BT26  6DP.
Groups  of gilts fed ad libitum  during rearing  were stimulated  for 
puberty  at one of four ages, namely  130, 150, 170 or 190 days. Within  
each age group littermate  pairs were allocated  to two treatments;  (1) 
relocation,  mixing  and mature  boar contact;  (2) these stimuli  plus an 
intramuscular  injection  of 400 i.u. PMSG  + 200 i.u. HCG (PG 600, 
Intervet).  Gilts were mated at puberty  and slaughtered  34 ±3 days post 
coitum.  Interim  results  for 180 gilts are presented  in order of ascending  
age at stimulation.  The mean liveweights  at stimulation  and the number  
of gilts involved  were 72.5 kg, 38; 88.5 kg, 38; 98 kg, 52; 115.5 kg, 52. 
The proportion  of gilts which  attained  puberty,  the proportion  mated  are 
shown  in parenthesis,  within  60 days of stimulation  for treatment  1 were 
0.78 (0.56), 1.0 (0.88), 1.0 (0.96), 0.96 (0.96). The proportion  of gilts 
which  attained  puberty  (mated)  within  6 days of stimulation  for treatment  
2 were 0.89 (0.83),  0.79 (0.74),  0.96 (0.92), 1.0 (0.84). The intervals  in 
days from stimulation  to puberty  (mating)  for the gilts on treatment  1 
were 23.3 (29.4), 11.0 (17.3), 9.6 (11.8), 8.5 (8.5) and for the gilts on 
treatment  2 the corresponding  intervals  were 4.6 (4.9),  4.7 (4.8), 4.4 (4.5),  
4.4 (4.8). The conception  rates for treatments  1 and 2 with increasing  
age at stimulation  were 0.80, 0.93, 0.83, 0.90 and 0.71, 0.71, 0.71, 0.74.  
The corresponding  ovulation  rates were 12.9, 13.6, 12.1, 12.9 and’ 14.6, 
19.9, 16.6, 20.6. The corresponding  number  of embryos  alive at 34 days  
post coitum  were 9.7, 9.5, 8.9, 9.9 and 8.1, 10.2, 9.3, 11.3. The effects  of 
liveweight  within  age at stimulation  were small and mainly  non-significant.
83
THE  EFFECTS  OF HIGH  FEED  INTAKES  IN EARLY  
PREGNANCY  IN SOWS
N. WALKER
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland.  Hillsborough,
Co. Down,  BT26  6DP.
Multiparous  sows were classified  subjaetively  at farrowing  according  
to body condition  as either  fat or thin. The difference  in body condition  
between  the two groups  was increased  by feeding  the ‘fat’ sows gener ­
ously during  lactation  and restricting  the feed of the ‘thii^ sows to a 
maximum  of 4 kg per day of a diet containing  12.5 MJ DE/kg.  After  
weaning  all sows were fed this diet at the rate of 3 kg daily until mating.  
The depth of skin plus subcutaneous  fat was measured  ultrasonically  at 
the Pj position.  At conception  the thin sows weighed  159 kg with a 
measurement  of 13.8 mm with corresponding  values  for the fat mws of 
165 kg and 19.4 mm. Following  mating  half of each group  was allocated  
at random  to feed allowances  of either 2 or 4 kg per day for 30 days. 
Thereafter  all sows were given a common  allowance  cf 2.2 kg per day 
until parturition.  A total of 62 sows completed  the experiment.
There was no effect on the number  of pigs born per litter. The fat 
sows produced  heavier  pigs than the thin sows but the response  of this 
parameter  to generous  feeding  was greater  in the thin sows.  
gross and net liveweight  gains  in gestation  were greater  in the fat than in 
the thin sows at equal feed intakes. From conception  to day IIU ot 
gestation  subcutaneous  fat thickness  increased  slightly  more in the tat 
than in the thin sows. From day 110 to parturition  the losses of sub­
cutaneous  fat were higher  in the fat sows such that the overall  net gain 
from conception  to parturition  was similar  for fat and thin sows given  
identical  feed allowances.  Calculations  based on this data suggested  that 
the daily nitrogen  retention  at equal feed rates was lower in thin sows  
than in fat sows. The thin sows showed  no evidence  of compensatory  
growth.
84
Irish Grassland 
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal  
1985
FARMERS
JOURNAL
inE VO'Cf  Of IRF lANOS  BK.CtSf  iNDUSru*The Road  
to Success
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 19 1985
Printed  by Lithographic  Universal,  Dargle  Vale, Bray
M. J. Drennan  
B. Hickey  
K. A. Linklater  
P. A. Gleeson  
G. A. Stakelum  
K. J. OTarrell
P. McFeely
P. O. Mohn  
J. M. SlaterCONTENTS
Page
Beef production  from the suckler  herd 3
The suckler  herd in the agricultural  economy  14
Disease  control  in the lambing  flock 24
Effect of calving  date on milk production  30
Factors  effecting  herbage  intake of cows 36
Do it yourself  artificial  insemination  
(DIY AI) 43
Financial  management  on dairy farms —the 
weak link?  48
Challenges  to the Irish dairy industry  54
The Management  of a large dairy herd in 
the U.K.  61
Abstracts  of the 11th Annual  Research  
Meeting  66
COUNCIL  1984/1985
President-.  A. Conway  
Vice-President  D. Fay 
Council  Members :
D. Booth, D. Cashman,  J. Dardis,  V. Flynn. D. Grace, G. Kerin,  
J. Leeson,  K. Mathews.  O. Manley,  P. MacCanna,  D. MacCarthy,  
P. McFeely,  M. Murphy,  P. O’Keeffe, The O’Morchoe,  T. Power,
P. Tighe
Hon. Secretary  / Treasurer  
Dr. S. Flanagan,
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Beef Production  from the Suckler  Herd
M. J. DRENNAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Following  increases  in the late sixties and early seventies  the suckler  
herd consisted  of 0.69 million  cows in December  1974 which  represented  
about one-third  of the total cow population.  However,  there was a 
major decline  in beef cow numbers  subsequently  resulting  in only 0.40 
million  in December  1983. The increase  in dairy  cow numbers  from 1974 
was inadequate  to offset  the decline  in beef cows  with the result  that total 
cow numbers  have declined  over the last 10 years. The introduction  of 
the milk super levy means  that dairy cow numbers  will at best remain  
constant  but are more likely to decline  in the next few years due to 
increased  milk production  per cow. Therefore,  if beef production  is to 
expand  in the foreseeable  future  the extra calves  will need to come from  
a source  other than the dairy herd. The most likely source  of these extra  
calves  is the suckler  herd.
The suckler  herd (cow and progeny)  is presently  using the equivalent  
of about  one-sixth  of the total usable  land in the country  but if expansion  
is to take place it is necessary  that acceptable  economic  returns  can be 
obtained  from suckling.
There is no single factor in suckling  which ensures  good economic  
returns. However,  having  a clearly  defined  production  plan involving  
sale of suitable  animals  at the right time is of vital importance.  The most  
important  management  factors  relating  to beef production  from the 
suckler  herd include  the following  :
— Breeds  used
— Re-breeding
— Time of calving
•— Pasture  management
— Winter  feeding
— Type of system.
Breed  of Cow
The most suitable  type of cows available  for single suckling  has been 
Hereford  x Friesians  from the dairy herd. However,  there is now 
increased  usage of continental  sire breeds  on Friesian  cows providing  
progeny  which are also suitable  as suckler  dams. Comparisons  of con­
tinental  (Charolais,  Simmental  and Limousin)  cross Friesian  dams with 
Hereford  x Friesians  are in progress  and the calf gains  pre-weaning  from  
one such study are shown  in Table 1. Averaged  over the first lactations  
the growth  rates of the progeny  of Charolais  cross cows was about 4% 
greater  than those from Hereford  cows. Friesian  cows  were also included  
in this comparison.  While  calf growth  rates were highest  for the Friesians  
due to greater milk intakes,  the weight and body condition  of the
Friesian  cows deteriorated  relative  to the other breed types as the study 
progressed  which  would  exclude  Friesians  as suckler  dams. In addition  
to better  calf growth  the continental  crosses  tend to have slightly  lower 
calving  problems,  their progeny  have better carcasses  but the dams are 
usually  heavier  than Hereford  x Friesians.  However,  the mature  size of 
the Limousin  x Friesian  cow is quite similar  to the Hereford  x Friesian.
Table 1
Year Hereford  x Friesian Charolais  x Friesian Friesian
1977 0.79 0.86 0.95
1978 1.02 1.01 1.11
1979 0.92 0.99 1.00
1980 1.06 1.11 1.13
Mean 0.95 0.99 1.05
Limousin  bull on heifers  (1977)  and Simmental  bull subsequently
Breed  of Bull
When a crossbred  cow is used, the bull should preferably  be from a 
third breed. The two most important  factors  in relation  to the bull are 
high growth potential  in the calves and a low incidence  of calving 
problems.  In addition  to the breed differences  for these factors,  there is 
also wide variation  within any one breed. Iii data collected  by the 
Department  of Agriculture  the incidence  of serious  difficulty  at calving 
varied  from 2.4 with Friesian  bulls to 6.4 with Charolais  bulls (Table  2). 
More important,  however,  is the variation  between  individual  bulls  
within any one breed which  for Simmental  bulls varied  from 0.4 to 12.3 
per cent. Therefore,  when selecting  the bull the most important  point is 
to choose an individual  known to have a low incidence  of calving 
difficulties.
Table 2
Effect  of breed  of bull on calving  difficulties
Breed of BullSerious  Difficulty  (%)
Average Individual  bulls range
Hereford 3.1 0.0 to 7.4
Charolais 6.4 1.0 to 10.4
Simmental 5.1 0.4 to 12.3
Friesian 2.4 0.0 to 9.9
Source  ; Department  of Agriculture  1984
Calving  difficulties  are more common  in heifers  than in cows. The 
large breeds  of bull are therefore  not recommended  for heifers. While
adequate  data were available  on Limousin  bulls from the above survey 
other information  shows  the expected  incidence  of serious  calving  diffi­
culty to lie between  those of Charolais  and Hereford.  Limousin  bulls are 
used at Grange  on heifers  calving  at two years  of age.
Studies  in the U.K. and U.S.A. have clearly  shown that relative  to 
Hereford  bulls an increase  in pcwth  rate and final liveweight  of about  
8% can be expected  from using the better continental  sire breeds on 
suckler  cows (Table  3).
Table 3
Effect  of breed  of bull on birth weight  and final liveweight
Breed of bull Birth wt.
(kg)Final liveweight  
(kg)Difference  in final 
liveweight  (kg)
Hereford 37 469 0
Limousin 38 482 + 13
Simmental 40 504 + 35
Charolais 41 512 + 43
Source  : U.S. Department  of Agriculture,  1974
In addition  the progeny  of continental  sires may be taken to heavier  
carcass  weights  before  excess  fat deposition  occurs. Their suitability  for 
the higher priced markets  on the continent  will likely be of greater  
importance  in the future and hopefully  will be reflected  in a suitable  
price advantage  at meat factories.
Breeding
An obvious  objective  in suckling  is to aim for a live calf per cow 
every 365 days. The most effective  and simplest  method  of breeding  is 
by using a fertile bull. For various  reasons  (e.g. small herd size) a bull 
may not be available  and it is necessary  to use AI. A vasectomised  bull 
with a chin ball marker  is effective  for detecting  cows in heat. However,  
as the cows are generally  at pasture  during the breeding  .season the 
greatest  problem  is assembly  of cows for AI.
Time  of Calving
While this is an important  consideration  for those starting  a suckler  
herd, it also merits attention  from producers  with existing  herds. The 
first essential  is to aim for a specific  3-month  calving  season. There are 
many  arguments  as to what is the best calving  season  and it is extremely  
difficult  to study this experimentally.
The feed allowances  per cow yearly and her calf to 240 days were 
calculated  for spring  (March  1), summer  (June 1) and autumn  (October  
1) calving  herds. While there were no differences  in pasture  land re­
quirements  between  the three systems,  spring calving  herds required
considerably  less silage  than the other  two systems  (Table  4). To provide 
adequate  silage the proportion  of grassland  which must be cut on two 
occasions  is 40, 56 and 59 per cent for spring,  summer  and autumn  
calving  herds respectively.  Concentrate  allowances  of 90 & 270 kg are 
needed  for summer  and autumn  calving  herds respectively.  There is a 
straw  allowance  for spring  and summer  calving  herds.  The main problems  
peculiar  to the systems  are calf scours  when calving  indoors  in spring 
and in autumn  calving  herds  re-breeding  and summer  mastitis.
Recent  data from Northern  Ireland  show that 78 per cent of suckler  
cows calve in the first four months  of the years (Table 5). It is thus 
reasonable  to assume  that about 80 per cent of suckler  cows here are 
also spring  calving.  At Grange,  the suckler  herd is calved  in the months  
February  to April and this ensures  a heavy  weanling  in November.  The 
cow is dry for most of the winter,  therefore  feed inputs  can be kept to a 
minimum  (Table  4). This approach  ensures  that in the winter  when feed 
costs are high requirements  of the cow are least and when requirements  
are high the cow is at pasture. In addition,  earlier  calving  in spring, 
particularly  in smaller herds, allows the possibility  of adopting  an 
additional  calf (or calves)  on to the beef cow before  she is turned  out to 
grass. Such a practice  would  be particularly  attractive  at a time of low 
calf prices.
Table 4
Season  of calving— cow for 1 year and calf to weaning
Season  of calving
Spring Summer Autumn
Mean calving  date
Silage (tonne  DM)
Silage (% of grassland —2 cuts) 
Concentrates  (kg)
Straw (kg)March  1 
1.13
40
180June 1
1.57
56
90
noOctober  1 
1.65
59
270
Table 5
Distribution  of beef cow calvings in Northern  Ireland
Jan./Apr. May/Aug. Sept./Dec.
Percent  calvings 78 12 10
Summer  grazing  and silage  making
As grazed grass is the cheapest  feed for livestock,  it is essential  to 
obtain high animal performance  during  the grazing  season. A major  
factor  influencing  production  per acre is the number  of animals  carried.  
To obtain high production  per unit area, the stocking  rate must be
CASH
FLOW
A complete  financial  
management  kit 
for lararmers.
• Agri-Check  Cheque  Book• Agri-Check  Cash Flow  Sheet• Agri-Check  Farm Diary
Why  every  farmer  needs  Agri-Check:
Careful  planning  and cost control  are 
critical  to the success  of modern  farm  
business.  For that reason,  it is vital for 
farmers  to have an efficient  method  of 
recording  financial  transactions.Bank of Ireland  provides  this with the 
Agri-Check  service.
Call into your local Bank  of Ireland  
branch  today  for further  details.
BanKcrireiana
adjusted  to ensure  that the animals  have adequate  grass at all times  and 
that it is properly  utilised.  Grazing  studies  with spring  calving  cows  have  
shown  that about 0.6 acres  of pasture  (rested  from November  to April)  
is required  per cow and calf from mid-April  when  grass growth  is highest. 
To maintain  animal  performance  at a high level the stocking  rate must  
be reduced  considerably  (approximately  halved)  for the remainder  of the 
.season. Where a herd is carried throughout  the year the silage is 
required  for the cow and weanling  in winter,  1.25 acres are allowed  per 
cow and calf. In the early part of the season,  0.65 acres  is cut twice for 
silage and 0.60 acres is grazed.  The entire  area is grazed  from August  to 
the end of the grazing  season.
In suckling  systems  it is important  that silage fed to the progeny  is of 
high quality  which  necessitates  taking  the first cut early (May 20-25)  and 
ensuring  good preservation.  If the remaining  silage is for dry cows and 
cows in early lactation,  such as with a spring calving  herd, then the 
same emphasis  need not be placed on quality. In such circumstances  
some quality  decline  can be tolerated  with more emphasis  on yield in the 
second  cut which  will be fed to the cows.
Winter  Feeding  of the Cows
Feed requirements  of the cows in winter  will depend  on whether  they 
are dry or lactating.  A suckler  cow rearing  one calf will require  oyer 1.5 
times as much feed as a dry cow. All cows can afford to lose weight  in 
winter  but the time at which weight  is lost and the extent  of the loss is 
important.  Spring  calving,  mature  suckler  cows in gocd Ixidy condition  
at the start of winter  can be restricted  in feed from the time of housing  
to calving  (about  3 months)  without  ill-effects.  As a general  rule, main ­
tenance  of cow liveweight  to calving  is adequate.  This means  that after  
calving,  the cow will be over 50 kg lighter  than at the start of winter.
Table 6
Effect  of restricted  feeding  of cows (500 kg) in the last 2.5 to 3 months  of 
pregnancy  on liveweight  changes  (kg)
Silage fed before  
calving*YEAR 1 YEAR 2
To appetite Restricted To appetite Restricted
Housing  to post-calving + 2 —57 —49 —84
Post-calving  to grazing —28 —21 —34 —32
At pasture -1-55 -1-98 4-80 -1-102
Housing  to 180 days
after calving -1-29 -1-20 —3 —14
♦Silage  fed to appetite  post-calving
When fed mcderatc  quality  silage alone after calving  the cow will lose 
further  weight  resulting  in a total loss of about  75 kg over the winter.
Studies  at Grange  have shown  that beef cows restricted  over the winter  
recover liveweight  during the following  grazing season (Table 6). 
Although  the weight loss in winter in year 2 was greater  than the 
recommended  75 kg loss for mature  cows, the animals  were only 14 kg 
lighter  6 months  after calving  than at the start of the previous  winter. 
These  weight  losses  had no ill-effects  on calf performance  or cow fertility  
when the cows were subsequently  provided  with an adequate  supply  of 
high quality  pasture.
Reducing  feed intake before calving  is likely to reduce  calving  diffi­
culties. It has been demonstrated,  particularly  with heifers,  that animals  
fed on high levels of nutrition  before  calving  have greater  calving  prob ­
lems. With greater  use of the larger breeds  as sires, calving  difficulties 
will increase  somewhat  and it will be more important  to avoid having  
cows fat at calving.  Of course,  at the other  extreme,  very thin emaciated  
cows would  also result in increased  calf mortality.
Spring  Calving  System  — Fattened  at 1.5 to 2 years
While  time of sale can very depending  on farm circumstances  a system  
involving  fattening  at 1.5 to 2 years of age can usefully  be used to 
illustrate  the management  required  at various  periods. The system in­
volves  sale of the heifers  at 18 months  and the steers at end of a second  
winter  (about  25 months).
The cows calving  in February/March  are put to pasture  (which  has 
been rested from November)  in mid-April  when the calves  are 6 to 7 
weeks  old. Calves  of this age at the start of the grazing  season  will be 
able to avail of the increased  milk produced  by the cows on going to 
pasture  and will also be able to use grass themselves.  In addition,  an 
adequate  supply of high quality  pasture at this period ensures  good  
fertility  and rapid weight  recovery  in the cows. As indicated  earlier  a 
cow and calf to the yearling  stage will require  1.25 acres  for grazing  and 
silage. A further  0.55 acres  is required  to graze the yearling  and provide  
silage for steers  during  the second  winter. Thus a total of 1.8 acres of 
pasture  is required  per cow unit, 54 per cent of which is grazed in the 
period April to August  and the remainder  cut twice for silage. The 
entire  area is grazed  from August  until the end of the season.
Mature  suckler  cows are generally  in good body condition  at the start 
of winter  (weaning).  They are fed silage only during  the winter  (about  
150 days) and 5.5 to 6 tonnes  are available  per cow. This means  that 
silage must be fed at a restricted  level until calving,  but it is fed to 
appetite  from calving  to grazing.  However,  cows in poor body condition  
(which  is unlikely  under lowland  conditions)  and first calvers  should  be 
fed silage to appetite  throughout  the entire  winter  period. The cows are 
fed the second  cut silage taken in late July. Mature  cows are fed silage  
alone in winter  whereas  heifers  calving  at two years of age are offered
up to 1.5 kg of barley daily with silage from calving  to the start of 
grazing.
The level of meal feeding  required  in the first winter  with high quality  
silage fed to appetite  will be low (1 kg per head daily) as the yearlings  
will be going  to pasture  in spring. Average  weights  of steers and heifers  
going  to pasture  as yearlings  will be about  330 kg (Table  7). Heifers  are 
sold fat in September  (mean sale date) at a carcass  weight of 236 
(moderate)  to 260 (good)  kg. The steers  are housed  in November  and fed 
4 kg barley  daily during  their second  winter  and sold fat at 25 months  of 
age in spring  when caneass  weights  of 340 (moderate)  to 380 (good)  kg 
can be expected.
Table  7
Animal  weights  (kg)
Steers Heifers
Age at sale (months) 25 18
Weaning  weight 273 250
Yearling  weight 354 309
Final liveweight 600-670 440-485
Carcass  weight 340-380 236-360
Spring  Calving  — fattening  buUs at 16 months  of age
Economic  analyses  suggest  that to achieve  optimum  financial  returns  
the progeny  should  be taken to slaughter  on the producers  farm. How ­
ever, in many instances  this is not possible  and suckled  calves  are often 
sold at weaning  in autumn  at a time of low prices. The provision  of a 
better  market  for these animals  resulting  in higher  economic  returns  to 
producers  will encourage  greater  expansion  in the future; These young 
continental  cross bulls if over 300 kg in autumn  could be considered  
suitable  for fattening  over an extended  winter  feeding  period  (200 days) 
where high quality  feed is available.  The performance  of three-quarter  
continental  cross suckler  bulls from the herd at Grange  fed high quality  
silage and concentrates  over the past two winters  is shown  in Table 8. 
The animals  were 290-300  kg at weaning  and average  daily concentrate  
intakes  per animal  were 4.3 and 4.1 kg in years 1 and 2 respectively. 
Corresponding  figures  were 1.21 and 1.34 kg per day for liveweight  gains 
and 320 and 355 kg for carcass  weights.  The high killing-out  percentage  
(57.1 and 58.4 for years 1 and 2 respectively)  is noteworthy  which  is 4 to 
5 units higher  than for two year old Friesian  animals  of a similar  weight.  
In both years  carcasses  were primarily  2 and 3 for fatness  on the carcass  
classification  scale. In terms  of carcass  conformation  83 per cent of the 
total carcass  were graded  E or U.
10
Table 8
Performance  of young  bulls fed silage  and concentrates
Year 1
1982/83Year  2 
1983/84
Feeding  period (days) 218 238
Concentrates  (kg/day) 4.3 4.1
Silage (kg Dm/day) 4.4 4.2
Initial liveweight  (kg) 297 290
Final liveweight  (kg) 561 608
Daily gain (kg) 1.21 1.34
Killing-out  percentage 57.1 58.4
Carcass  weight  (kg) 320 355
Age at sale (months) 15.5 16
Economic  retunis  from intensive  suckling  systems
Gross  margins  per acre were calculated  for the following  3 systems.
A sale of weanlings  in autumn,
B sale of steers  at 2 years and heifers  at 18 months,
C sale of bulls at 16 months  (350 kg carcass  weight)  and heifers  at 18 
months  (Table  9).
The acres of grassland  (grazing  and silage required  per cow and 
progeny  for Systems  A, B and C) were 1.1, 1.8 and 1.56. At high 
levels of production  without  a beef cow subsidy  gross margins  were 
about £230/acre  for Systems  B and C but only £146 for System  A. 
Thus,  on good lowland  with moderate  levels of nitrogen  application  
(150 units per acre on the grazing  area) economic  returns  are improved  
by taking  the animals  to slaughter.
Table 9
Gross  margins  (£/ac)  from different  systems
Time of saleA
WeanlingsB
Steers  — 25 mths.  
Heifers  —-18 mths.C
Bulls  —16 mths.  
Heifers  — 18 mths.
Acres/cow  & progeny 1.1 1.8 1.56
Gross margin/ac. 146 185-227 230
Effect  on gross  margin  of
Beef cow subsidy  £65 -1-59 -F36 4-42
Heifers-l-22p/kg  carcass 4-16 4-18
Continentals  -1-1 Ip/kg  carcass 4-20 4-21
Steer (or bull) and heifer  carcasses  valued  at 247 and 203 p/kg respectively
11
Factors  affecting  economic  returns  and future  cow numbers
Inclusicn  of a beef subsidy  cf £65 per cow increases  gross margins  per 
acre from Systems  A, B. and C by £59, £36 and £42 respectively.  In 
recent  years the prices  of heifers  have been particularly  poor relative  to 
steers  and an increase  of 22p per kg of carcass  for heifers  would  increase 
gross  margins  from Systems  B and C by £16 to £18. The carcass  fatness  
and conformation  data for the young  bulls indicate  the quality  of those 
three-quarters  continental  cross carcasses  compared  with standard  Frics-  
ians. A premium  for these carcasses  of 1 Ip per kg increases  gross  margins  
per acre from Systems  B and C by about £20. The combined  effect of 
these three factors  amount  to an improvement  in margins  of up to £80 
per acre from suckling,  thereby  improving  considerably  the economic  
environment.  If these conditions  are available  then it can be expected 
that suckler  cow numbers  will increase  as evidenced  by the response  to 
favourable  economic  conditions  in the late sixties/early  seventies.
Cheveley  Johnston  & Company
Agricultural  Consultants  & Land Agents
Farm Reports  and Feasibility  Studies  
Management  Accounts  and Enterprise  Costings  
Farm and Estate  Management  
Staff Selection
Budgetary  Control  and Cash Flow Forecasts  
Land and Stock  Valuations —Farm Sales  and Purchases
26/27 WELLINGTON  ROAD,  CORK  
(Cork 501109)
12
list  year freland^  daii5»  exports;  farw^^ore  
our counhys  economy!
Now we are determined  to maintain  this grovfe  by developir^  a wider": : 
range  of prodiKts  for tire intemadional  martetplace.
IRISH  DAIRY  BOARD
13
The Suckler  Herd in the Agricultural  
Economy
B. HICKEY
The Agricultural  Institute,  Economics and Rural  Welfare  Centre,  Dublin.
There  are 422,000  suckler  cows in the country.  Between  them and their  
progeny  they comprise  approximately  one million  livestock  units and 
occupy  2.5 million  acres  of land. In the national  accounts  the contribution  
of the suckler  herd to agricultural  output  is not identified  separately  but 
rather  is included  with cattle  and beef. The authors  estimate  of the con­
tribution  to gross agricultural  output in 1983 is IR£230  million or 
IR£207  million  net of headage  payments.  It represents  about  9 per cent 
of the value  of agricultural  output  excluding  turf. This compares  with the 
output  from sheep  and lambs  of £75 million.  It will be appreciated  then 
that it is an important  component  of agricultural  production.  As such 
it is worth considering  whether  it should  be actively  encouraged  to de­
velop  and flourish.
Why do we need a suckler  herd ?
When  the suckler  herd is discussed  the point  is often  made  that suckler  
beef production  is biologically  inefficient.  It has also been shown  that 
in the absence  of subsidies  it is not generally  competitive  with other  
farm enterprises  in terms  of profitability.  One may then ask why it should  
be actively  promoted  in agricultural  development.  The case for the 
expansion  of suckling  is based on a number  of underlying  facts as 
follows :
(a) unsuitability  of a high proportion  of land for tillage;
(b) restriction  of the dairy herd due to the Super-levy;
(c) household  structure  or off-farm  employment  restricting  farm  
enterprise  options  on many  farms;
(d) lack of tradition  in sheep  on about  75 per cent of farms;
(e) low levels of stocking  rate on the majority  of farms with suckler  
herds;
(f) expansion  of suckling  in the past has not been at the expense  of 
other enterprises.
Given  the trend in EEC cereals  policy  and the pressure  on prices  it is 
likely that in future  cereals  will be largely  confined  to the most suitable  
soils (35% of soils).  This implies  that on a high proportion  of the country  
the options  will be mainly  confined  to some form of livestock  and for­
estry. Milk production  is restricted  by the operation  of the dairying  
Super  Levy. Arising  from this, future  increases  in deliveries  per cow will 
result in a decline  in the total dairy herd while the Super  Levy persists. 
Deliveries  to creameries  per cow increased  at an annual  average  rate of 
2.5% between  1970 and 1982 (Fingleton,  1983). Were this trend in 
deliveries  per cow to continue  until 1990 the dairy cow herd could be
14
reduced  by 16 per cent or by 264,000  head while  maintaining  the present  
level of total deliveries.  Calf prices would tend to escalate,  thus rein­
forcing  the traditional  extensive  systems  of cattle production  and mili­
tating  against  the more intensive  systems  such as accelerated  beef produc ­
tion. A decline  in dairy  cow numbers  would  be accompanied  by increased  
retention  of calves  for rearing  on dairy farms,  resulting  in a future  source  
of decline  in the supply  of calves  to beef producers.
Apart  from restrictions  imposed  by soil type and the milk Super  Levy 
about three-quarters  of farmers  have no tradition  in sheep production.  
Approximately  one-quarter  are part-time  farmers  (Higgins,  1983).  Others  
are restricted  in their farm enterprise  options  due to a household  struc ­
ture, age, etc. For these reasons  there are many farms on which  choice 
of enterprise  is restricted  to some form of cattle  production.
The argument  that suckling  is biologically  inefficient  and uncompetitive  
in the absence  of financial  aids might  be sustainable  if it were established  
that suckling,  which had received  aid, was displacing  other more pro­
ductive  and remunerative  enterprises.  The evidence  however  is very much  
to the contrary.  In a study of suckler  herds in 1980 (Hickey  et al, 1980)  
it was found that farmers  who expanded  their herds did so mainly  
through  intensification  and land reclamation  (86%)  or by substitution  for 
other cattle. Where  the suckler  cow enterprise  was substituted  for other  
cattle this meant that the displaced  cattle were kept on other farms  
instead,  so that there was no corresponding  reduction  in national  produc ­
tion. Only 5% of expansion  was accommodated  at the expense  of 
enterprises  other than cattle. Further  evidence  that expansion  of the 
suckler  herd does not greatly  impinge  on other enterprises  is provided  
by the fact that the total number  of grazing  livestock  units in the country  
was at its maximum  in 1974 when the suckler  herd reached  its peak.
Other  sources  of increased  beef production
Apart from increasing  the size of the breeding  herd there are some 
other potential  sources  of increased  beef production  including  increasing  
the productivity  of the herd, carrying  animals  to heavier  weights  and 
production  of beef from once calved  heifers.
The foregoing  considerations  indicate  that even in the absence  of a 
milk Super  Levy the case for expansion  of the suckler  herd is strong  from  
a national  perspective.  With the Super Levy in operation  the case is 
overwhelming.  However  in order for a national  agricultural  aspiration  
to be realised  it must be translated  into increased  farm outcome.  This 
means that suckler  beef production  must be competitive  with other  
options  available  to those engaged  in cattle  production  in particular.
The suckler  herd nationally
A major expansion  of the beef suckler  herd commenced  in the late 
1960s prior to which  numbers  had been low, although  the Calved  Heifer  
Scheme  did provide  a temporary  impetus  to the herd in 1965-66.  This 
expansion  continued  uninterrupted  until 1974 when the number  reached  
732,000  and accounted  for 33% of the total breeding  herd. A number  of
15
coinciding  factors  favoured  this major  expansion.  Firstly,  the Beef Cattle  
Incentive  Scheme  was introduced  in 1969, which provided  grants for 
breeding  herds not engaged  in commercial  milk production  and was 
available  throughout  the whole country.  The level of grant from 1970 
onwards  was IR£21 for the 3rd cow, 1R£19  for the 4th and IR£16  for 
each additional  qualifying  cow in a herd. Putting  this in the context  of 
present  prices  the IR£16  grant in 1970 is equivalent  to IR£87  at the level 
of agricultural  prices  prevailing  in 1983. A second  important  aspect  was 
the high level of calf prices. Calf price was equivalent  to 154 kg live- 
weight  of finished  beef in 1973, a level which has never since been 
approached.  After 1974 the number  of suckler  cows declined,  at first 
rapidly  and later at a more moderate  pace. This coincided  with a marked  
decline  in calf prices,  which  dipped  to their lowest  level relative  to beef 
prices in 1975. The reduction  in the level of grants payable  under the 
Beef Cattle  Incentive  Scheme  followed  by its abolition  in 1978 also con­
tributed  to making  suckling  less competitive  with artificial  rearing  of 
cattle.
Since 1981 the numbers  of suckler cows has stabilised  at about  420,000.  
This has been accompanied  by an increase  in the calf to beef price ratio.  
The introduction  of the suckler  cow grant would also have been a 
contributory  factor.
Since  keeping  of suckler  cows  can be viewed  as an alternative  to buying  
in calves  and rearing  them artifically,  then the combination  of calf price  
and suckler  cow grant is likely to be important  in determining  the rela­
tive attractiveness  of suckling.  The attraction  of keeping  a suckler  cow 
might be measured  as the saving  arising  from not having  to buy a calf 
plus the value of the grant for keeping  the cow. This is shown  in Table  
1 for the years 1973 to 1984. Calf prices are derived  from the Bandon
Table 1
Calf price plus suckler  cow grant  relative  to beef cattle prices
YearCalf
price
(1R£)Suckler  
cow grant  
(1R£)Calf&
headage
(IR£)Cattle
price
(1R£/
100 kg)Calf & 
headage 
relative 
to cattle 
price  (kg)No. of 
other
cows
(000)
1973 52 16 68 33.70 202 651
1974 26 16 42 29.80 141 732
1975 13 16 29 40.11 72 637
1976 32 11 43 53.10 81 547
1977 49 11 60 64.00 94 537
1978 56 56 76.25 73 502
1979 80 80 78.60 102 484
1980 60 13.18 73 78.10 93 448
1981 80 27 107 94.50 113 424
1982 106 24 130 103.50 126 429
1983 124 25 149 112.30 133 421
1984 131 25 156 116.80 134 422
16
series and are unweighted  averages  for the months  January  to April.  
Beef cattle prices are annual  averages  and are derived  by combining  
bullocks  (66%) and heifers (34%). In 1973 the combined  value of a 
calf plus the suckler  cow grant was equal to 202 kg of beef, its highest  
level of the years shown,  indicating  that the keeping  of suckler  cows was 
relatively  attractive.  The lowest point was reached  in 1975 when the 
combination  of calf price plus grant was equal to only 72 kg of beef 
liveweight.  At that time the number  of suckler  cows was declining  
rapidly In 1984 the calf price plus grant is equal to 134 kg of beef a 
level which  is accompanied  by a stable  suckler  cow herd.
If the price and grant parameters  that prevailed  in 1973 are taken as 
the yard stick against  which  to judge the attractiveness  of suckling,  i.e. a 
combination  of calf price and suckler  grant equal to 200 kg liveweight 
then the corresponding  value at 1984 beef prices  is about IR£230.  The 
grant level required  to achieve  this combined  value  would  depend  on the 
level of calf prices,  but taking 1984 calf prices a total of approximately  
IRflOO  IS implied.  The two components,  namely  calf price and suckler  
cow grant operate  in different  ways in affecting  the competitiveness  of 
suckling.  By contrast  an increase  in the price of calves  improves  the com­
petitive  position  of suckling  by reducing  the profitability  of artificial  rearing.
Suckler  herds  in the country
There were 74,000  holdings  in the country  in 1983 with cows other  
than dairy  cows and with an average  herd size of 5.4 (Table  2). Of these  
56,000  with 6.5 cows on average  were eligible  for the suckler  cow scheme. 
It is clear then that the beef cow herd is broadly  based indicating  that 
the possibilities  for expansion  are considerable  provided  the circum ­
stances  are favourable.  The average  herd size is very small and this 
would  not be conducive  to the use of more modem  production  methods.
Table 2
The suckler  herd nationally  1983
No. of 
herds 
(000)No. of
cows
(000)Average 
herd size 
(No.)Amount  grant  
per cow 
(1R£)
Total 74.2 402.7 5.4
Suckler  cow scheme 56.3 363.0 6.5 25.0Beef cow scheme 9.1 58.7 6.5 20.8
Source  : Department  of Agriculture
Of the total 422,000  other cows in the country  in 1983, 363,000  or 
86% received  grant under  the suckler  cow scheme.  The remainder  were 
either  in herds with creamery  or liquid milk or where  the farmer  was a
17
part-time  farmer  (i.e. less than 50% of his time and less than 50% of 
his income  from farming).
Approximately  70% of suckler  cows are in the disadvantaged  areas  
including  54% in the severely  handicapped  areas and 16% in the less 
disadvantaged  areas.
Suckling  as a fann enterprise
Moving  from the national  situation  to that of the individual  farm two 
of the main aspects  that arise are :
a) suckling  as an alternative  to other cattle or farming  enterprises;  
and
b) increasing  the numbers  of suckler  cows through  intensification.  
First it is of some interest  to consider  the general  level of returns  being 
achieved  on farms keeping  suckler  cows. Table 3 shows the average 
levels  of output,  costs and margins  for 1983 from farms  engaged  in single  
suckling  in the Farm  Management  Survey.  The generally  low level of out-
Table 3
Output,  costs and margins  — single  suckling  by soil group,  1983
SOIL GROUP Wide use
rangeLimited  use 
rangeExtremely
limited  
use range
No. of farms 47 70 58
Average  farm size (acres) 47 38 50
Per livestock  unit*
Output 231 231 227
of which Fleadage  grants 14 29 27
Direct  costs 84 64 66
Gross margin 147 167 161
Forage  acres 1.85 2.43 3.56
Per acre :
Gross margin 79 69 45
Regular  overheads 28 20 12
Return  to land, labour.
33 management  and investment 51 49
Note : * A livestock  unit is one 533 kg animal  kept for one year 
Source  : Farm Management  Survey  Data, An Foras Taluntais
put and margins  is striking  as well as the extensive  nature  of stocking  
rate. Even on good soils the average  level of stocking  rate is 1.85 forage  
acres per livestock  unit. The combination  of low output  per livestock 
unit and low stocking  rate results  in very low income  per acre, despite  
very moderate  farm overheads.  The result is a return to land, labour,  
management  and investment  of approximately  IR£50  per acre on soils
18
with a wide to limit use range and IR£33  per acre on those soils which 
are extremely  limited  in use range.
A comparison  between  the average  returns  from Single  Suckling,  Mul-  
tip e Suckling  and Artificial  Rearing,  as they occur in farms on good  
soils IS shown  m Table  4. The net returns  to land, labour,  management  
and investment  are IR£51,  IR£69  and IR£80  per acre for Single  Suckling, 
Double/Multiple  Suckling  and Artificial  Rearing  respectively.  The lower  
level of margin  from Single  Suckling  is partly  due to a poorer  stocking  
rate and partly  due to lower  margins  per livestock  unit.
The fact that a difference  in margins  exists between  single suckling  
and artificial  rearing  implies  that at the standards  of management  pre­
vailing  grant aid is required  in order to make suckling  more generally  
difference  in gross margin  per livestock  unit of 
1K£46  and the common  system  of suckling  involving  sale at about one 
and a half years representing  1.5 livestock  units per cow the resulting  
difference  per cow is IR£72,  or a total of IR£90  to IR£100  when account  
IS taken of exiting  suckler  cow grants  as generally  available  throughout  
the country.  This of course,  is not to say that suckling  is not appropriate  
at lower  levels of grant  in certain  circumstances.
Table 4
Returns  for suckling  compared  with artificial  rearing,  1983
Mainly
single
sucklingMainly 
double  & 
multiple 
sucklingMainly
artificial
rearing
Per livestock  unit :
Gross  margin  (IR£) 147 171 195Forage  acres 1.85 1.66 1.66Per acre (IR£) :
Gross margin 79 103 117Regular  overheads 28 34 37Returns  to land, labour.
management  and investment 51 69 80
It would  be interesting  to compare  survey  results  from single suckling  
involving  sale of progeny  at different  stages,  namely  weanlings,  stores or 
hmshed  animals.  In the survey  farmers  sold the progeny  predominantly  
as stores and hence there are not sufficient  observations  for the other  
stages m the various  soil categories  to give conclusive  results  on this 
aspect. Sale of progeny  as weanlings  is concentrated  in poorer  soils and 
this may be the most appropriate  system  where  soil and topography  im­
pose severe  restnetions  in the options  available.  On soils with a limited  
use range the results  are somewhat  in favour  of earlier  selling while in 
the better  soils bringing  the progeny  to finish  gave better  results.
19
Range  in returns
As in the case of farm  enterprises  generally  a wide range  occurs  around  
the average  due both to difference  in returns  per animal  unit and varia ­
tion in stocking  rate. This is shown  in the case of Single Suckling  on 
better soils in Table 5. Farms  in the bottom  group not only achieved
Table 5
Output,  costs and margins  (1R£) per acre for single suckling  on soils with a wide
use range,  1983
Bottom  group Middle  group Top group
Number  of farms 11 22 11
Per livestock  unit :
Output 159 257 301
Direct costs 100 75 74
Gross margin 59 182 228
Forage  acres
Per acre :2.36 1.98 1.50
Gross margin 25 92 152
Source  ; Farm Management  Survey,  An Foras Taluntais
lower levels of output  per animal  unit but also had higher  costs and a 
poor stocking  rate. By contrast  farmers  in the top group  produced  higher  
levels of output  per animal  unit, while keeping  costs at an average  level 
and also had a better  than average  stocking  rate to generate  an average 
gross margin  of IR£152  per acre. Even  amongst  this group  stocking  rates  
are still moderate  at 1.5 acres per livestoek  unit.
Suckling  as an alternative  to 2-year  beef
Beef producers  are particularly  concerned  with the increasing  price of 
calves. This is especially  relevant  in the light of the trend in milk de­
liveries  and the possibility  of a future  decline  in the supply  of calves  from 
the dairy herd. In the light of this farmers  engaged  in 2-year-beef  may 
consider  the possibilities  of well managed  suckling  as a partial  alternative  
in order  to reduee  their exposure  to high calf prices.
Table 6 sets out margins  based on results  from well managed  com-  
mereial  2-year beef produetion  in BEEFMIS  and returns  from better  
managed  suckler  herds in the Farm Management  Survey  with the sale 
of progeny  at one and a half years old on average. For cornparison  
purposes  margins  per animal  sold are adjusted  to an equivalence  in 
of livestock  units. It must be pointed  out that it cannot  be claimed  that 
the standards  in both are exactly  comparable,  since they are based on 
different  sources.  Nevertheless  they may be of use as a general  guide ­
line. At the standards  and prices  prevailing  the gross margin  less interest  
on livestock  and working  capital  per livestock  unit is IR£210  for 2-year
20
beef as compared  with IR£160  for Single  Suckling.  The calf price in the 
2-year  beef budget  is IR£140  net of subsidy  while returns  from suckling  
are inclusive  of IR£25 suckler  cow grant, but would not include  other  
headage  payments  such as the beef cow grant. In the absence  of extra  
suckler  cow grant the suckling  system  would  give an equal return with 
the 2-year beef system at a calf price of approximately  1R£190  for 
Friesian  bulls. With the extra suckler  cow grant  of IR£70  included  in the 
National  Plan for 1986 the returns  from the better  managed  suckling  sys­
tem would  be roughly  comparable  with that cf the 2-year  beef enterprises  
as budgeted.
Table 6
Budget  to assess suckling  as performed  in better managed  units compared  with  
well managed  two-year  beef
2 year 
beefSingle  suckling  
cow and calf 
to 18 months
Sale weight  (kgs) 590
Concentrates  per animal  sold (kgs) 650
Sale price (IR£/100  kgs) 130 n.a.
(p/lb carcase) 110
Calf price net of grant (IR£) 140
Gross margin  per animal  sold (IR£) 355 355
Interest  on livestock  and working
capital  @ 14% pa (1R£) 90 115
Gross  margin  less interest  (1R£) 265 245
Livestock  units per animal  sold 1.25 1.5
Gross margin  less interest  per
livestock  unit (1R£) 210 160
Effect of 1R£I0  calf price change
including  interest  (1R£) 11
Effect of IR£70  suckler  cow grant (1R£) 45
Another  reason  why suckling  may be favoured  is that it can be self 
contained  and would not require  increasing  borrowings  to finance  the 
purchase  of young  stock which  may be increasing  in price.
Intensification
It is clear from Table  4 that the majority  of farms  engaged  in suckling  
operate  at a low level of intensity.  The general  level of development  is 
also low. Considering  the low stocking  rates it is likely that in a great  
many instances  stock numbers  could be increased  and that considerable  
expansion  could be accommodated  without  major investment  in farm
21
buildings.  Increasing  stock numbers  however  means either foregoing  
income  resulting  from keeping  extra  stock for breeding  rather  than selling  
them, or borrowing  the money  both for stock and buildings,  where er- 
quired. In view of the low levels  of income  in general  on farms  engaged 
in suckling  the scope for financing  increases  in stock numbers  from own 
resources  is likely  to be very limited.
Conclusions
The arguments  for increasing  the suckler  herd are compelling  nation ­
ally, especially  since the introduction  of the Milk Super Levy. There  
are 74,000  herds in the country  with some beef suckler  cows and with 
generally  low levels of stocking  rate. It is thus a broadly  based enter ­
prise with considerable  scope for expansion  under favourable  circum ­
stances.
It is competing  mainly  with other systems  of cattle production,  insofar  
as there is any competition  involved.  At calf prices  and levels  of suckler  
cow grants  available  in recent years and up to 1984 it is not generally  
competitive  with the purchase  of calves  coming  from the dairy herd and 
rearing  them artifically,  which  is seen as the main alternative,  although  
it may be more appropriate  on many individual  farm situations.  How ­
ever the increase  in headage  payments  from 1R£32 to IR£70  for beef 
cows in the disadvantaged  areas from 1986, as outlined  in the National  
Plan, should considerably  improve  the outlook  for suckling  in these 
areas which  contain  approximately  70% of the herd, especially  in view 
of the strengthening  of calf prices. In the remainder  of the country  calf 
prices would have to increase  further  before single suckling  would be­
come an option  on the generality  of farms.
Future  expansion  of suckling  is likely to be most appropriate  in less 
developed  farming  situations  or where  soil and topography  impose  limi­
tations,  and more generally  in disadvantaged  areas with the increase  in 
grants  which  have been outlined  in the National  Plan.
References
1. Fingleton,  W. (1983).  Dairying —Changing  Structure  and Performance;  adjust ­
ment and structural  problems  in the agricultural  sector. An Foras Taluntais,  
Economics  and Rural Welfare  Centre,  10th Annual  Conference.
2. Higgins,  J. (1983). A study of part-time  farmers  in the Republic  of Ireland. 
An Foras Taluntais,  Economic  and Rural Welfare  Centre; Socio-Economic  
Research  Series No. 3.
3. Hickey,  B., Connolly,  L., Riordan,  B. (1980).  Beef Cow Study-Prospects  and 
Problems  of Expansion.  Report  prepared  by An Foras Taluntais  E.R.W.R.C. 
for Irish Meat Exporters  Society.
22
trust
NET
A
5 EEC FERTILISER  W^ mEEC FERTILISER  *
theONiy
Irish  nitrog&i
23
Disease  Control  in the Lambing  Floek
K. A. LINKLATER
Veterinary  Investigation  Centre,  East of Scotland  College  of Agriculture.  
Greycrook,  St. Boswell ’s, Roxburghshire.
While there are few alternatives  to keeping  sheep on hill land in this 
eountry,  in the lowland  and upland  situations  they have to compete  with 
arable crops and cattle for land use. Admittedly,  sheep have added  
benefits  in improving  soil fertility  but their level of production  must be 
high enough  for the gross  margins  per hectare  to match  other enterprises  
on the farms. It is important  therefore  to consider  performance  figures 
which  are required  for them to do this (Table  1).
Table 1
Target  production  figures  per 100 ewes to ram
Barren  ewes 3
Ewe deaths 2
Productive  ewes 95
Total lambs born 181
Lambs  born dead 4
Lambs  died around  birth 5
Lambs  surviving 172
Later lamb deaths 2
Lambs weaned/sold 170
Lamb growth  rate to 1st August 300 g/day
Target  weight  at 1st August 41 kg
Proportion  sold fat at 1st August
Remainder  sold fat by 30th September50%
The major  factor  in the profitability  of sheep flock is the number  of 
lambs  sold. We have set a target  of 170 lambs  sold per 100 ewes mated  
but the majority  of flocks are not achieving  this as we see from recent  
MLC  data (Table  2). Yet with crossbred  ewes  this target  should  be quite  
feasible.
Table 2
Number  of Iambs  reared  by recorded  lowland  flocks  (MLC  Sheep  Yearbook)
Average  number  of lambs reared/ 100 ewes to ram 
Top third of these flocks1981
143
1491982
148
156
The main components  affecting  sheep  reproduction  and hence number  
of lambs  reared  are :—
1) Ram fertility
24
2) Ewe  fertility  (number  of ewes which  lamb)
3) Ewe fecundity  (number  of lambs/pregnancy)
4) Perinatal  mortality.
Components  1-3 are outside  the scope  of this paper. I should  therefore  
like to spend most of the time discussing  various  aspects  of perinatal  
mortality,  i.e. deaths  in lambs  which  occur  around  lambing  time. Results  
of a survey  we carried  out over a three year period  in the Borders  and 
Half Bred and Greyface  flocks  arc shown  in Table 3. Stillbirths  are the 
largest category.  Most of these were associated  with dystokia  despite  
intensive  shepherding  at lambing  time. The most common  form of 
dystokia  involved  large single lambs which were presented  with both 
fore-legs  back resulting  in the so-called  “hung lamb ”. These  often result  
from overfeeding  of ewes carrying  singles  as the whole  flock is normally  
fed as if all the ewes are carrying  twins.
Table 3
Summary  of causes  of perinatal  mortality  in seven Halfbred  and Greyface  flocks  
in the Scottish  Borders  1974-76
Diagnosis Percentage  of deaths
Stillborn 36.5
Starvation/chilling 32.7
Infectious  disease 17.3
Misadventure 4.9
Congenital  abnormalities 3.7
Others 4.9
If the twinning  rate in the flock can be increased,  obviously  these deaths  
can be reduced. However,  more emphasis  should be placed on the 
selection  of breeding  stock from strains  with low incidence  of dystokia.  
Selection  for fashionable  conformations  in certain  breeds  also probably  
exacerbates  the condition.
Of lambs  bom alive it can be seen that by far the greatest  number  die 
from starvation  and chilling  or hypothermia.  Recent  work from the 
Moredun  shows  that over 80 per cent of these lambs  could be saved by 
careful  management  at birth. This includes  providing  adequate  shelter  
with facilities  for warming  if necessary  in a flew of warm air at 40 to 
45°C. Hypothermia  occurs  at two main periods.  Firstly,  before  they are 
adequately  dried through  direct  loss of body heat and secondly,  after 10 
hours of life when body energy  resources  are quickly  used up. In the 
latter instances  injections  of 20 per cent glucose  must be given before  
warming  and adequate  supplies  of milk must be available  afterwards  or 
hypothermia  will recur. Use of a stomach  tube on the end of a large 
syringe greatly  facilitates  feeding  weak lambs. Hence the reason for 
grouping  starvation  and chilling  together.
25
Infectious  disease,  while accounting  for approximately  half as many  
deaths  as starvation  and chilling,  is still very important  in a lowground  
situation  where  normally  ewes are brought  into closely  confined  quarters  
for lambing.  The most common  conditions  seen are scours,  navel ill and 
joint ill.
Scouring  is due to a variety  of organisms  including  E. coli, viruses  and 
protozoa.  Only the first of these is sensitive  to antibiotics.  It should  be 
remembered  that E. coli is a normal  inhabitant  of the gut and only a few 
strains  cause disease.  Spcicjal  laboratory  procedures  are required  for the 
detection  of these strains.
With the navel ill/joint  ill syndrome,  infection  gains  entry through  the 
umbilicus  (navel)  soon after birth. The bacteria  then migrate  to the liver 
or joints  to produce  abscesses.  In some instances  these may occur  in the 
spinal cord leading  to posterior  paralysis  which may be mistaken  for 
swayback  unless  a careful  examination  is carried  cut. In other cases the 
bacteria  which are introduced  through  the navel may multiply  in the 
blood stream causing  fever and death unless suitable treatment  is 
instigated.  Antibiotics  by injection  are the most effective  way of treating  
these infections  but they must be given early in the course  of the disease 
to be effective.
Watery  mouth  is an interesting  condition  which  has long been recog ­
nised in South  East Scotland  but has now apparently  become  widespread  
throughout  the country.  Characteristic  signs include  dullness,  drooling  of 
saliva and distension  of the belly. The lamb ceases  to suck and, if not 
treated,  its condition  deteriorates  quickly.  The condition  is due to slowing  
down of gut movement  which in turn encourages  the multiplication  of 
bacteria  within  the gut. It is important  to remember  that the abdominal  
distension  is partly due to gas formation  in the stomach  and despite  
appearing  to be full, the affected  lamb may actually  be starving.  There ­
fore treatment  is aimed  at reversing  these processes  as follows  :—
1) Treatment  with suitable  antibiotic  both by mouth  and by injection.
2) Attempting  to encourage  gut movement  by means  of an enema —20 
ml of soapy  water  administered  by means  of a syringe  and cut down 
stomach  tube placed  about  5 cm into the rectum.
3) Feeding  the lamb by stomach  tube. A mixture  of glucose  and salt 
in water is recommended  (10% glucose  and 0.9% salt—i.e. 10()g  
glucose  and 9 g common  salt per litre of water). Three  times  daily  
feeding  of from 50 to 150 ml of the solution  is desirable  with the 
larger  volume  being required  if the lamb is not sucking  at all.
Treatment  should  be continued  until the lamb is sucking  well from the 
ewe and apparently  back to normal.
As with most sheep diseases,  prevention  of these neonatal  problems  is 
the best course  to take. As there are few specific  remedies  for most of 
the conditions  discussed,  general  principles  of good husbandry  and man­
agement  are essential.  Perhaps  the most important  factor is adequate  
feeding  of the ewes before  and after lambing  to produce  strong  lambs  at
26
birth and adequate  colostrum  of good quality. Recent  work has shown 
the importance  of high quality  protein  such as fish meal and soyabean  
meal in the ration. Therefore  as well as good quality  silage, hay or 
roots, the ration should  be supplemented  with a concentrate  containing  
high quality  protein. This can either be a proprietary  sheep feed or a 
hcmemix  if cereals  are available  on the farm. The homemix  which is 
recommended  by the East of Scotland  College  of Agriculture  is shown  in 
Table 4. These  concentrates  should  be fed from four weeks  pre-lambing  
until the end of the first month  of lactation  starting  at about 200 g per 
head per day and going  up to about  600 g per head per day at and after  
lambing.
Table 4
kg per tonne
Barley 750
Sugar beet pulp 100
Soyabean  meal 75
White fishmeal 50
Mineral/vitamin  supplement 25
Having  got the ewes to produce  ample  colostrum  it is essential  to see 
that the lambs  get an adequate  supply  as soon as they are able to suck.  
This will be greatly  facilitated  if the ewe and her lambs  are moved  to a 
small pen after lambing  and kept there for about 36 hours  or until the 
lambs are strong and the ewe/lamb  bond is well established.  As a 
general  rule one small pen about 1.5 m square  is required  for every  eight  
ewes in the flock. Ideally  pens should  be cleaned  out between  each ewe. 
Should any disease occur, pens must be thoroughly  disinfected  after  
cleaning  and, if possible,  left empty  for a few days. It is important  that 
ewes have ad lib access  to clean  water  at all times  even when  restricted  to 
small pens.
Any lamb  which  has net sucked  colostrum  one to one and a half hours  
after birth should  be fed by stomach  tube. Ewes ’ colostrum  is obviously  
best but as a substitute  cow colostrum  may be used. If possible  this 
should  be collected  from a cow which  has been vaccinated  with a mul­
tiple clostridial  sheep vaccine  before  calving  — 10 ml of the same pre­
paration  as used for the ewes on three occasions,  i.e. three months,  one 
month  and two weeks  before  calving.  It is best to avoid animals  of the 
Channel  Island breeds  as some problems  have been reported  in lambs  
which  have received  colostrum  from certain  animals  of these breeds. As 
a general  rule the amount  of colostrum,  whether  it be from a ewe or a 
cow, required  for a lamb  varies  with the size as follows  :—
Small triplet  
Average  twin 
Large single100 ml 
125 ml 
150 ml
27
To prevent  infections  occurring,  navels  should  be treated  with a strong  
iodine solution  as soon as possible  after birth. As well as acting  as an 
antiseptic  this has astringent  properties  to promote  sealing  of the um­
bilical vessels. The whole navel, including  the junction  with the body,  
should be immersed  in the solution  and allowed  to soak for several  
seconds.
It has been shown that anything  which interferes  with the intake of 
colostrum  is likely to predispose  to watery  mouth and possibly  other  
neonatal  conditions.  Therefore  manipulations  such as castration  and 
docking  by rubber  rings should  be avoided  for as long as possible  and 
certainly  not carried  out within the first two days of life. They must,  
however,  legally  be done within  a week of birth.
Antibiotics  should only be used when required.  In certain circum ­
stances  they provide  the only hope in controlling  diseases  such as watery  
mouth and scours. However,  if used unnecessarily  they allow the 
infectious  organisms  to develop  resistance  to them so that when required  
they are no longer  effective.  Therefore  they should not be used indis ­
criminately  at the start of lambing  but reserved  until first signs of trouble  
are observed.  Thereafter  it may be necessary  to use antibiotics  routinely  
to every lamb bom to try to prevent  some of the diseases.  However,  it 
must be remembered  that there are no substitutes  for good husbandry  
and hygiene.
To increase  numbers  of lambs  reared it is essential  to have adequate  
facilities  for fostering  orphan  lambs  and triplets. While the traditional  
methods  such a using the skin of the foster  ewe ’s dead lamb can be very 
effective,  they are time consuming  and not always  successful,  by far the 
best method  is the use of fostering  pens. In this the ewe is held in a 
neck yoke and not allowed  to smell the lambs  for 48 hours. After this 
time the ewe ’s head is released  and one creep  bar is removed  and the ewe 
and lambs  are left in the pen for a further  24 hours. Ideally  lambs  should 
be a matched  pair, not one strong  lamb  and one weak  triplet.
Perinatal  care is therefore  crucial  for maximising  the number  of lambs  
reared and hence the profitability  of the flock. It must be remembered  
that good feeding,  management  and hygiene  are of paramount  importance  
and should  take precedence  over drug therapy.  There are neither  drugs  
nor vaccines  which  can compensate  for bad husbandry.
28
CBF-lrish  Livestock  
and Meat Board
The link to 
the marhetplace
CBF —The  Irish Livestock  and Meat  
Board,  is the truly  effective  and vitally  
important  link between  the industry  and the 
marketplace.
It continually  monitors  market  potential,  
assists  in market  development  and promotes  
the name  of Irish  cattle,  beef  and lamb  
wherever  there  is a realistic  prospect  of trade.
Through  its offices  in London,  Paris  and 
Dusseldorf,  and by regular  participation  in 
food  fairs  and special  promotions,  CBF  is in 
constant  touch  with  all aspects  of the 
industry,  at home  and abroad.
It is well equipped  to serve  Ireland ’s biggest  
and most  important  industry.
CBF
Irish  Livestock  and Meat  Board,
Clan  will!  am Court,
Lower  Mount  Street, Dublin  2.
Tel. 01-685155  Telex  24440
29
Effect of Calving  Date on Milk  
Production
P. A. GLEESON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Introduction
In Ireland,  about 80% of the manufacturing  milk is delivered  to the 
processing  factories  during the six month period April to September  
inclusive,  resulting  in a constantly  changing  daily volume  of milk being 
processed  with utilisation  of about  52% of plant capacity  (1). Marketing  
difficulties  are also encountered  arising  from the requirements  to store  
large quantities  of products  during  the peak production  season  in order  
to maintain  an orderly  distribution  of product  to the various  outlets  dur­
ing the off-peak  season.
Price  incentives  to influence  the pattern  of milk supply
Until the 1970 ’s, the Irish dairy industry  generally  paid an even price  
for manufacturing  milk throughout  the year and provided  no seasonal  
price incentives.  In contrast,  the liquid milk trade have always  paid 
incentives  for the “out-of-season ” months  to ensure  adequate  milk sup­
plies for consumer  needs during  the winter  months.  In recent  years the 
liquid  milk price has been 97% of the EEC target  price,  while the manu ­
facturing  milk price about 87% of target  (2). The 10% higher  price for 
liquid milk represents  the price required  by farmers  to produce  milk 
during  the winter  months.
The highly seasonal  nature  of manufacturing  milk supplies  imposes 
severe limitations  on the product  mix, as short-life  products  cannot  
generally  be manufactured  due to inadequate  supplies  and/or  chemical  
quality  of winter  milk. During  the last decade  many co-operatives  have 
introduced  price incentives  to increase  milk supplies  during  the winter  
months.  The initial  approach  in most cases  was to offer a bonus  payment  
for milk produced  in January  and February  and in some instances  also 
during  November  and December.  The purpose  of these bonus  payments  
were two-fold;  firstly  extra milk was produced  during  the winter  months  
and secondly  lactation  lengths  of the cows were lengthened,  thus increas ­
ing the overall  yield of the cows. These incentive  schemes  have had 
modest  success  in the last decade.
In more recent  times,  some co-operatives  have introduced  substantial  
bonus  schemes  to encourage  some autumn  calving.  The incentives  range  
from an additional  16-18p/gallon  bonus  on all milk supplied  during  the 
months  of October  to March  inclusive.  This incentive  is paid provided  
the farmer  meets a specific  quota requirement.  Usually  this means  that 
at least 40% of the farmers  total annual  delivery  is supplied  during  the 
months  October-March.  In addition,  most co-operatives  specify  that at 
least 10% of the annual supply is delivered  in November-December.
30
These specifications  arc modified  during  a specified  transitional  period.  
While many co-operatives  introduced  these schemes  in recent years  
there appears  to be less enthusiasm  for these bonus payments  by some 
co-operatives  at present  which may be influenced  by poor monetary  re­
turns from products  manufactured  during  the off-season  months.
Comparison  of three calving  patterns
A study was begun at Moorepark  in 1983 to compare  early and late 
spring  calving  and in addition  a combination  of autumn  and spring  calv­
ing was also studied.  The purpose  of the study is to define  the inputs  
and outputs  of the three different  calving  patterns  and provide  production  
data for the economic  assessment  of the three systems.  The data gener ­
ated will allow ari assessment  of the present  bonus  payments  as they in­
fluence  the financial  returns  form dairying.
Three  herds were established  during  1983 but full lactation  data were  
available  only at the end of 1984 and are presented  in this paper. The 
three calving  patterns  had mean calving  dates of 28 January,  16 March  
and 19 October/ 27 January  for treatments  ES, LS and AS, respectively  
(40 and 60% of herd AS had mean  calving  dates in October  and January,  
respectively).  A total of 78 Friesian  cows balanced  for lactation  number  
were allocated  to the three  treatment  groups.  Each treatment  had its own 
farmlet  of 18 paddocks,  stocked  at 2.90 cows per hectare  and 395 kg N 
per hectare  were applied.  Silage  was conserved  from 8 and 6 paddocks,  
for the first and second  silage cuts, respectively.  The grazing  areas of 
each farmlet  received  18.5 kg P and 37.1 kg K per hectare  in the autumn.  
The cutting  areas received  25 kg P and 111.2 kg K per hectare  in the 
autumn  and a further  17.3 kg P and 74.1 kg K per hectare  after the first 
silage  cut. Slurry  was applied  to all silage  areas  in the autumn.  The silage  
areas were grazed  once in spring  time before  closing  for silage in treat ­
ments ES and AS but were ungrazed  in treatment  LS. Earlier  housing  
in the autumn  and later turnout  in spring  increased  the silage require ­
ments  of the LS treatment,  hence the silage areas were not grazed  in the 
spring. When the silage areas were closed  for first cut silage,  cows had 
access to 10 grazing  paddocks  in each treatment  spending  2 days per 
paddock.  Twelve  paddocks  were available  during  the second  cut silage 
period  and access  time per paddock  was one and a half days. In late July,  
all paddocks  were available  for grazing  with 1 day access  per paddock. ’ 
The chemical  composition  of the silages  made in 1984 and the grass dry 
matter  yields  for silage  are shown  in Table 1.
Concentrate  feeding
In-calf  heifers  and first lactation  cows were fed 1.8 kg of concentrates/  
head/day  in the pre-calving  period. Post calving,  cows were fed 7.3 kg 
of 16% crude protein  concentrate  with ad libitum  access  to grass silage.  
The concentrates  were phased  out after turnout  to pasture  except  for 
treatment  LS where 1.8 kg/head/day  were fed to cows from early Octo ­
ber until the end of lactation.  Concentrates  were fed to all treatments  
from 10 July to 30 August  at 3.2 kg/head/day  due to drought  conditions.
31
Table 1
The chemical  composition  in g/kg DM (unisss  specified)  of silages  and grass dry
matter  yields  for silage
ES LS AS
1st cut 2nd cut 1st cut 2nd cut 1st cut 2nd cut
Dry matter  (g/kg) 228 204 236 202 206 204
Crude  protein 164 141 165 150 172 149
Volatile  N (g/kg TN) 89 75 82 81 93 82
Ash 119 85 100 79 112 77
MAD fibre 302 312 290 312 314 325
DMD 740 690 756 661 737 675
ph 3.84 3.61 3.66 3.62 3.78 3.69
Grass dry matter  
(tonne/ha) 6.94 5.46 7.36 5.16 6.82 5.83
Results
All silages  were well preserved  but dry matter  digestibilities  were higher  
for the first than second  cut silages. The first silage cut for each treat ­
ment was taken on 17 May and the second  cut on 11 July. First cut 
silage yields were increased  in treatment  LS by not grazing  the area 
before  closing  but second  cut yields  were reduced  in this treatment  giving  
similar  overall  yields  for each treatment  for the two cuts.
The lactation  performance  for each treatment  is shown  in Table  2. The 
milk yield of the AS treatment  was higher  than the other  two treatments  
but there was no significant  differences  between  treatments.  Milk fat, 
protein  and lactose  yields were not significantly  different  between  treat ­
ments  but the early spring  calving  group (ES) had a significantly  higher  
fat and lactose  concentration  than the late spring calving  group (LS).
Table 2
Lactation  performance
ES LS AS SE of dif
Milk yield (kg/annum) 4841 4902 5212 233
Peak yield (kg/day) 23.2 25.9 21.3—
Fat yield (kg/annum) 182 175 188 8.3
Fat cone, (g/kg) 37.6 35.8 36.1 0.8
Protein  yield (kg/annum) 164 163 172 6.8
Protein  cone, (g/kg) 33.8 33.4 33.2 0.6
Lactose  yield (kg/annum) 222 221 241 10.4
Lactose  cone, (g/kg) 46.0 45.2 46.3 0.4
Concentrate  (kg/annum) 815 641 1149 75.4
Calf weight  (kg) 38.1 40.0 39.2 1.4
Lactation  length  (days) 295 305 306 —
Calving  to service  interval  (days) 87.3 89.9 91.7 —
U.M.E.  (GJ/ha) 104 111 99 —
32
Concentrate  intakes  differed  significantly  between  treatments  due to calv­
ing date and the length of the concentrate  feeding  period. Calf birth  
weights  and calving  to service  intervals  were similar  for all treatments.
The milk proportions  produced  at periods  during  the year are pre­
sented  in Table  3. ,Table 3
Milk production  profile
ES LS AS
January  - March .28 .11 .29
April - September .65 .73 .55
October  - December .07 .16 .16
Discussion
The results  presented  are for one year only and the study  will be con­
tinued  for a further  two years.
At high stocking  rates it is essential  to obtain  high silage yields for 
adequate  winter  feed. For this reason,  the silage area of the late spring  
calving  herd (LS) was not grazed  before  closing  in spring. First cut silage 
yield was increased  in this treatment  but the yield of the second  cut was 
less than that recorded  for the other two treatments,  thus giving  similar  
overall  yields for the combined  first and second  cuts for all treatments.  
The reduced  yield in the second  cut of the LS group  may be due to the 
high first cut yields and needs further  study during  the next two years  
of the experiments.
The highest  milk production  per cow was achieved  in the AS treatment  
although  lactation  lengths  were similar  for the three calving  patterns.  
Tbe milk yield of the ES and LS treatments  was similar.  The high milk  
yields of the LS treatment  was achieved  by feeding  silage and concen ­
trates  from early October  until the cows finished  their lactations  in Janu ­
ary/February.  In farm practice  late spring  calving  cows dry off in the 
autumn  due to insufficient  feed to maintain  milk production.  Feeding  
silage in early October  is feasable  only if adequate  silage has been con­
served. The additional  feeding  allows cows to have a long lactation  
length of about 300 days. The highest  peak yield was achieved  by the 
LS treatment  and this combined  with a long lactation  length  gave as high 
a milk yield as the ES treatment  with a lower  input  of concentrates.
The pattern  of milk production  over the year has a major influence  
on the price received  for milk. The yield of milk constituents  did not 
differ  between  treatments  but their value was influenced  by the seasonal  
pattern  of their  production  as influenced  by milk bonus  schemes  operated  
by the co-operatives.  Milk fat and lactose  concentrations  were signifi ­
cantly  lower  in the late spring  versus  the early spring  group.
The level of concentrates  fed to each group  reflected  the calving  pat­
tern. In 1984, 162 kg of concentrates  was fed to each group  due to the 
drought  condition  prevailing  during  July and August  of that year. A 
lower UME value was obtained  by the AS group due to the higher  
element  of concentrates  in their diet.
33
The data on the milk production  profiles  in Table 3 show the high 
proportion  of milk produced  by the LS group during  April-September  
and in addition  milk production  was sustained  during  October-December.  
The AS treatment  produced  45% of total production  between  October-  
March  and would  qualify  for the winter  calving  bonus  schemes  operated  
by some co-operatives.  The ES treatment  had produced  93% of their  
total production  by the end of September.
Financial  implications
The milk production  patterns  influenced  the milk receipts  of the three  
calving  groups. Higher  input costs were incurred  by the AS and ES 
groups  due to extra concentrate  feeding  when compared  with LS group.  
In all treatments  replacements  were costed at £510. Cull cows were 
valued  at £300 in January,  rising to £400 in July and falling  to £320 in 
December.  Spring-bom  calves were priced at £130 and £75 for male  
and female,  respectively  for those born in January  and February  and at 
£120 and £65 in March. Autumn  born calves were priced at £145 for 
males  and £85 for females.
Milk was priced  at 15.6 p/kg (73.0 p/gal)  for 3.60%  fat. A milk bonus  
of 1.5 p/kg (7 p/gal)  was added  to milk delivered  in January  and 1.71 p/ 
kg (8 p/gal)  in February  for treatments  ES and LS. A bonus  of 3.4 p/kg  
(16 p/gal)  was added  to milk delivered  from October  to March  inclusive 
for treatment  AS. Milk price was adjusted  each month  in relation  to its 
fat content. Concentrates  were costed at 17.6 p/kg for all treatments.
Table 4
Variable,  fixed and depreciation  costs — £/cow
ESTreatment
LS AS
Variable  costs
Concentrates 158 127 221
Fertilisers  and lime 98 98 98
Replacements 106 107 106
Machinery  hire 6 6 6
Silage 42 42 42
Vet., medicine,  AT 20 20 20
(P/gal) 430 (37.1) 400 (33.9) 493 (40.0)
Fixed  costs
Car and insurance 37 37 37
Electricity  and phone 28 28 28
Machinery  operation 87 87 87
(p/gal) 152 (13.1) 152 (12.9) 152 (12.4)
Depreciation  charges
Machinery 43 43 43
Buildings 41 41 41
(p/gal) 84 (7.2) 84 (7.1) 84 (6.8)
Total costs (p/gal) 666 (57.4) 636 (53.9) 729 (59.2)
34
The variable,  fixed, depreciation  and total costs/cow  are presented  
in Table  4. All variable,  fixed and depreciation  costs were the same for 
each treatment  except  for concentrate  costs which  varied  according  to the 
calving  pattern. These costs excluded  labour,  repayments  on borrowed  
capital  and income  tax liabilities.  The receipts  minus  variable,  fixed and 
depreciation  costs are shown  in Table 5. Interest  earned  on cash flow 
was also included  to calculate  net profit  per cow but excluded  labour  and 
repayments  on borrowed  capital.
The late-spring  (LS) calving  treatment  had the lowest  production  costs 
but due to lower milk price and yield had a lower net margin  than the 
autumn/spring  treatment  (AS). To maintain  the highest  net margin,  the 
AS treatment  required  the bonus  of 16 p/gallon  for milk produced  during  
October  to March  inclusive.  There  was no difference  in the net margins  
between  the ES and LS treatments  even though  the ES treatment  received 
a higher  milk price it was offset  by higher  concentrate  costs.
Table 5
Financial  costs and returns  — f/cow
ESTreatments
LS AS
Milk sales 848 837 955
p/gal (net) 72.3 70.2 77.6
Livestock  sales 170 170 175
Total receipts 1018 1007 1130
Variable,  fixed and depreciation  casts 666 637 730
Interest  earned 19 10 21
Net profit 371 380 421
Conclusions
The first year results  of a long term study are presented  on the effect  
of date of calving  on milk output  for creamery  milk production.  The 
experiment  compared  early and late spring calving  and in addition  a 
combination  of autumn  and spring  calving  was also studied.  Similar milk  
outputs  were achieved  for each treatment  group but the proportion  of 
total yield produced  varied  during  the year and this influenced  the price  
received  due the bonus payments  paid by the Co-Operatives.  Eligher 
feed costs were associated  with autumn/spring  and early spring  calving 
groups  and must be taken into consideration  in any milk pricing  policy.
References
1. Keane,  M. (1980).  Economic  aspects  of seasonality.  Seasonality  of milk supply 
in the Irish airy dairy industry.  Dairy Industry  Technical  Study Group  Series  
No. 14, An Foras Taluntais.
2. Keane,  M. and Lucy, D. I. F. (1984). The UK liquid milk sector and the 
Common  Agricultural  Policy. Agribusiness  Discussion —Paper No. 2. Dept,  
of Dairy & Food Economics,  U.C.C.
35
Factors  Effecting  Herbage  Intake  
of Cows
G. A. STAKELUM
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Introduction
Maximising  the grass and silage component  of the total annual feed 
intake  of the dairy cow improves  the profitability  of the milk production  
enterprise.  Such factors  as silage  quantity  and quality,  early spring  grass, 
low concentrate  Inputs  and good grassland  management  help to achieve 
this aim.
The cow ’s requirement  for nutrients  is determined  principally  by such 
factors  as milk yield, stage of lactation,  metabolic  size and condition  
(degree  of fatness).  At pasture,  however,  a variety  of sward  and manage ­
ment  factors  operate  to effect  the herbage  intake  of the cow.
Sward  factors
The main sward  factors  which  effect  the intake  of the gazing  dairy  cow 
are digestibility  of the herbage,  the mass and spatial  distribution  of the 
herbage  and the species  of plants  present  in the sward.
Sward  mass
The effect of sward mass on intake  was examined  in two trials in the 
spring  and summer  of 1984 at Moorepark.  Table  1 outlines  the digestibility  
of the sward  grazed  by the cows in both spring  and summer.  The digest ­
ibility figures  refer to the top and bottom  of the grazed horizon.  The 
primary  spring sward showed  no differentiation  in digestibility  as the 
animals  grazed  down  the horizon  in contrast  to the summer  sward  which 
was very much depressed  in digestibility  as the animals  grazed  closer  to 
ground  level.
Table 1
Digestibility  of the grazed  horizon  of the sward  (OIVlD%)
Spring Sumer
Top of sward 82.0 76.0
Bottom  of sward 81.0 65.0
Average 81.5 70.5
Tables  2 and 3 outline  the intakes  of the  various  groups  of cows  for the 
spring  and summer  periods  respectively.  Increased  herbage  mass in both 
seasons  increased  intake  of herbage  especially  at high herbage  allowance. 
The increased  intake with increased  herbage  mass was associated  with 
increased  rates of herbage  utilisation  reflecting  the fact that the spatial
36
distribution  (particularly  height  of sward)  was now more favourable  for 
ease of prehension  by the animal. The much reduced  intakes  at high 
herbage  allowance  with low herbage  mass is considered  significant  as it 
clearly demonstrates  that although  effective  stocking  rate (herbage  
allowance)  may be adjusted  in a practical  situation  due to scarcity  of 
herbage,  restricted  herbage  intake could still result due to the aerial  
distribution  of the herbage.
Table 2
Daily intake (kg organic  matter/head)  of cows grazing  two contrasting  herbage  
masses  (kg organic  matter/ha)  at two daily herbage  allowances  (kg dry matter/
head) in spring
2900Herbage  mass
3500
Allowance
16
24
( ) % utilisation11.8 (88) 
14.7 (73)12.6 (93)
16.2 (77)
Table 3
Daily intake (kg organic  matter/head)  of cows grazing  two contrasting  herbage  
masses  (kg organic  matter/ha)  at two daily herbage  allowances  (kg dry matter/
head)  in summer.
3500Herbage  mass
4600
Allowance
16
24
( ) % utilisation11.6 (79)
13.6 (62)12.5 (85)
16.6 (76)
Concentrate  feeding
Responses  in milk production  from concentrate  feeding  of cows at 
pasture  has generally  been poor and uneconomical.  It is widely  reported  
in the literature  that concentrate  feeding  reduces  herbage  intake but 
there is little information  in the case of grazing  cows at very high stock ­
ing rates (low herbage  intake).  Experiments  were conducted  in 1983 and 
1984 to examine  the effect of grazing  dairy cows in spring,  summer  and 
autumn  at high and low herbage  allowances.  Table 4 shows  the effects  
of concentrate  feeding  at high daily herbage  allowance  (24 kg herbage  
dry matter).
The concentrate  consisted  of a barley  molasses  nut (95 : 5) and was 
fed daily at 3.2, 3.6 and 3.8 kg organic  matter  per head in spring,  summer  
and autumn  respectively.  The concentrate  increased  total intake in all 
seasons  but with a much  reduced  herbage  intake. The herbage  intake  for
37
Table  4
The effect  of concentrate  feeding  on daily herbage  intake  (kg organic  matter/head)  
at high herbage  allowance
Spring
Summer
AutumnHerbage  intake 
Grass  only Grass + Cone.Total intake
Grass + Cone.
16.2
16.6
16.914.1
14.1
15.017.8
17.8
18.2Replaeement
rate
0.57
0.67
0.59
the grass only groups  was high. The results indicate  very substantial  
replacement  of concentrate  for herbage  at high herbage  intake.
Table  5 shows  the effect  of concentrates  at low daily  herbage  allowance  
(16 kg of herbage  dry matter).  Concentrates  again  reduced  herbage  intake  
but by a much smaller  amount.  The replacement  rates were about half 
of those found in the previous  case. The existence  of substitution  rates  
of this degree  at these low intakes is surprising.  Smaller  substitution  rates  
may be the case with higher  yielding  cows. However,  the principal  result  
is that substitution  of concentrates  for grass occurs  regardless  of season  
(sward  type) and its magnitude  depends  upon the level of herbage  intake.
Table 5
The effect  of concentrate  feeding  on daily herbage  intake  (kg organic  matter/head)  
at low daily herbage  allowance
Herbage  intake 
Grass  only Grass + Cone.Total intake
Grass + Cone. Replaeement
rate
Spring
Summer
Autumn12.6 11.4 14.9
12.5 11.0 14.7
12.8 12.0 15.20.34
0.40
0.28
Factors  of animal  origin
Previous  work at Moorepark  found that lactating  pregnant  cows con­
sumed 22% more herbage  than pregnant  dry cows. However,  with 
lactating  animals,  the level of milk production  and the stage of lactation  
have a substantial  effect  on the intake  of nutrients.  Peak intake  of dairy  
cows lags behind peak milk yield. High producing  dairy cows do not 
reach peak intake  until 100 days post-calving.  Information  sugges^  mat 
the lag between  peak intake and peak yield may be longer  with hrst 
lactation  than with other  animals  and shorter  with  low yielders  compared  
to high yielders.
The relationship between  level of milk production  and intake  is difficult  
to define  as the effects  on milk production  due to lactation  stage and the
38
The  AIB Guide  
to Farm  Finance  gives  
you  a heiping  hand.
In the farming  business,  an extra 
helping  hand  is always  welcome  
—particularly  when  you’re 
dealing  with a specialist  area like 
farm finance.
That ’s why  you need  the Al B 
Guide  to Farm Finance —a 
concise  and practical  guide  to 
efficient  financial  managementonyourfarm.  In it you’ll find very 
useful guidelines  on farm 
accounting,  planning  and many  
other  subjects  relevant  to your 
livelihood:  plus information  on the 
various  financial  services  and 
grants  available  to farmers.
Pick up your  copy  of this vital 
booklet  at any branch  of Allied  
Irish Banks.
Fora  betterfuture  on  yourfarm
effects  on milk production  due to genetical  factors  are often confounded  
in experiments.  Additionally,  when cows are fed according  to yield it is 
difficult  to construct  relationships  between  yield and intake. Metabolic  
size and liveweight  are highly  correlated  and at comparable  degrees  of 
fatness  large cows  eat more  food than small  cows.  The degree  of increased  
feed intake  with increasing  size depends  on the source  of feed (roughage 
concentrate  ratio or mixed  diets).
An experiment  carried  out at Moorepark  in 1984 examined  some of 
animals ’ factors  which determine  the herbage  intake of stall-fed  cows.  
Four feeding  periods  of twelve  days in duration  were used. The sward  
was composed  mainly  of perennial  ryegrass  and white  clover  and herbage  
was cut fresh each day of each feeding  period and fed indoors  to tbe 
cows. The intake  and digestibility  of the herbage  were measured.  Cutting  
and feeding  took place in spring,  early summer,  late summer  and autumn.  
Herbage  was fed to 10 large and 10 small cows balanced  for lactation  
number,  calving  date, current  milk yield and degree  of fatness.  Herbage  
was fed additionally  to four milking  cows to measure  the in vivo digest ­
ibility  of the cut herbage.  Average  liveweights  over the feeding  periods  
were 570 and 510 kg for the large and small frame size cows respectively. 
This difference  in bodyweight  was reflected  in a large difference  in the 
height  and length  of the cows. The large category  were on average  139 
cm in height  and 130 cm in length. Average  lactation  number  was 5 and 
average  calving  date was the end of January.
Table 6 outlines  the composition  of the herbage  fed during  the four 
feeding/cutting  periods.  The crude protein  content  of the primary  spring 
cut was very low. Ash and dry matter  content  were variable  but the small  
range in ash content  reflected  the drier than normal  weather  conditions  
in 1984.
Table 6
Composition  of the cut herbage  (g/kg)
Cutting  period
S ES LS A
Dry matter 203.0 175.0 220.0 155.2
Ash 84.0 113.6 108.6 91.5
Crude  protein 136.2 180.2 183.9 204.2
MAD-flbre 214.2 298.7 250.3 262.0
Tn-vivo ’ DMD 784.5 768.6 695.5 766.3
Tn-vivo ’ 821.8 798.1 750.3 801.2
S = Spring;  ES = Early Summer;  LS = Late Summer;  A = Autumn
The digestibility  values showed  very similar  trends to those found  
previously  in other cutting  and feeding  experiments  at Moorepark.  The 
primary  spring  sward  was very high in quality  and progressively  declined 
throughout  the summer  and recovered  somewhat  in the autumn.
40
Table 7
Total  milk production  characteristics  (kg) of the two groups  of cows  
(compositional  percentage  in brackets)
Large category  (C) Small category  (Cj)
Milk
Fat
Protein
Lactose4262
155 (3.64)  
146 (3.43)  
196 (4.60)4244
154 (3.63)  
153 (3.61)  
191 (4.50)
Prcduction  of milk and milk constituents  was similar  for both groups  
of cows except  that the small cows yielded  slightly  more protein  and 
lactose  due to higher  protein  and lactose  percent  in the milk. Daily  milk  
production  during  the feeding  periods  was similar  for both groups  and 
averaged  20.0, 17.0, 14.0 and 10.0 kg of milk/cow  for spring, eaily  
summer,  late summer  and autumn  respectively.
Table 8
Daily  intake  of nutrients  per animal  over the season
Feeding  periods
S ES LS A
Dry matter  (kg) 16.7 17.3 16.9 16.2
Organic  matter  (kg) 
Digestible  organic15.3 15.3 15.0 14.7
matter  (kg) 12.6 12.2 11.3 11.8
Digestible  energy  (MJ) 230.2 237.7 220.7 221.8
Feeding  periods  S, ES, LS, A as per Table 6
Intakes  over the four feeding  periods  for both groups  are shown  in Table  
8. Peak intake  of dry matter  and digestible  energy  was achieved  in June  
(120 days approximately  from calving).  Intakes  of organic  matter  and 
digestible  organic  matter were modified  due to ash content  and dig­
estibility.
Table 9
Daily intake of nutrients/cow  for both large (C.) and small cows (CJ
Feeding  period
ES LS
c, c. c, c. c, C3 c, C,
Dry matter  (kg) 17.0 16.3 17.5 17.1 17.0 16.7 16.6 15.7
Organic  matter  (kg) 15.6 15.0 15.5 15.1 15.1 14.8 15.1 14.3
Organic  matter/ 100 kg 
Liveweight  (kg) 2.85 3.01 2.78 2.98 2.64 2.87 2.61 2.77
Digestible  energy  (MJ) 235.0 225.4 240.1 234.4 222.7 218.7 227.8 215.8
Feeding  periods  S, ES, LS. A as per Table 6
41
Table 9 shows that over all the feeding  periods  the large cows con­
sumed  0.5 kg of dry matter  and 8 MJ digestible  energy  more than the 
smaller  cows. However,  the small cows consumed  more herbage  per unit 
of metabolic  size than the large cows. The differences  in intakes  were  
small in all cases  and amounted  to about  0.8 kg dry matter  per extra 100 
kg liveweight  above  500 kg.
The ranges  in intake  between  cows within  a given category  were quite  
large reflecting  the wide spread  of calving  dates and level of milk yield.  
An example  of this for dry matter  intake  is shown  in Table 10.
Table 10
Ranges  of daily milk yield and intake  of dry matter  (kg) for both categories
of cows
Period Milk yield Intake
S 25.0 - 10.8 20.4 - 13.7
ES 22.8 - 9.2 20.4 - 13.4
LS 18.5 - 7.2 19.4 - 12.4
A 15.8 - 4.3 18.8 - 10.5
The range in milk yield was 13 kg per day while the range in intakes  
was 7 kg per day. These ranges  show that within a herd some cows  
consume  about  50% less feed than other cows. This assumes  a random  
spread of milk yields around  the mean. The average  increase  in dry 
matter  intake  for each one kilogram  increase  in daily milk yield was 0.35.  
An extension  of this work has commenced  in 1985 with the assembly  of 
a high yielding  herd of cows in order to measure  their maximum  intake  
of a high concentrate  to roughage  ration over the whole year and to 
compare  this to the maximum  intake  achievable  with a similar  group  of 
cows on unrestricted  herbage  during  the grazing  season  and conventi(^nal  
silage/concentrate  rations  indoors  prior to turn cut.
CondusioRS
1. Sward mass (kg organic  matter/ha)  has a significant  effect on the 
herbage  intake of grazing  dairy cows. Reduction  in herbage  intake  
occurs  at low sward mass even though  herbage  allowance  may be 
liberal.
2. Concentrate  feeding  to grazing  dairy cows depresses  their herbage  
intake. The magnitude  of the depression  depends  on the level of 
herbage  intake which in turn is largely determined  by herbage  
allowance.  Substantial  replacement  of herbage  by concentrate  occurs  
even at low levels  of herbage  intake.
3. Milk  yield and liveweight  differences  account  for significant  differences 
in herbage  intake between  cows, 0.8 kg dry matter  intake/ 100 kg 
liveweight  above 500 kg and 0.35 kg of intake  for each additional  1 
kg increase  in milk yield.
42
Do it Yourself  Artificial  Insemination  
(DIY AI)
K. J. OTARRELL
The Agricultural Institute.  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
The recent  introduction  of legislation  allowing  the use of “do it yourself ” 
Insemination  (DIY AI) by farmers  for use in their own herds,  has stimu ­
lated considerable  Interest. Already  after only one season  of training  
courses  the Department  of Agriculture  has received  100 applications  for 
licences.  From the dairy farmer ’s point  of view there are several  reasons  
why he might  wish to become  involved  in DIY AI. These  reasons  are :
1. Better  timing  of AI;
2. Convenience;
3. Improving  conception  rates;
4. Disease  control;
5. Costs.
While some of these reasons  are more valid than others,  all should be 
considered  carefully  before  making  the final decision.
1. Better  timing  of AI
In the dairy cow ovulation  occurs 26 to 32 hours after heat onset  
(Hafez,  1980). The fertile life of the ovum lasts for approximately  24 
hours and the spermatozoa  have a fertile life span of approximately  30 
to 48 hours. However  it is suggested  that optimal  fertility  is achieved  
when insemination  takes place 6 to 24 hours  before  ovulation.  This in­
formation  is of little value to the dairy farmer  since he has no means  of 
knowing  when this will occur. On the other  hand it has been suggested 
that optimal  fertility  will be obtained  if inseminations  are performed  12 
to 24 hours after heat onset. In those herds where  frequent  heat obser ­
vations  are made during  the day it would  be possible  to be reasonably  
accurate  as to when  heat onset  began. However  since 50% of heats  occur  
in the period 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. it is much more difficult  to be precise. 
Bull fertility  has also an important  affect on time insemination  since it 
has been shown  that high fertility  bulls are less affected  by early post 
oestrous  inseminations  than low fertility  bulls. The difference  in fertility  
appears  to be related  to sperm  livability  with the high fertility  bulls pro­
ducing  semen  with longer  viability.
2. Convenience
In addition  to possibly  providing  a better  timed  AI service,  DIY AI is 
also more convenient.  It avoids  having  to hold in cows for quite pro­
43
longed  periods  of time and also reduces  any associated  stress  which  may 
have a detrimental  effect  on fertility.
3. Improving  conception  rates
With the possibility  of better  timing  of AI through  using DIY the in­
ference  is that conception  rates will be improved  relative  to the commer ­
cial AI service. While there are little published  data available  on direct  
comparisons  between  DIY AI and the commercial  service,  what informa ­
tion is available  would suggest  that fertility  on average  is reduced. A 
comparison  of DIY AI and the inseminator  service  in the UK showed 
that more services  were required  per conception  and more cows failed  
to conceive,  as a result of DIY AI (Lamont  and Foulkes,  1981). AI 
technician  and dairy men insemination  comparisons  in the US have also 
shown  similar  results. On average  it would  appear  that conception  rates  
to DIY AI are 10 to 15% lower  than to commercial  AI. However  some 
farmers  may get better results  but in general  fertility  levels would tend 
to drop.
Another  reason  why fertility  on average  would  tend to dis-improve  is 
because  there is no standard  set for DIY AI. The DIY training  pro­
gramme  which costs £170 provides  training,  a booklet,  and a certificate  
but no evaluation  of skill or competence  is made. Thus the licence  only 
means  that the person  has gone through  a training  course  and is now 
licenced  to practice  DIY AI in their own herd. Since no evaluation  is 
made or standard  set during  this course,  it is likely that people  who are 
totally  incompetent  at the technique  will obtain  licences.  Thus the likeli ­
hood of conception  rates improving  as a result of converting  to DIY AI 
would  seem to be fairly  remote  for some farmers.
4. Disease  control
While  disease  control  would  not be one of the main reasons  for con­
verting  to DIY AI, it would  be advantageous  in a situation  where  move ­
ment was restricted  due to disease  control  regulations.  The possibility  
of disease  being introduced  to a farm by an AI operator  is also possible  
but very remote. What danger  exists in this regard could be removed 
through  going  to DIY AI.
5. Costs
The major reason  for converting  to DIY AI would be the potential  
savings  in economic  terms. The current  commercial  AI fee of £11 in­
cludes  the first service  and two free repeats,  but semen is extra, except 
for bull of the day and for some beef bulls. Thus the average  cost of a 
nominated  service  for commercial  and DIY AI is £19 and £8 respectively. 
For bull of the day and beef bulls the cost for commercial  AI and DIY 
AI is £11 and £3 respectively.  Taking  a 100 cow herd, 1.65 services  per 
pregnancy  and where  50% of inseminations  are nominated,  20% bull of
44
the day, and 30% to beef bulls, the relative  costs of commercial  AI and 
DIY Al are calculated  in Table 1. The capital  costs of the DIY course  
and the nitrogen  container  is £150 and a years supply  of liquid  nitrogen  
is included  + £100 per year. The costs per cow in calf for commercial  
AI and DIY AI are £18.44  and £11.52  respectively.  This saving  of £7 
is substantial  but is only true if existing  pregnancy  rates are maintained  
by changing  to DIY AI.
Table 1
Comparative  costs of commercial  AI and DIY Al in a ICO cow herd with 50%  
nominated  semen (£19), 20% bull of the day (£11) and 30% beef sires (£11).
(Assuming  1.65 services/pregnancy).
Commercial  AI DIY AI
£ £
50% nominated 1250 656
20% bull of the day 242 99
30% beef sires 352 147
SUB TOTAL 1844 902
Capital  Costs
Course  and container
(depreciated  over 5 years) 150
Nitrogen  supply/year 100
TOTAL 1844 1152
Cost/cow  in calf £18.44 £11.52
If on the other hand, as seems  to be the more likely case, a 10% fall 
in fertility  occurs,  the costs per cow in calf including  milking  days lost 
as a result of later calving  is almost  £22 (Table  2). Thus DIY AI costs  
an extra  £3 per cow in calf over the commercial  service.  In this situation,  
the other reasons  mentioned  for converting  to DIY AI would hardly  
justify  this additional  cost.
One of the other  factors  which  must be considered,  especially  for those  
dairy farmers  serviced  by the Munster  Cattle Breeding  Society,  is the 
loss of the fresh semen  service.  This fresh semen  service  provides  semen  
from the top quality  dairy bulls during the peak breeding  months  at 
relatively  low cost. This is something  which  has not been included  in the 
initial comparative  costs of the two systems.  The final decision  as to 
whether  a farmer  should  convert  to DIY AI depends  on his herd size and 
whether  he would be capable  of maintaining  current  conception  rates.  
For those farmers  who have the technical  skill and expertise  necessary  
for good AI, the benefits  would be substantial  but for those who lack 
ability,  the costs would be prohibitive.  An assessment  of a farmer ’s 
potential  skill as an AI operator  should  be made at the end of the train ­
45
ing programme  and rated against  a set standard.  Only those fanners  
who achieve  this standard  should  consider  converting  to DIY insemina ­
tion service.
Table 2
Comparative  costs of commercial  Al and DIY AI in a 100 cow herd (as in Table  
1) except  with a 10% drop in conception  rate for DIY AI (1.65 services  per
conception  versus  1.82)
Commercial  Al DIY AI
£ £
50% nominated 1250 720
20% bull of day 242 109
30% beef sires 352 162
SUB TOTAL 1844 991
Capital  Costs (Table 1)250
Milking  days lost
(630 days @ 2 gals./day  x 0.75p/gal.) 945
TOTAL 1844 2186
Cost/cow  in calf £18.44 £21.86
References
Lamont,  P. H. and Foulkes.  J. A. (1981).  Bovine  Infertility.  Vet. Rcc. 1, 41.
Hafez,  E. S. E. (1980). Reproduction  in Farm Animals.  Lea and Febiger,  Phila ­
delphia,  4th Edition.
46
t
• Three-quarters  of your 
calcium  needs
• One-third  of your protein  
requirements
• Many  vitamins
• Several  minerals
• A major  contribution  to 
daily energy  and vitality
• An important  part of a 
balanced  diet
• A cool refreshing  drink
nricWATER  • PROTEIN  • 
FAT®  CARBOHYDRATE*  
CHOLESTEROL  • 
SODIGM  • 
POTASSIUM  • 
MAGNESIUM  IRON • 
ZINC • CALCIUM  • 
PHOSPHOROUS  • 
THIAMIN  •
I RIBOFLAVIN  •
I FOLIC  ACID  •
VITAMIN  B,2 • 
VITAMIN  A • 
^^TAMIN  D
National  Dairy Council  Infornnation  Centre  on Nutrition  & Health  
Grattan  House,  Lower  Mount  Street.  Dublin  2.
47
Financial  Management  on Dairy  Farms  
-The  Weak  Link?
P. McFEELY
Bank  of Ireland,  Regional  Office,  Wexford.
Financial  management  is as important  in farming  as in any other  
business.
It is primarily  of importance  to the farmer  himself,  whether  or not he 
has any borrowings,  to facilitate  an accurate  appraisal  of the current  
state of his business  and to help him plan the future  effectively.
Most business  people,  and especially  dairy farmers,  that 1 have met 
are hard-working.  However,  not all dairy farmers  have been successful.  
Therefore,  the first point I wish to emphasise  is that the ability  to work  
hard should  not be confused  with the ability  to manage  a farm business  
successfully.  There  is a German  saying,  ‘All intelligent  people  are lazy . 
The intelligent  lazy manger  gets the maximum  output  from the minimum  
hours and he exploits  the time that he is not ‘working ’ by using the 
intelligence  which  won him the time; in other words  he thinks. As pu 
think you will demand,  and ultimately  provide,  the essential  ingredient  
for managing  a successful  business  — INFORMATION.  Provision  of 
information  begins  with accurate  record-keeping  or as a visiting  speaker
(1) at a previous  Grassland  meeting  put it — ‘a short pencil  is better  than 
a long memory ’. Cheque  books should  be used to record all payment  
transactions  and all receipts  should be lodged to individual  customer  
bank accounts;  the true business  turnover  can be confirmed  in these 
circumstances.
Let us examine  briefly  the farm business.  However  large and diverse 
(in terms of enterprise  mix) your dairy farm is, it ultimately  reduces  to 
OUTPUT  and INPUT  terms. The successful  manager  is the one who 
consistently  maximises  the difference  between  the two sides of the 
equation.  This difference  is the ultimate  aim of any business,  i.e. to 
make adequate  CASH  PROFIT  to meet essential  commitments  such as : 
living  expenses,  interest/repayments,  savings,  re-investment  and taxation.  
The need for greater  efficiency  in terms  of cost control  is more necessary 
than ever in a Super  Levy environment,  hence  the relevance  of improved  
financial  management.  Skills such as farm planning,  cash flow control,  
and the keeping  of detailed  management  records  form a package  which 
the dairy farmer  of today  needs  to identify  increased  profitability  oppor ­
tunities. Unfortunately  too often in the past these were regarded  as 
unnecessary  and the emphasis  was exclusively  on technical  coefficients.  
Many  dairy farmers  seem to excuse  the absence  of financial  information  
by suggesting  they have a ‘feel’ for the way the business  is going.
48
Typical  profile  of a difficult  farming  account
1. Absence  of Records  and/or  Milk Statement  not used effectively.
2. No recent  Farm Accounts.
Accounts  are important  to the farmer  (businessman)  because  they 
show :
(i) The financial  strength  of the business  at the time of preparation  
of Accounts —Balance  Sheet;
(ii) The trading  performance  over whatever  period the Accounts  
cover,  i.e. Profit  and Loss Statement.
(iii) Quantification  of fixed costs and drawings.  Fixed costs usually  
range from £50/£100  per acre owned (excluding  non-family  
labour  and con-acre).
3. Absence  of any Farm Plan.
Most dairy farmers  have not taken farm planning  seriously  and more  
often than not they perceive  it as a necessary  evil to keep Bank  
Managers  satisfied  . However,  in other  situations  problems  have arisen  
despite  preparation  of Farm Plans due largely  to inadequate  expen ­
diture  control.
4. Failure  to monitor  progress  and react. Examples  would  be :
(a) Inadequate  control  of costs,  e.g. over-feeding,  inflated  machinery  
running  costs,  etc.
(b) Changed  circumstances  which  may require  adjustment  in or even 
drastic  revision  of what  was originally  a soundly  based plan,  e.g. 
Super  Levy.
(c) Low retention  of profits  in easily realisable  assets,  e.g. stock vs. 
concrete.
5. Unbudgeted  expenditure  from cash flow :
(a) Inclusion  of extra development  work which was not part of an 
original  Farm Plan, e.g. erection  of a 100-space  cubicle shed 
rather than a 60-space  and additional  yard concrete  / slurry ac­
commodation.
(b) Change  of car/machinery  without  proper  appraisal  resulting  in a 
shortage  of working  capital  or the emergence  of a hard core in 
the overdraft.
(c) Construction  of new dwelling  house or substantial  extension  to 
original  without  appropriate  financing  arrangements.
6. Misuse  of sanctioned  funds :
Loan used for purpose  other than that requested,  e.g. Stocking  Loan  
used to discharge  undisclosed  creditors.
7. Dispensation  with the rules of logic and economics,  e.g. expectation  
that milk yield will improve  by 200 gallons  per cow within  one year 
despite  the fact that silage quality,  herd composition,  and calving  
patterns  were to remain  essentially  unchanged.
49
8. Drawings :
These have to be related  to the stage of development  and the profit 
margins  being  generated  on the farm. The German  standard  of living,  
however  desirable,  may not be possible  on Irish farming  margins.
9. Split Financing  ;
Loans  from several  sources,  e.g. Bank,  A.C.C.,  Co-Op,  Merchant,  H.P. 
Company,  etc.
In many cases, at any given time, the farmer  simply  did not know 
how much money  he owed and to whom. Strict Current  Account  
control  and/or  refusal  to sanction  further  funds  by the Bank has too 
often in Ireland  been interpreted  by individual  dairy farmers  as a 
restriction  on their ‘spirit of independence ’. Instead  of pausing  to 
examine  whether  such a negative  response  might  validly  represent  an 
accurate  assessment  of their repayment  position  they have sought  
further  finance  from whatever  source  and sometimes  at substantially  
higher  cost.
Cash  flow forecasting
A Cash Flow Projection  is simply  a Statement  setting  out the expected  
cash receipts  and payments  for a future  period. A Cash Flow disregards  
all non-cash  elements,  e.g. stock changes.  It not only projects  the 
amount  of cash required  over the year but more importantly  it identifies 
the seasonal  flow pattern  which  can provide  the following  information  .
(1) An indication  whether  there are any periods  where cash may be 
scarce  or run out.
(2) Confirmation  of Overdraft  required  or ether seasonal  financial 
needs. Most farmers  under  estimate  the difficulty  of accurately  
planning  their financial  requirements.
(3) Aid to proper  Planning  of Capital  Expenditure  Programme,  e.g. 
indication  of a cash shortage  early in the season  would suggest  
deferral  of equipment  purchase  until later or alternatively  the 
need for a loan to cover such requirement.
(4) Indication  of surplus  which  can be used for any necessary  capital  
expenditure  or to take advantage  of discounts  from suppliers  for 
immediate  payment.
(5) Confirmation  to Lending  Institution  of customer  who is on ‘top 
of the job’, thereby  improving  credit rating.
(6) Facilitates  comparison  between  projected  and actual  performance.  
On a monthly  basis this is the most effective  financial  control  
mechanism  available  to any dairy farmer.
As a means  of spotting  trouble,  the measurement  of cash flow is vital. 
Despite  the fact that dairying  is a relatively  strong  cash-flow  business  the 
periods  of major  inflow  are not synchronised  with the periods  of major  
outflow.
50
The amount  of information  sought  by a bank is sometimes  claimed  to 
discourage  the potential  borrower.  He may feel that the preparation  of 
a detailed  submission  is a waste  of management  time. If a farmer  cannot  
provide  all the requested  information  for his Bank Manager  easily,  then 
the Manager  knows  that the farmer  cannot  provide  it easily  for himself — 
he does not know all that he should  about  running  his own business.  It 
is information  the farmer  should  know. If it takes time to uncover  all 
the details,  then it is time well spent. Dairy farmers  can no longer  leave 
their financial  planning  to their local branch  managers.  Failure  to dis­
charge  fully a seasonal  loan which  may relate to fertiliser/feed  purchase  
and/or  stock retention  and an evident  build-up  of hard core overdrafts  
should  be recognised  as at least a hiccup  in the business.  Early  questions  
/answers  on the reasons  are a more sensible  approach  to dealing  with a 
potential  problem  which may not go away. Reluctance  to face up to 
impeding  financial  difficulties  often leads  to friction  and misunderstanding  
between  dairy farmers  and their lending  institutions,  partly because  “by 
the nature  of their work,  bankers  must reduce  everything  to figures.  They  
are made uneasy  by factors  which  cannot  be measured ”. (2)
Regular  communicaticn  is the key to a good working  relationship  
between  a farmer  and his Bank Manager.  Some  farmers tend to the view 
that the less they meet the bank the better. This is a mistaken  approach.  
In communication  terms it is even more important  that there should  be 
a strong  family  involvement  in the farm business  — this is a feature  of 
successful  dairy farms  and the converse  is true of problem  cases in many  
of the latter we have found that wives had not been aware of the full 
extent  of the financial  situation  until a crisis  had arisen.
Financial  analysis
In this section  I have summarised  three large dairy farm situations  
where  farm accounts  were available.  The financial  information  has been  
extracted  selectively  to illustrate  profit performance  over a 3-year  period  
and to examine  certain  ratios which can assist in an evaluation  of the 
financial  stability  of the farms. The adjusted  profit  is defined  as net profit  
+ interest  + depreciation,  i.e. cash flow. Current  assets  consist  largely  of 
livestock  but valuations  differ somewhat  due to accounting  treatment  
between  farms.
Farm 1 would represent  an acceptable  debt : disposable  asset ratio in 
the context  of a well-managed  farm. On the other hand. Farms  2 & 3 
are over-borrowed  and represent  high risk lending  situations  on the basis  
of this ratio. However,  top efficiency  has enabled  Farm 2 to meet com­
mitments.  The interest : G.F.I. ratio comparisons  similarly  indicate  the 
marked  contrast  between  Farm 1 and the other two. Generally,  an 
interest : G.F.I. ratio of 20% upwards  rings the warning  bells whereas  
10% would  be a comfortable  situation.  The gross profit  margin  indicates  
the proportion  of total output  absorbed  by direct (variable)  costs, i.e. 
the higher  the ratio the better  the efficiency  on the farm.
51
EXTRACTS  FROM  FARM  ACCOUNTS  (200 acres,  mainly  dairying) :
FARM  1 (100 cow-herd  @ 1,100 gallons  + tillage)
YEAR  ENDING 31.3.1982 1983 1984
Adjusted  Profit £ 31,500 47,500 34,500
Interest 11,000 12,000 7,000
Drawings/Tax 9,000 12,000 17,000
Surplus  (Deficit) 11,500 23,500 10,500
Current  Assets 74,000 81,000 65,000
Total Liabilities 75,000 65,000 57,500
Debt : Disposable  Asset  Ratio  (%) 101 80 88
Gross  Farm Income  (GFI) 80,500 106,000 115,500
Interest : G.F.I.  Ratio (%) 13 11 6
Gross Profit Margin  (%) 59 64 52
FARM  2 (100 cow-herd  @ 950 gallons  -H beef)
YEAR  ENDING 31.3.1981 1982 1983
Adjusted  Profit £ 31,000 30,000 36,500
Interest 16,000 18,500 20,000
Drawings/Tax 9,500 10,000 9,500
Surplus  (Deficit) 5,500 1,500 7,000
Current  Assets 70,500 59,500 59,500
Total Liabilities 122,000 119,000 122,000
Debt : Disposable  Asset  Ratio  (%) 172 200 205
Gross  Farm Income  (GFI) 75,000 81,000 88,000
Interest : G.F.I.  Ratio (%) 21.5 23 22.5
Gross  Profit Margin  (%) 59 56 60
FARM  3 (100 cow-herd  @ 850 gallons  -t- pigs)
YEAR  ENDING 21.12.1981 1982 1983
Adjusted  Profit £ 27,000 24,000 40,500
Interest 24,000 27,500 13,000
Drawings 8,000 10,000 14,500
Surplus  (Deficit) (5,000) (13,500) 13,000
Current  Assets 80,500 84,000 100,000
Total Liabilities 164,000 183,000 188,000
Debt : Disposable  Asset  Ratio  (%) 204 217 187
Gross  Farm Income  (G.F.I.) 68,000 92,500 98,500
Interest ; G.F.I.  Ratio (%) 35.5 30 13
Gross  Profit Margin  (%) 57 39 57
52
Summary  : Financial  Management  Guidelines
1. Provide  up-to-date  information  by keeping  good records.
2. Have farm accounts  prepared,  preferably  within  3 months  of trading  
year end.
3. Consider  the preparation  of a monthly  cash flow projection  for effect ­
ive financial  control  on your farm.
4. Do not undertake  major  expenditure  from cash flow.
5. Adhere  to budgets  and loans sanctioned.  Don ’t discard  a farm plan 
after facilities  have been sanctioned.
6. Non-conforming  overdrafts  should not be ignored  by recourse  to 
other sources  of finance.
7. Identify  your icost structure  so that you can take steps to improve  
enterprise  efficiency.
8. Be aware of level of drawings.  In general,  many farmers  have little 
accurate  estimate  of living expenses  and frequently  under estimate  
them by overlooking  items  such as educational  expenses.  The opening  
of a separate  household  account  to which regular  (monthly)  agreed  
transfers  are made,  simplifies  considerably  the control  and budgeting  
of drawings.
References
1. Deighton,  J. (1983). Flock productivity  — components  of success.  Paper pre­
sented  at I.G.A.P.A.  Sheep  Conference,  Portlaoise,  October,  1983.
2. Sampson,  A. (1981).  The Money  Lenders.  Coronet  Books.
53
Challenges  to the Irish Dairy Industry
P. O. MOHN
Senior  Visiting  Fellow,  Bank of Ireland  Centre  for Co-operative  Studies.
University  College,  Cork.
During  the past two years I have been meeting  with Dairy Co-operative  
leaders  in a number  of capacities.  Out of these discussions  a number  of 
issues relating  to the future of the Irish Dairy Co-operatives  have sur­
faced. Interestingly,  I recently  met with two dairy co-operatives  in Nova  
Scotia,  Canada,  which are about the same size as the co-operatives  in­
cluded  in the so-called  ‘Big Six’ here in Ireland.  It was a unique  oppor ­
tunity  to compare  the co-operatives  in Nova  Scotia  and the co-operatives  
here in Ireland. My observations  are based upon : discussions  with 
leaders  in the Irish co-operative  community;  analysis  of the annual  re­
ports  of several  major  co-operatives  including  all of the “Big Six”; limited  
research  in which  Dr. Garoyan  and I have been involved;  some 30 years 
of experience  in working  with boards  and management  of agricultural  
co-operatives  including  many dairy co-operatives  and the recent meet ­
ings in Nova  Scotia.
Firstly,  the dairy co-operatives  in Ireland  are alive and well. They  
can have a great furture  as is clearly  demonstrated  by their growth  — 
some greater  than others. Most have latent growth  in contrast  to those  
in other countries  where growth  is in mature  stages and fine tuning is 
taking  place. In Ireland  there are a number  of opportunities  for the dairy  
co-operatives  which have not been fully exploited.  There are adjust ­
ments  that must be made by the co-operatives  to take full advantage  of 
the potential.  Adjustments  by other  integers  of the dairy community  are 
also needed,  i.e. Bord Bainne,  to provide  a more complete  service  to the 
dairy industry.  Farmers  themselves  may have the biggest  adjustments  to 
make.
The asset base for each co-operative  has grown  materially.  As a group  
for the “Big Six”, total assets  grew from £161.9  million  in 1977 to £365.5  
million  in 1983. This was far greater  than inflation.  Co-operative  boards,  
farm organization  leadership,  labour  and bankers  can contribute  to in­
creasing  this asset base by accommodating  to prudent  requirements  for a 
healthy  growth. Let us first examine  the public flnancial  statements  of 
the “Big Six” in the context  of the growth  issue. An analysis  was made  
for the ten year period 1974-1983.  During  this period out of £363.8  
million  funds raised by the “Big Six”: 66.2% came from operations,  
22.3%  came from borrowings,  8.0% came  from grants,  3.5% came from  
members:  69% was used for fixed assets,  29.6% was used for working  
capital  and 1.4% was invested  in other businesses.
The shocking  statistic  is that only 3.5% of the capital  raised during  
this period  came from the members.  This is probably  the lowest  in the 
world.  Only two co-operatives of the “Big Six” have had a revolving  fund
54
in recent  times. Avonmore  had a revolving  capital  fund (discontinued  in 
1984) and Waterford  has a revolving  loan fund. There are two other  
alarming  trends. Cash flow as a percentage  of sales is trending  sharply  
downward  and trading  surplus  as a percent  sales is also trending  sharply  
downward.  Both of these trends  continued  downward  in 1984. If these 
trends continue,  how will future investments  be funded?  Or how will 
debt be serviced?  Currently,  interest  is devouring  a large proportion  of 
trading  surplus.  Another  statistic  that is a warning  signal is the size in 
creditor  financing.  In terms of total liabilities,  creditors  as a percentage  
of Total Liabilities  have increased  from 18.5% in 1977 to 26% in 1984.  
Some  serious  questions  need to be raised  relative  to this statistic,  although  
just looking  at in the raw form does not tell us what the construction  of 
that creditor  number  is.
If there is to be continued  development  of the industry  to the extent  
to which it is capable,  major  input of additional  capital  is needed.  This 
infusion  of new capital  would be used for research  and development,  
capital  cost in relation  to new value-added  products  and new processes,  
including  brand names,  rationalization  of assembly,  processing,  and dis­
tribution  facilities,  energy  conservation  measures,  and investments  in new 
technology  for existing  processes.
To obtain the most advantagous  financing  for these investments,  
co-operatives  might pool their needs. By this I mean that if all of the 
co-operatives  were to combine  together  and seek a pool of funds for 
their total needs  the chances  of their entering  some of the  capital  markets,  
not only in Ireland  but in other European  markets,  would be much  
greater. Interest  rates might very well be lower and the length  of term 
of the borrowings  might also be longer particularly  long term bonds.  
The Irish banking  industry  could very well examine  innovative  financing  
programmes  of co-operative  banking  systems  that exist in most other  
countries.  I believe  that long term loans —up to 30 years—are  needed  
for the co-operatives  in Ireland  to plan effectively  and to develop  like 
their competitors  in other  countries.
Another  area which  bears some study  is that related  to overhead  costs  
and profit  centre  analysis.  Such analysis  might  lead to more rationaliza ­
tion but I have not studied  this area. Performance  is frequently —and 
mistakenly —measured  only on trading  surplus. Trading  surplus  is only 
one dimension  of economic  results  of a co-operative.  Another  relevant  
measure  is price paid to suppliers  for their milk or prices charged  for 
purchases  by them. It is probable  that some co-operatives  paid a rela­
tively higher  blended  price with a resultant  lower surplus. Other co­
operatives  may end the year with a relatively  higher  surplus  but farmers  
on the whole  may have received  a lower blended  price.
In a true co-operative  this phenomena  would  have made  no difference 
because  the surplus  would  be allocated  at the end of the year. In Ireland  
patronage  refunds  are not paid to farmers.  There are two reasons  why 
this might be the case (perhaps  neither  one of them was in fact the
55
reason  why patronage  refunds  are not paid) : (1) that a high price is paid 
at the delivery  of milk —sometimes  at a price higher  than is justified  since  
it is not known  whether  or not there will be a surplus  earned  during  the 
year and (2) that if patronage  refunds  are paid to farmers  the farmer  
incurs  a tax liability.  Again  Ireland  is unique  in this regard  because  m 
most countries  the tax is paid either at the farm or at the co-operative  
level. In Ireland,  if it remains  in the co-operative,  for the most part no 
tax is paid.
In most other  countries  the price paid initially  is a competitive  price. It 
is not set by the Board  of Directors.  It is set by Operating  Management  
and at the end of the year any surplus  generated  by the co-operative  is 
distributed  as patronage  refunds.  This means  that in the final analysis  
the prices  received  by farmers  are increased  once the patronage  refund  is 
distributed —partly in cash and partly  in equity  paper —at the end of the 
year.
By taking the responsibility  and authority  of setting periodic  milk 
prices  the Board  cannot  hold management  accountable  for year end re­
sults because  a major  function  of the size of surplus  or deficit  is the up 
front price paid for milk. As in co-operatives  and companies  in most  
other countries  operating  management  of ordinary  companies  in Ireland  
—not the Board —sets the price.
From a broader  perspective  I would  now like to identify  what causes  
stagnation  in agricultural  industries.  Based upon about 20 years of 
analysis  and observation  I can safely say that some of the reasons  for 
stagnation  are : weak management,  low member  equity,  high cash pat­
ronage  refunds  (same  as high price),  and being  slow to adjust  to changing  
economic  and market  conditions.  The question  could be raised : “Why  
grow? ” There are some important  reasons  for growth. They include  
opportunity  for diversification,  economies  of scale, more flexibility  to 
implement  opportunities,  reduction  of the need for price competition  
(competition  rather  that relates  to more services,  broader  lines of pro­
ducts,  etc.).
There are some dangers  to growth,  however. These include  an in­
creased  tendency  toward  bureaucracy,  possible  loss of member  control,  
and earnings  becoming  the sole goal.
It is difficult  to distinguish  between  the economic  position  of dairy  
co-operatives  and the industry  of which  they comprise  a dominant  P®®*'  
tion. The production  sector (farmers)  have been experiencing  reduced  
production  and lower  returns  and many  are financially  weak.  Many  dairy  
co-operatives  are also in a poor financial  condition  due to problems  
within  the dairy industry.  While  some of the big dairy co-operatives  are 
diversified  into non-dairy  products,  the heavy dependence  on the dairy  
industry  far overshadows  any non-dairy  revenues.  While profits  from  
non-dairy  activities  are always  helpful,  questions  remain  about  the profi ­
tability  potentials  of existing  non-dairy  ventures.  Some co-operatives  
appear  to be in lower margin  activities.  These ventures  often require  a
56
Where  
there ’s growth  
—there ’s 
Grasslcind  
fertilizers
HEAD OFFICE;
75 Mercion  Square,  Dublin  2.
Tel. (01) 600011/680788  Telex 24130
FACTORIES
Carrigrohane  Road,  Cork. Tel. (021)44188  
Dock Road, Limerick.  Tel. (061)27788  
The Pound  Road. Slane,  Co. Meath.  
Tel.(041)24124  & 24160
Grassland  
covers  Ireland.
Grassland  Fertilizers  Ltd. The Pound Road. Slane Tel. (041) 24124 & 24160
57
level of managerial  skill not yet proven  in the existing  co-operatives.  
Retail  activity  of co-operatives  often competes  with supermarket  chains  
—the co-operative ’s customers.  Finally,  the risks of capital  losses  in soine  
of the non-dairy  ventures  seems  to be larger  than the potential  gains in 
annual  profits.  Although  dairy  production  has slowed,  the huge inventory  
of products  available  world-wide  still serves  as a dampness  on profitabil ­
ity. Production  is down within  the E.E.C.  and the IJ.S. Production  was 
up in Australia,  New Zealand  and Canada.  There  are signs of increased  
consumption  for some  products  — mainly  cheeses  — while  lower  demand  
exists for butter  and skim milk powder.  How quickly  the world-supply  
demand  comes into balance  will determine  how profitable  will be the 
Irish dairy industry.
The industry  in Ireland  seems to be driven  by production  considera ­
tions rather  than by markets.  Apparently  excess  capacity  exists and co­
operatives  are manoeuvering  to obtain volume  from a shrinking  total 
supply  base. Some wounds  exist but they are minor  compared  to future  
conflicts  that may arise unless the industry  comes to grip with the 
problems.
As co-operatives  becomes  more concerned  about producing  products  
for consumer consumption  rather  than for intervention  storage,  a number  
of changes  will follow. Shifts will be required  from butter-powder,  to 
various  types of cheeses  and other consumer  products.  They may even 
learn that the market  for yoghurt  is limited,  too. As production  shifts to 
more perishable  products,  basic changes  in seasonal  farm milk supplies  
will be needed.  The supply  base for the industry  will need to change,  i.e. 
the nature,  type and size of dairy farm will change  to produce  a more  
uniform  seasonal  milk supply.  Co-operatives  will need to reward  farmers  
for responding,  as several  co-operatives  are now doing.
There  is a need to move  more to value added  products.  This does not 
mean  value added  in the sense of only consumer  products.  It might  mean  
value added  in the industrial  line such as where  some increased  process ­
ing takes place but the product  is sold to other  firms for further  process ­
ing into consumer  or other  end products.
Joint marketing  might be another  way of approaching  the export  
issue. An Bord Bainne  is in place as the marketing  arm. However,  co­
operatives  are not fully utilizing  Bord Bainne.  Each seeks  to find its own 
markets  for its own products  and only a limited  amount  of product  
produced  by the co-operatives  is going through  Bord Bainne. This is 
highly  unfortunate  since a marketing  organisation  can only be effective  
when  it has the whole  of the production  of its owner-members  to market  
so that negotiations  can effectively  be made with buyers. Unless  the 
co-operatives  make a major  change  in this direction  Irish exports  from  
the dairy industry  will continue  to deteriorate  against  other  eompetitors.  
If Bord Bainne  is not doing  the job the co-operatives  wish it to do, they 
should  in fact require  that necessary  changes  take place —they sit on the 
Board  of Directors  of Bord  Bainne.  The bottom  line is that “Bord Bainne  
is not being  given  a chance  by the co-operatives  to perform ”.
58
The Directors  of co-operatives  have a major  responsibility  of shifting  
the utilization  of their energy  and time resource.  Rather  than taking  time 
each month  to set the price of milk (this can easily  be done by operating  
management  within parameter  policies  established  by the Board of 
Directors),  they should  devote  more attention  to carrying  out the major  
functions  of Boards,  i.e. planning  and control.  They should  also identify  
their information  needs.  Model  information  systems  exist that are specific 
on key performance  areas  and provide  key indicators  that are appropriate  
for planning  and control  as well as other decision  making  by Boards  of 
Directors.  Virtually  no Board  of Directors  in Ireland  has set performance  
goals  for their co-operative  and then monitoring  the achievement  of those 
goals. Some of the key issues that were found in the two years of dis­
cussions  with co-operative  leadership  are :
(1) there is a deep rooted  mistrust  between  members  and the Board/  
Management  team;
(2) there appears  to be a total lack of sense of ownership  of their co­
operative  by members;
(3) strategic  planning  may be in the minds of operating  management  
but Boards  are not involved  in setting  directions  for those plans  and 
evaluating  the implementation  consequences;
(4) today ’s co-operative  structures  may not be suitable  to take advan ­
tage of the opportunities;
(5) should  Irish farmers  create  bargaining  associations  and let co-opera ­
tives become  companies?;
(6) the decision  process  within  co-operatives  becomes  highly  interwoven  
with agricultural  politics,  i.e. groups  of producers  take actions  which 
damage  their own co-operative;
(7) clear understanding  of the rights of the member  in relationship  to 
his co-operative,  the responsibilities  of the co-operative  to the mem ­
ber, the rights of the co-operative,  and the responsibility  of the 
member  to his co-operative  appear  to be absent.
Summary
(1) A number  of co-operatives  are large enough  as dairy processors — 
none are large enough  to be a significant  force in export  markets.  
Either  joint efforts  are needed  by co-operatives  or they must  continue  
individually  to find specific  market  niches  for a specific  product.
(2) Value added products  offer significantly  greater  profitability  but 
require  marketing  skills, heavy investments,  and entail risk. Addi ­
tionally  the question  needs to be raised, “are the co-operatives  
equipped  with the necessary  managerial  and marketing  com­
petencies ”?
(3) Low retention  levels and lack of members  contributed  equited  capi­
tal and sources  for long term financing  will result  in the industry  not 
being  able to move  forward  competitively.
59
(4) It is doubtful  if any of the co-operatives  studied  (in the Sources  and 
Uses publication)  can continue  needed  growth  by holding  fast to 
traditional  capitalisation  and financing  methods.
(5) Concurrent  with new approaches  to financing,  two additional  moves 
are needed : away  from production  orientation  to market  orientation  
and change  from fierce individualism  by co-operatives  in marketing  
to more group  or joint effort  in export  marketing.
(6) Polarisation  between  diverse  groups (which as a whole own the 
co-operatives)  create the most adverse  climate  for orderly  growth  
and competition  I have ever seen. One option  might  be to convert  
the co-operatives  to companies —so that they could perform  as a 
business  with all of its attendant  competitive  consequences,  and have 
farmers  form bargaining  associations.  This is not too far from where 
you are today  and countries  which  use this approach —or modifica ­
tions thereof  seem to be managing.
(7) One or more of the co-operatives  might  use a strategy  of picking  off 
the largest,  most efficient  producers.  This approach  could result in 
greater  economic  benefit  to both the co-operative  and the supplier-  
member.  It would  play havoc  in the industry,  though.  This becomes  
particularly  relevant  as co-operatives  must establish  policies  and 
criteria  to meet the constraints  dictated  by the Super Levy. This 
approach  could result  in fewer  but larger  co-operatives.
(8) The alternative  co-operative  approach  would  be for the co-operatives  
to work together  for the benefit  of their members —a study may be 
undertaken  on how to rationalise  milk supply  on a geographic  basis  
to minimise  transport  costs (in a study for Oregon  dairy co-opera ­
tives, rationalising  milk routes saved about eight cents per gallon  
back in 1967/68).  Another  study would  be to assess  the differences 
in manufacturing  costs of each product  by each co-operative  to 
determine  which co-operative  has lowest manufacturing  costs per 
unit. Also, which of the lowest cost co-operatives  had available  
capacity  to expand.  Finally,  a third study would  be to take a look 
at making  it economically  profitable  for higher  cost units to function  
as a standby  and use lowest  cost to capacity  under  contract  to share  
benefits  of economies  of scale. Implementing  results  of these studies  
could materially  improve  the competitive  posture  for Irish dairy  
products  and world  markets.
(9) Having  raised all of these questions,  one might  ic,onclude  that I am 
pessimistic  about  the future  of dairy co-operatives.  Well, I am not; 
I am very optimistic.  However,  there will be many changes.  I am 
confident  in the leadership  that continues  to rise to the top. Many  
in this Association  will be agents  of change  which  can result in the 
Irish dairy farmer  and his co-operative  becoming  more competitive  
and stronger  in world markets.  What those changes  will be is left 
to good judgement  and leadership.
60
The Management  of a Large  Dairy  
Herd in the U.K.
J. M. SLATER
I.C.I. Ltd., Dairy House  Farm, Stanthorne,  Middlewich,  Cheshire.
England.
Dairy House  Farm has been owned by ICI for 50 years and over that 
time has been used for many fertiliser  experiments,  and in the last few 
years has been run as a commercial/demonstration  farm. The research  
work for the Company  is now carried  out at Jealott ’s Hill in Berkshire  
and Ravenscroft  Hall Farm in Cheshire.
Dairy House  Farm comprises  400 acres of grassland  and 50 acres of 
buildings  and woodland.  The farm is a compact  block of ground  with 
the main London  to Glasgow  railway  line and the Shropshire  Union  canal  
running  through  it. The majority  of the land is typical  of the Cheshire  
Plain,  heavy  clay. A small percentage  of the farm, however,  is on steep  
slopes  falling  to the River  Weaver  and this land is particularly  light and 
sandy. There are two main sets of buildings  centrally  placed  within  the 
farm boundaries,  with all the dairy cows now housed  at Dairy House  
itself, where  three dairy men look after 320 cows milked  through  a one- 
man ojjerated  24/24  Gascoigne  parlour.  All silage is forage  box fed and 
the cows are housed  in kennels  and a clear span cubicle  building.  There  
is accommodation  for 3500 tonnes of silage at Dairy House and it is 
proposed  to raise this to 5000 tonnes  within  the next year.
The main aim of the farm is to maximise  grass  output  and farm profit ­
ably, and this necessitates  on heavy wet soils large storage  capacity  for 
both silage and slurry. The total farm staff comprises  five men, three  
herdsmen  previously  mentioned  with a tractor  driver/relief  milker  and a 
full time tractor  driver.
With the necessity  for maximising  grass  yields  on heavy  land floatation  
equipment  is used to enable  fertiliser  to be applied  in the early part of 
the year when conventional  equipment  would  cause damage.  As part of 
the grassland  management  within  the farm, zero grazing  is practised  at 
the start of the season  and at the end, and here again tyre configurations  
are most important  to allow zero grazing  to start in the early spring. 
There are some 60 acres of land bordering  roads that we cannot  stock  
and these are continuously  cut for either  zero grazing  or silage. The leys 
comprise  predominantly  Augusta  with a small quantity  of RVP Hay 
Pasture  and Frances. The ability to zero grass at this time of year 
enables  economies  in concentrate  use and total silage use.
Most of the farm is sown to a mixture  of late and intermediate  rye­
grasses. This is used for either  cutting  or grazing.  The current  mix is 9 
lbs of Melle,  Meltra  Morenne  and Talbot  to give a total seed rate of 36 
Ibs/acre.  The very heaviest  fields  are sown to a mixture  of late perennials  
to allow an extra week in the spring  before  first cut silage.
61
With a heavy soil and a moderately  high rainfall  there is a high risk 
of sward  damage  due to ruts. Therefore,  as the only time in the rotation  
to reetify  this problem  is at reseeding,  we conventionally  plough  and take 
the opportunity  to level the soil surface. Also, as we need to break a 
soil pan in many fields,  subsoiling  is carried  out prior to ploughing.
Our heavy  clay soils are inherently  difficult  to break  down into a fine 
firm seed bed and therefore  we aim to plough  in mid-August  and allow 
any rain in late August  to aid tilth formation.  Autumn  sowing  of grass  
seed is conducted  in the last week of August  and the first week of 
September  A minimum  of 60 units of P2O5 and KjO are applied  to the 
seed bed along with 12-15 units of nitrogen  to help the young  plant get 
established.
Post emergence  care of the ley is most important  with weed control  
primarily  for chickweed  and pest control  for fritfly necessary  in most  
autumns.
The general  fertiliser  policy  on the farm is to aim for an average  of 
400 units  / acre on the cow grazing  area and up to 450 units on the zero- 
grazed  Augusta  leys. The aim is to apply  two-thirds  of the total nitrogen  
by end of May and thus enable  the nitrogen  to be around  the rooting  
zone of the grass  during  the middle  of the summer.
On silage fields for four cuts up to 400 units of nitrogen  are applied  
along  with 180 units of KA A typical  fertiliser  policy  would  be
N P K
1st cut 145 32 56
2nd cut 110 0 72
3rd cut 85 0 54
4th cut 60 0 0
Of the total grass acreage  the aim is to conserve  as silage approxim ­
ately 75% of the total with some 25% only allocated  to grazing  up to 
the end of first cut silage. This creates  a large logistical  problem  in 
handling  approximately  2500-3000  tonnes  of grass for silage in the late 
May period. Our own silage making  team comprises  a 8' 6" mower  
conditioner  and a precision  chop  forage  harvester  serviced  by three silage  
trailers.  With this team approximately  1750 tonnes of silage  can be made  
within a given period  at a given quality. Therefore,  we call in a con­
tractor  to harvest  a proportion  of our first cut. In 1984 by following  this 
practise  we were able to harvest  all first cut at a quality  of 71 D.
Silage  performance  in 1984 was :
Acres  cut Tonnes/Acre Total  Tonnage
1st cut 
2nd cut 
3rd cut 
4th cut260
220
60
609.2
7.3
3.3 
5.02400
1600
200
300
62
Immediately  following  the clearing  of a silage field fertiliser  will be 
applied  to enable  the next cut to get away just as quickly  as possible.  In 
this way three or four cuts of silage are taken throughout  the growing  
period.
The current  stock numbers  at Dairy House are 320 dairy cows with 
198 young stock. The cows are split into two herds, the first calving  
September/October  and early November,  and these have been managed  
this last winter  on an ad lib silage and flat rate concentrate  level of 4 kg/ 
head/day.  The anticipated  silage  consumption  per cow will be 12 tonnes  
for the winter  period. During  the summer  this herd is set stocked  aiming  
at a maximum  stocking  rate for the early part of the season of no 
more than 0.3 of an acre per cow. The milk yield of these animals  at 
turn-out  will be 4 gallons. With the potential  in grass of over 5 gallons,  
this stocking  density  must be held as tight as possible.
The spring herd calving  January/February  and early March are on 
easy fed silage and concentrates  flat rate of 5 kg/head/day.  At turn-out  
these animals  will be stocked  at 0.35 of an acre per cow as their demand  
is slightly  greater  than the autumn  calving  animal  and they will have 
consumed  approximately  10 tonnes  of silage through  the winter  period.  
At the present  time the margin  per cow over bought  feed is £585. This 
figure is steadily  rising as our margins  recover  from the effects  of the 
poor silage fed in the 1983/1984  winter. The stocking  rate for the cows  
is 0.9 of an acre and thus the margin  over feed and fertiliser  costs is £580  
per acre.
The heifer calves  produced  by one herd are reared and return to the 
same herd at 2 years old to calve down. To achieve  good weights  at 
calving  a target is set at 350 kg for heifers  at 15 months  being served. 
The necessitates  a live weight  gain of 0.7 kg/day.  The calves  are reared  
on cold acidified  milk replacer  and weaned  by weight  at 85 kg when they 
should  be consuming  0.9 kg per day of dry feed. By 8-9 weeks of age 
they are switched  on to a grass cube/cereal  cube mix reducing  concen ­
trate costs. At 11-12 weeks silage is introduced  for the rest of the first 
winter.
In the second  winter  if good silage is available  minimal  extra feeds  
will be needed.
For the first three weeks  heifers  are served with Friesian  semen and 
then we allow the beef bulls to sweep  up. This coupled  with a six week 
period  for the cows  ensures  that all heifer  calves  are born in two periods  : 
September  to the first half of October  and January  to the first half of 
February,  allowing  two definite  batches  to be reared  per year.
There are changes  occuning  within the industry  that have to be 
planned  for now and we must all face up to the new financial  situation  
for dairying.  Our total output  of milk has been capped;  we have lost 4.5 
pence/gallon  on our milk value. Therefore,  to maintain  margins  is 
difficult  and to improve  them to cover  the increase  in labour  and machin ­
63
ery costs is exceptionally  difficult.  For anyone  with a tight stocking  rate 
the production  of extra grass and the reduction  of the concentrate  input  
must be the answer.  For some people  there could be no alternative  but 
to go to a no concentrate  feeding  system. The most worrying  aspect  of 
the changes  in costs is within the fixed cost structure  and many dairy  
farmers  will have to look to reducing  paid labour and simplifying 
machinery  within  their own systems.  It could be a great advantage  for 
farmers  to not have so heavily  invested  in building  and machinery  and 
that their dairy industry  is on a much lower capital  base. We find it 
necessary  for some operations  to use a contractor  and in the future this 
may become  a larger  part of many  farm operations.
Looking  to the future the aim must be to improve  the quality  of the 
cattle that we have so that they can utilise  large quantities  of forage  and 
depend  very little on concentrate  feeding.  Margins  of £550 and above 
will be needed  to cover  the true fixed costs and this will only be achieved 
with respectable  yields  and low feed costs. One of the major  difficulties 
farming  with cows in Cheshire  compared  with southern  Ireland  is that 
we have to budget  for a 200 day winter  and thus our conservation  of 
grass primarily  as silage has to be a very efficient  and effective  job. 
The current strengthening  of controls  on slurry and silage effluent 
disposal  will have a serious  impact  on all our operations  and there will 
be some cases where  slurry  systems  will have to be abandoned  in favour  
of straw bedded  systems  of housing.
Having  painted  a fairly  gloomy  picture  let us hope that we can produce  
as much milk from our own resources  as possible.  The target should  be 
900 gallons  per acre and above  to produce  a margin  of over £600 per cow 
and thus enable  the dairy industry  to remain  profitable  for the future
64
ureenvale  
ANIMAL FEEDS
PRODUCT  RANGE:
Calf  Nuts
Cal Mag  Nuts
Beet  Pulp  Nuts
Low  Calcium —High  Phos.  
Min.ViLSuppls.
Dairy  Nuts
Beef  Nuts
Molasses
Horse  Conditioner
Superpressed  Pulp
• HIGHLY  PALATIBLE,  HIGHLY  
DIGESTIBLE  FEEDS  — FROM  
GREENVALE —-THE EXPERTS  
IN FEEDING.
• A DIVISION  OF 
SIOCRE  EIREANN,  OPT
ABSTRACTS
THE  EFFECT  OF SWARD  MANAGEMENT  AND  COMPANION  
GRASS  ON THE  PERFORMANCE  OF WHITE  CLOVER  
A. J. BRERETON
The Agricultural Institute,  Johnstown Castle,  Wexford.
The research  was undertaken  to obtain  data on the factors  affecting 
the ecological  stability  of grass/white  clover  swards. The objective  was 
to monitor  the changes  in the level of clover dominance  within and 
between  seasons  under different  managements.  The changes  were com­
pared with concurrent  changes  in the density  of grass tillers. The results  
showed  that clover dominance  was reduced  as grass tiller density  in­
creased. Management  and companion  grass effects were explained  in 
terms of their effect on grass tiller density. Clover dominance  was 
maintained  over three years in swards  cut at 28-day  intervals  during  the 
growing  season. Clover  declined  progressively  in swards  cut at 14-day  
intervals.  This decline  was related  to an increase  in grass tiller density. 
Under  the conditions  of the experiment  clover  was suppressed  when grass 
density  exceeded  5,000 m"l At lower  tiller densities  clover  was generally  
dominant.  The transition  from clover  to grass dominance  was sensitive  
to small changes  in grass  tiller density  in the region  of 5,000  m~^ It was 
concluded  that the instability  observed  in grass/clover  swards under  
rotational  grazing  is due to the sensitivity  of clover  to grass tiller density  
within  the normal  range  found in swards.  The results  provide  a basis for 
developing  management  practices  suited to the establishment  and main ­
tenance  of the grass/clover  association.
INCREASING  EFFICIENCY  OF GRAZED  SWARDS  
O. CARTON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
The primary  factor  affecting  the output  of animal  product  per hectare  
in a grazing  system  is the amount  of herbage  produced.  The efficiency  
with which  this herbage  is utilized  is controlled  by stocking  rate (SR). In 
the standard  rotational  grazing  system  stocking  rate is adjusted  during  
the season  as the silage  ground  becomes  available  for grazing.  While  this 
system  achieves  a reasonable  balance  between  feed supply  and herd feed 
requirements,  periods of feed surpluses  and deficits  occur. Deficits  
imply  reduced  animal  performance  while surpluses  imply  grass is carried  
from one grazing  to the next with associated  losses  in feed value.  Ideally  
the SR should be adjusted  continuously.  Thus a balance  is achieved 
between  feed supply and demand  and all the herbage  produced  is 
utilised. The inherent  flexibility  of the paddock  system  of grazing  can 
be used to adjust the grazing  time per paddock  therefore  achieving  a 
continuously  adjusted  SR. However  within this system surpluses  (too 
many paddocks)  and deficits  (too few paddocks)  can occur. In times of 
surplus  the excess  herbage  can be conserved  and this can then be fed in 
times  of deficit.
66
THE EFFECT  OF HERBAGE  ALLOWANCES,  HERBAGE  MASS  
AND CONCENTRATE  FEEDING  ON THE INTAKE  OF COWS  
GRAZING  MID-SUMMER  PASTURE
G. STAKELUM
The Agricultural Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
An experiment  is described  in which  40 spring-calving  dairy cows  were 
on four grazing  treatments  (two levels of daily herbage  allowance  with 
and without  concentrate  feeding).  The treatments  were imposed  for 16 
days in August  1984.
Daily herbage  allowances  from ground  level were 24 and 16 kg dry 
matter/head.  Concentrates  were individually  fed once daily to two 
groups  at 4.5 kg/head.  Daily intake of concentrate  organic  matter  was 
3.8 kg/head.  Herbage  intake  was measured  by estimating  herbage  before 
and after grazing.
Herbage  mass increased  significantly  (p<0.001)  from 3394 to 4319 kg 
of organic  rnatter/ha  for the 1st and 2nd half of the experimental  period.  
Realised  daily herbage  organic  matter  allowances  were 21.9 and 14.6 
kg/head  for the high and low allowance  groups,  respectively.
Herbage  mass, herbage  allowance  and concentrate  feeding  all had a 
sgnificant  effect (p<0.001)  on herbage  intake. There was a significant 
interaction  between  the effects  of herbage  mass and herbage  allowance  
(p<0.001)  and between  herbage  allowance  and concentrate  feeding  
(p<0.05)  on herbage  intake.
Increased  herbage  mass increased  herbage  intake  from 13.6 to 16.6 and
11.6 to 12.5 for the unsupplemented  groups  at high and low herbage  
allowance,  respectively.  The increase  for the supplemented  groups  was 
11.0 to 14.1 and 10.6 to 11.0 for the high and low allowance  groups,  
respectively.  Concentrate  feeding  reduced  herbage  intake by 0.67 and 
0.33 per kg of concentrate  fed at high and low herbage  allowance,  
respectively.
CROP  LOSS  MODEL  FOR  SILAGE  MECHANISATION  
S. M. WARD
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department,  U.C.D.,
Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin  2.
A microcomputer  based model  for evaluating  the opportunity  cost of 
crop losses, arising from delayed  silage harvesting,  is described.  The 
algorithms  of the model  determine  the equivalent  quantity  of concentrate  
feedstuffs  required  to offset a good reduetion  in the net-energy  value of 
forage. Three enterprise  types are considered,  viz. beef and dairying  
(autumn  and spring-calving);  and the inclusion  of this model  in the total 
cost analysis  of a silage  mechanisation  system  is explained.  Examples  are 
given cf the application  of this model  : Results  indicate  that a minimum  
harvest  area of 20 ha./yr.  is required  in order  to justify  system  ownership.  
In addition,  it was found that the opportunity  cost of crop losses,  arising  
from delayed  harvesting,  is a critical  factor in the evaluation  of silage  
mechanisation  systems;  and can account  for up to 50% of the total 
system  cost.
67
PREDICTION  OF 1st CUT SILAGE  QUALITY  FROM  THE RATE  
OF DECLINE  OF GRASS  DIGESTIBILITY  FOR THE YEARS
1982  - 4
J. O’SHEA.  P. O’KIELY
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
The aim of this study was fourfold.
1. To establish  year to year variability  in the decline  of grass DMD  
prior to first-cut  silage making.
2. To compare  patterns  obtained  in the East as against  the West of 
Ireland.
3. To contrast  results  from farms  with Grange  data.
4. To determine  the decrease  in DMD  at farm level between  first-cut 
grass and silage made from it.
The procedure  adopted  was to sample  grasses  throughout  the country,  
in collaboration  with ACOT  and other bodies. Samples  were taken in 
the early part of May and at cutting  time and dispatched  to Dunsinea  for 
DMD analysis.  Later on each year silage made from these grasses  was 
also sampled  for analysis.
The results showed  that considerable  year to year variability  exists.  
The rates of decline  in digestibility  measured  for 1982, ’83 and ’84 were 
0.58, 0.2 and 0.33 respectively.  Comparison  of patterns  between  the East 
and the Western  regions  revealed  little difference  when swards  of a 
similar nature were considered.  In general  samples  taken at weekly 
intervals  at Grange  tended  to have higher  DMD values  than those from  
the farm study. Some surprisingly  high differences  in DMD were ob­
served between  grass cutting  time and silage made from it, the mean  
values  for 1982, ’83 and ’84 being 2.5, 4.5 and 4.5 units respectively.
68
MICROSCOPIC  AND  CHEMICAL  CHANGES  DURING  THE  FIRST  
22 DAYS  IN SILAGES  MADE  IN LABORATORY  SILOS
ANA WINTERS  and P. A. WHITTAKER  
Biology  Department,  College  oj St. Patrick,  Maynooth,  Co. Kildare.
R. K. WILSON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
Two factorial  experiments  (2x8x2) were carried  out where  ryegrass  
(Lolium  multijorum,  CV Meritra)  and cocksroot  (Dactylis  glomerata,  
indigenous)  were ensiled in laboratory  silos (capacity  0.2 kg) under  
pressure  (0.7 kPa) using two treatments  (with and without  85% formic  
acid at 3.3 1/t) by eight sampling  intervals  (1. 2, 3, 4, 7. 10, 14 and 21 
days) in duplicate.
Chemical  and microscopic  changes  were followed,  the latter by hand-  
sectioning  blade transverse  sections,  mounting  them, followed  by 
photography  through  a microscope.  The negatives  were projected  and 
the diameters  of cells and their protoplasts  measured  in two directions  at 
right angles.
Both grasses  at day 21 had undergone  lactic acid type fermentation  
but the same amount  of lactic acid gave a pH of 4.3 in ryegrass  but only
4.6 in cocksfoot.  The formic  acid treatment,  relative  to the untreated  
grass, gave a rapid (1 day) shrinking  of the protoplast  within  the cell, a 
quicker  release  of effluent  and loss of cell turgor  pressure,  and an increase 
in electrical  conductivity  due to additional  ions in solution.  All the above 
were statistically  significant  (p<0.01)  for the first 4 days.
The results  suggest  that formic  acid penetrates  the plant cuticle,  dam­
ages the mesophyllic  cell membrane  and causes  a leakage  of cell nutrients  
for subsequent  fermentation  as well as provide  H+-ions  to lower  pH.
69
USING  SILAGE  EFFLUENT  
P. O’KIELY  and V. FLYNN  
The Agricultural Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Interest  has been expressed  in using a layer of straw under silage to 
collect/trap  effluent  so as to reduce  the effluent  problem  and improve  
straw quality. An experiment  was conducted  to quantify  the value of 
such a practice.
One layer of barley straw bales were placed beneath  herbage  being 
ensiled in an unwalled  clamp in October.  Both ammoniated  (54.4%  
DMD)  and non-ammoniated  (47.5% DMD)  bales were used and each 
was placed  either  on the flat or on its side. The silage DM content  was 
15% and it contained  26% crude protein.  The untreated  straw retained
1.7 kg and 1.1 kg effluent  per kg straw when placed  on the flat or on its 
side respectively.  The ammoniated  straw had corresponding  effluent 
retentions  of 2.4 and 2.3 kg effluent  per kg straw. Effluent  increased  the 
crude  protein  content  of straw  dry matter  by 7.6 per cent units  on average. 
Untreated  straw digestibility  (in vitro DMD)  was 3.9 units higher  and 
ammoniated  straw digestibility  was 5.2 units lower following  storage 
under  silage.
Friesian  stores  (500 kg) were fed 6 kg barley  and 2 kg straw per head  
daily. Fresh water and silage effluent  were both available  ad libitum.  
Animals  consumed  up to 10 gallons  per day of well preserved  effluent  but 
only 1 gallon  per day when preservation  was bad. There was a growth 
response  to the effluent  consumed.
Due to the great variation  of the output  effluent  per tonne herbage  
ensiled  and because  of the large amount  of straw required  to retain all 
of the effluent  from wet herbage,  this technique  of retaining  effluent  is 
both impractical  and unreliable.  Feeding  silage effluent  to beef cattle  
would  not be applicable  on most farms  due to the problems  of storing  a 
large volume  of effluent  until it would  be practical  to feed it. Spreading  
silage effluent  onto grassland  still seems the most realistic  method  for 
disposing  of it on the beef farm. However,  it may be easier  to organise  
the feeding  of silage  effluent  to cows on a dairy farm as they come in for 
or go out from milking.
70
EFFECT  OF ENVIRONMENTAL  FACTORS  ON ANIMAL  
PRODUCTION
WM. O’KEEFFE  and M. RYAN  
The Agricultural Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
Heat-energy  exchange  between  animals  and their surroundings  are 
governed  by the laws of thermodynamics.  Homeotherms  maintain  a 
stable  deep body temperature  over a range cf environmental  conditions.  
There  is a critical  temperature  at the lower  end of the range below  which 
the energy  required  to maintain  deep body heat increases.  Critical  tem­
perature  may be calculated  from Baxter ’s equations.
To=Tr-l-HIt  + (E—H) lo where  T„=critical  temperature  °C;
Tr=Rectal  temp.  = 39°C;
H = Heat arising  from metabolism  (Mj It = Tissue  Insulation
CC m ’’ d
E = Minimal  loss of heat by vaporising  moisture  (Mj m"^d" ‘);
I<,=Extemal  insulation  (°C m^ d Mj’’)
Adverse  environmental  conditions  affect animal  production  by raising  
the critical temperature.  Critical  temperature  is influenced  by several 
factors  including  coat thickness,  insulation,  wind, wetness,  etc. When  
critical  temperature  is higher  than environmental  temperature  homeo ­
therms  use some of their total energy  intake  to maintain  deep body heat.  
This may mean loss cf LWG  or ill-health.  Data from the 1st cycle of a 
grazing  experiment  at Johnstown  Castle 1977- ’84 were used to study this 
effect. Blaxter ’s equations  were used to calculate  critical  temperature  for 
2 coat thicknesses,  with and without  continuous  wetting  at variable  wind  
speeds. The calculations  showed  that coat thickness  has a greater  effect  
than wetness  but this effect declines  as wind speed increases.  Critical  
temperatures  higher  than environmental  partly  explained  some losses in 
ADG  in 1978, ’79 and ’83. More  detailed  studies  of environmental  effects  
over the grazing  season  are planned.
71
THE  CELLULARITY  OF MUSCLE  DEVELOPMENT  IN MALE
CATTLE
M. J. CLANCY
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
D. HARRINGTON
The Agricultural Institute,  19 Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin 4.
Skeletal  muscle,  produced  by cattle,  sheep,  pigs and poultry,  is the raw 
material  of the meat industry.  The practical  goal of animal  production  
is the production  of lean meat in an efficient  manner.
Basic factors,  which limit the rate and extent  of muscle  growth  and 
protein  synthesis  in meat animals  need to be defined.  An understanding  
of these factors  in cellular  and molecular  terms  would  permit  the optim ­
isation  and maximisation  of meat production.  In keeping  with such a 
requirement,  this communication  reports  results  from two studies  on the 
cellularity  of skeletal  muscle  development  in male cattle, during  which 
samples  of L. dorsi  muscle  taken at 24 h post mortem  from carcasses  of 
bulls and steers were examined.  The histochemical  muscle  fibre types,  
/3-Red,  a-Red  and a-White  were identified  and quantified.
The cardinal  finding  in one study was that both endogenous  and 
exogenous  anabolic  agents  increased  significantly  the sizes and propor ­
tions of Red, or aerobically  metabolising,  myofibres,  thereby  facilitating  
a more efficient  deposition  of protein  in the myofibers.
In another  study,  during  which the effects  of genotype  and slaughter  
weight  were examined,  significant  genetic  differences  in the myofibre  type 
profiles  were observed.  Considerable  and distinctive  breed differences 
were found  in the development  patterns  of all myofibre  types.
Our findings  indicate  that the radial and longitudinal  components  of 
myofibre  growth  operate  in different  modes  for Hereford  x Friesian,  
Charolais  x Friesian  and pure Friesian  steers.
72
RESPONSES  OF FINISHING  STEERS  TO EXOGENOUS  GROWTH  
HORMONE  AND  OESTRADIOL
J. F. QUIRKE',  L. G. KENNEDY,  J. F. ROCHE^  I. HARTER  
W. SHEEHAN,  A. COERT  and P. ALLEN
'The Agricultural Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
"Faculty  of Veterinary  Medicine,  U.C.D.,  Ballsbridge,  Dublin  4.
^National  Institute  for Research  in Dairying,  Shinfield,  Reading,
Berkshire.
The admifiistration  of exogenous  growth  hormone  has been shown  to 
stimulate  nitrogen  retention  and enhance  growth  rate in a number  of 
species. There  is however,  comparatively  little information  regarding  its 
effects  on growth  in cattle. The present  experiment  examined  the effects  
of growth  hcmone,  either alone or in combination  with oestradiol,  on 
growth  rate and a number  of endocrine  and metabolic  parameters  in 
growing  Friesian  steers.
Groups  of steers (N = 16) were either kept as untreated  controls  
implanted  with 45 mg oestradiol,  injected  daily with bovine GH of 
pituitary  origin  or treated  with a combination  of oestradiol  and GH. The 
growth  hormone  was administered  subcutaneously  in the neck region in 
a carbonate  buffer  vehicle  (pH 10.0 = daily at 9.00 h for a period  of 22 
weeks. The dose of GH (0.05 u/kg/day)  was adjusted  bi-weekly  to the 
mean liveweight  of the animals  under treatment.  The animals  were tied 
up in individual  stalls and their intake  of grass  and silage  and supplemen ­
tary concentrates  was recorded  3 times weekly. After 22 weeks, GH 
treatment  was terminated  and the animals  retained  for a further  week ’s 
observation  following  which  they were slaughtered.
Blood samples  for determination  of oestradiol  and growth  hormone  
concentrations  as well as levels of glucose,  non-esterified  fatty acids,  
blood urea nitrogen  and creatinine  were taken from all animals  on a 
number  of occasions  during  the experiment.
Treatment  with oestradiol  alone significantly  improved  growth rate 
and feed efficiency  by 13.6 and 8.3% respectively;  the responses  in these 
parameters  to treatment  with GH were 5.6 and 4.8% respectively  but 
neither  were statistically  significant.  The responses  to the combination  
treatment  indicated  that the effects  of oestradiol  and GH on growth  rate 
and feed efficiency  were additive.  There was a carry-over  effect of GH 
treatment  on carcass  composition  in terms of the % internal  fat which 
was reduced  in response  to this treatment.
Plasma  levels  of GH were elevated  within 15 minutes  of GH injection  
and were 3-7 ng/ml  higher  than the controls  for >8 h following  which  
they returned  to baseline.  Endogenous  GH secretion  was stimulated  by 
implantation  with oestradiol.  Blood urea nitrogen  levels were reduced  
by both oestradiol  and GH treatment  and the effects  of the two hormones  
were additive  in this respect.  There  was no evidence  for treatment  effects  
on plasma concentrations  of glucose,  non-esterified  fatty acids or 
creatinine.
73
RESIDUE  ANALYSES  FOR ANABOLIC  AGENTS  IN BEEF
M. O’KEEFFE
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
Anabolic  agents are used widely  in beef production  where they arc 
found  to give increased  carcase  yield. Two anabolic  agents  of particular  
interest  are the synthetic  agents trenbolone  (“Finaplix ”) and zeranol  
(“Ralgro ”) since their continued  usage is being considered,  currently,  by 
the EEC. These  two anabolic  agents  are given as ear implants,  often in 
combination,  and carry a recommended  with-holding  period  of 60 to 65 
days..
The residue  levels of trenbolone  and zeranol  were determined  in the 
edible tissues (muscle,  fat, kidney and liver) of 12 Friesian  steers at 
slaughter.  6 being  non-implanted  (control)  animals  and 6 being  implanted  
with 300 mg trenbolone  ricetate and 36 mg zeranol  67 days before 
slaughter.  Residue  analyses  were canied  out on small samples  of tissues 
(2-3 g) by extraction,  purification  and radioimmunoassay.
The results  of the analyses  show that significantly  higher (P<0.01)  
residue  levels are determined  for trenbolone  in muscle,  fat and kidney  
samples  and for zeranol  in kidney and liver samples  from implanted  
animals,  compared  with samples  from control  animals.  Use of an anti­
serum  specific  to the major  liver metabolite  of trenbolone,  17a-trenbolone,  
would be expected  to show significantly  higher residue  levels in liver, 
also, as has been reported  in other studies.  Zeranol  levels  in muscle  and 
fat are not different  from tissue  blank  levels  (i.e. levels  in control  animals)  
after the with-holding  period. In all cases residue  levels are at less than 
0.3 ng/g ppb) at slaughter.
74
EVALUATION  OF COMPUDOSE  200 AS AN ANABOLIC  AGENT  
FOR  CALVES,  GROWING  AND  HNISHING  STEERS
M. G. KEANE
The Agricultural Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Three  experiments,  one each with entire  male calves,  yearling  steers  at 
pasture  and housed finishing  cattle fed silage plus cpncentrates  were 
carried  out to evaluate  Compudose  200, a silicone  rubber  ear implant  
impregnated  with 24 mg oestradiol  (Elanco,  Dun Laoghaire,  Ireland).  Its 
stated duration  of effectiveness  is 200 days. The animals  were predom ­
inantly  Friesians.
In Experiment  1, 204 calves  (initial  liveweight  100 kg) were assigned 
at random  to the following  3 treatments  for a 168 day experimental  
period  : (1) Control,  (2) Compudose  200 on day 0, (3) Ralgro  on days 0 
and 82. Liveweight  gains for the treatment  groups  as listed were 125.8,  
121.5 and 127.8 (SE=1.85)  kg respectively.  There was no significant 
effect  of either  implant  treatment.
In Experiment  2, 264 yearling  steers (initial  liveweight  303 kg) were 
assigned  at random  to the following  4 treatments  for a 168 day experi ­
mental  period  : (1) Control,  (2) Compudose  200 on day 0, (3) Compudose  
+ Finaplix  on day 0 and Finaplix  on day 82, (4) Ralgro  + Finaplix  on 
days 0 and 82. Liveweight  gains for the groups,  as listed were 141.1  
153.2, 174.7 and 174.7 (SE=3.02)  kg respectively.
In Experiment  3, 250 finishing  steers (initial  liveweight  468 kg) were 
assigned  on the basis of weight  to the following  5 treatments  for a mean  
163 day experimental  period  : (1) Control,  (2) Compudose  200 on day 0, 
(3) Compudose  200 + Finaplix  on day 0 and Finaplix  on day 70, (4) 
Ralgro  + Finaplix  on days 0 and 70, (5) Synovex-S  + Finaplix  on days  
0 and 70. Carcass  gains for the groups  as listed were 63.9, 84.7, 92.5,  
91.4 and 94.2 (SE  = 2.93) kg respectively.
There was a significant  (P<0.05)  response  to Compudose  200 alone  
and a further  significant  response  to the use of Finaplix  with Compudose  
200 in both yearling  and finishing  steers. Responses  to Compudose  200 
+ Finaplix,  Ralgro  + Finaplix  and Synovex-S  + Finaplix  were similar.  
A total of 10 (3.3%)  of the 300 Compudose  200 implants  inserted  were 
not palpable  in the animals ’ ears 10-12 weeks  after implantation.  It was 
assumed  that these implants  were lost but all the data were included  in 
the analyses.
75
PHENOTYPIC  AND  GENETIC  PARAMETERS  OF CARCASS  AND
MEAT  QUALITY  TRAITS  IN PROGENY  TEST  CATTLE
G. J. MORE  O’FERRALL,  R. L. JOSEPH,  P. V. TARRANT  
and P. McGLOUGHLIN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
The overall appearance  and eating quality  of beef is of increasing  
importance  to consumers.  This paper  reports  the phenotypic  and genetic 
parameters  of carcass  and meat quality  traits in 2 groups  of progeny  test 
cattle in 1982 and 1984. Meat quality  was assessed  in the intact carcass  
by measuring  the pH value ot 3 hr and 48 hr post slaughter  and on fibre 
optic probe values  at 48 hours p>ost slaughter,  and on samples  of the 
longissimus  dorsi (LD) muscle  taken  at the 12th/13th  rib, for shear  force, 
drip loss and taste panel assessment.
A total of 182 samples,  representing  3 breeds  and 32 sires (Friesian  
27), Charolais  (4) and Hereford  (1)) were analysed  by the method  of 
least squares.  Because  of the small number  of Charolais  and Hereford  
sires genetic  parameters  were calculated  among  Friesian  sires only. The 
effect of breed,  year and breed x year interaction  were accounted  for in 
the complete  data set, and year in the genetic  analysis.  The inclusion  of 
a regression  on slaughter  age or slaughter  weight  had no effect on the 
meat quality  traits. The only significant  differences  between  breeds  in 
meat quality  traits was for drip loss % and drip loss g/100 cm^ with 
Charolais  x steers having  twice the drip loss of Friesians  (2.31% and 
2.84 vs 1.12% and 1.34 respectively).  Drip loss in Herefords  was inter ­
mediate  (1.66%  and 2.02). This higher  drip loss in Charolais  indicates  
poorer  water holding  capacity  of the muscle  and this could have con­
siderable  commercial  significance  for the vacuum  packing  and supermar ­
ket trades. Due to negative  sire variances,  heritabilities  could not be 
calculated  for many of the meat quality  traits. The heritabilities  and 
their standard  errors  obtained  were pH„=0.25  ± .27; cooking  loss % = 
0.19 + .26; texture  = 0.09 ± .24; flavour  intensity=0.45  + .30; and accept ­
ability  = 0.09 + .24. Estimates  of phenotypic  and genetic  correlations  
between  carcass  and meat quality  traits tended  to be low also. These 
results  (based  on a relatively  small  number  of sires and progeny  per sire) 
indicate  a relatively  low level of genetic  determination  of meat quality  
traits and relationship  between  carcass  perfonnance  and quality  traits.  
The breed  difference  in drip loss requires  further  investigation.
76
A COMPARISON  OF THREE  CALVING  PATTERNS  ON THE  
PRODUCTION  OF DAIRY  COWS
P. A. GLEESON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fennoy,  Co. Cork.
Milk for manufacture  is produced  from seasonally  calving  herds in 
Ireland  with distinct  seasonal  patterns  of milk supply. The present  study  
examined  three calving  patterns.  A total of 78 Friesian  cows were allo­
cated to three treatments  with a mean calving  date of 28 January,  16 
Mareh and 19 October/27  January  for treatments  ES, LS and AS, 
respectively  (40 and 60 per icent of herd AS calved in Oetober  and 
January  respectively).  Each treatment  had its own farmlet  of 18 pad- 
docks,  stocked  at 2.90 cows per hectare  and 395 kg N per hectare  was 
applied.  Silage was conserved  from 8 and 6 paddocks,  for the first and 
second silage cuts respectively.  Cows were fed 7.3 kg/head/day  of 
eoncentrates  post calving  with ad libitum  aocess to grass silage. The 
concentrates  were phased  out after turnout  to pasture  except  for treatment  
LS where 1.8 kg/head/day  were fed to cows from early October  until the 
end of the laetation.  The mean lactation  milk, fat, protein  and lactose 
yields (kg) were 4841, 4902, 5217 (SE 223), 182, 175, 188 (SE 8.3), 164, 
163, 172 (SE 6.8), 222, 221, 241 (SE 10.4) and the mean  milk fat, protein  
and lactose  concentrations  were 37.6, 35.8, 36.1 (SE 0.8), 33.8, 33.4, 33.2 
(SE 0.6), 46.0, 45.2, 46.3 (SE 0.4) for treatment  ES, LS and AS, respect ­
ively. The ES group  had significantly  higher  fat and l.-ictose  concentration  
than the LS group. Concentrate  intakes  of 815, 641 and 1149 (SE 75.4)  
for treatments  ES, LS and AS respectively  differed  significantly.  The first 
year ’s results  show that ealving  patterns  had little influence  on lactation  
performance  but autumn  and early spring  calving  cows had higher  feed 
inputs.
77
THE SLOPED  FLOOR  CATTLE  HOUSING  SYSTEM
A. V. FLYNN  and A. J. KAVANAGH  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
About  half the national  beef cattle herd is outwintered  in the fields, A 
lot more winter  housing  is needed  for cattle. Various  alternative  housing  
systems  exist,  e.g. straw bedded  shed, cubicle  yard without  or with roof,  
all three in combination  with either mechanical  feeding  or self-feeding 
of silage,  slatted  house. All have several  positive  features  in their favour  
but most also have several  negative  features.  The slatted  system  is widely 
accepted  as the ideal but it has one major negative  feature,  i.e. high 
capital  cost.
In 1980 we began  to develop  a new alternative  housing  system  which 
would incorporate  many of the positive  features  of the ideal slatted  
system  but which  would  be a cheaper  system  to construct.  About  half the 
capital cost of the slatted system is spent on housing  and feeding 
arrangements  for the animal,  the other half is spent on the collection  
and storage  of slurry. The alternative  system  retains  positive  features  of 
the slatted  system  like : minimum  floor area per animal,  minimum  roof 
area per animal,  minimum  perimeter  fencing  and service  roadways  per 
animal,  and seeks to combine  these with a cheaper  slurry collection  and 
storage  system.
It achieves  the latter objective  by :
(a) Eliminating  slats,
(b) Eliminating  underground  reinforced  concrete  tank and its internal  
slat support  walls,
(c) Replacing  the tank floor with a floor at ground  level which  is cast in
sections  which slope towards  channels  cast into the floor which 
collect the waste from the floor and channel  it to a slurry store 
outside  the building  with compacted  earth.
A preliminary  experiment  with cattle compared  sloping  floor sections 
which  were either  4m or 2m wide. The results  showed  that the 2m floor  
sections  produced  cleaner  cattle which  grew faster.
Ideally  pen dimensions  are as in qonventional  slatted  houses.  Channel  
dimensions  are 300 mm wide and at least 300 mm deep. The channel  is 
covered  with a steel grid. The channel  collects  slurry  from floor sections 
1.5m wide on either  side of it. The slope in the floor towards  the channel  
is about 1 in 12.
Four animal  production  experiments  have shown  similar  animal  per­
formance  on the sloped floor as described  above and the conventional  
slatted  floor (similar  floor area per animal  in both systems).  Daily live- 
weight  gain averaged  0.87 and 0.84 kg and final earcase  weights  averaged  
260 kg and 262 kg on the sloped  floor and slatted  floor respectively.  Hide  
weights  were recorded  at the end of all experiments  as an index of 
cleanliness.  Hide weights  have averaged  40.6 kg and 39.1 kg off the 
sloped  floor and slatted  floor respectively.
TTie sloped floor system  may be considered  as either a new housing  
system  or as a system  for incorporation  to existing  haysheds/lean-to ’s to 
convert  them to animal  housing,  particularly  on smaller  farms.
Gross  capital  cost of the sloped  floor system  is at least £70 per animal  
(2 floor) cheaper  than the slatted  system.
78
EFFECT  OF IMMUNISATION  AGAINST  SOMATOSTATIN  AND  
BREED  ON GROWTH  RATE  AND  CARCASS  COMPOSITION  OF
LAMBS
J. M. FITZSIMONS,  J. P. HANRAHAN  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam.  Co. Galway.
P. ALLEN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Dublin  15.
The object of the ex|^riment  was to examine  the effect of immunis ­
ation against  somatostatin  on growth  rate and carcass  composition  using  
different  breeds. Thirty  lambs were given an injection  of 750 /xg of a 
somatostatin  - human serum albumin  conjugate,  made up of 5 ml in 
Freunds  Complete  Adjuvant,  at 3 weeks of age followed  by 4 booster  
injections  of 250 /rg conjugate  at 14 day intervals  in Freunds  Complete  
Adjuvant.  Twenty-nine  control  animals  were given placebo  injections  at 
similar  intervals.  The 59 animals  comprised  12 Texels,  16 Suffolks  and 
31^ Scottish  Blackface  X Suffolk  crossbreds.  At the time of primary  
injection  the ewes and lambs were housed and the lambs were given  
access  to a concentrate  pellet. Tlie lambs  were weaned  at about  5 weeks  
of age and group  fed for one week. All lambs  were then individually  
penned  and feed intake  was recorded  for 4 days per week over a period  
of 10 weeks. The lambs were slaughtered  when they reached  38 kg, 
approximately.  After slaughter  half-carcass  dissection  was carried  out 
on 26 animals.
There was no significant  breed or treatment  effect on final weight  or 
on daily growth  rate from initial injection  to final weighing  84 days later 
although  immunised  animals  did grow at a lower  rate than controls  (248 
versus  233 g/day). Immunisation  did not affect feed intake. However,  
there was a breed effect with Texel lambs consuming  significantly  less 
than the crossbred  group (P<0.01).  Mean daily feed intakes  (g) were 
919±52.  105±45,  1140±33,  1017±34  and 1059±35  for Texel. Suffolk,  
crossbred,  immunised  and non-immunised  animals,  respectively.
Immunisation  against  somatostatin,  while not affecting  growth  rate, 
did increase  caocass  length (58 versus 56 cm; p<0.05)  and total bone ’ 
weight  (P<0.05)  but had no effect on any other carcass  traits measured.  
The carcasses  of Texel lambs contained  significantly  less fat (P<r0.01)  
less bone (P<0.05)  and more lean meat (P<0.001)  than Suffolk  lambs.
79
INCREASING  REPRODUCTIVE  PERFORMANCE  BY 
IMMUNISATION:  FACTORS  INFLUENCING  THE  
RESPONSE  TO FECUNDIN
J. P. HANRAHAN,  J. F. QUIRKE  and J. FITZSIMONS
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Steroid  hormones  are part of the complex  network  of physiological 
controls  on the process  of reproduction.  Hormone  binding  antibodies  
provide  a convenient  tool for manipulating  reproductive  function  and 
both active and passive  immunisation  against  cestrogens  and androgens  
has increased  ovulation  rate in sheep. An immunogen  for raising  anti­
bodies  against  androstendione  in sheep has been developed  for comrner- 
cial application  and is called Fecundin  (Glaxo  Animal  Health). The 
recommended  procedure  for immunisation  involves  two s/c injections  
(2 ml each),  4 weeks  apart,  in the first year while one booster  injection  
suffices  in subsequent  years.
Starting  in 1982 we have used this immunisation  procedure  m con­
junction  with various  mating  protocols  and incjuding  a comparison  with 
PMSG. Breeds  studied  have included  Galway,  S. Blackface.  Greyface,  
Belclare  Improver,  Improved  Galway  and Finnish  Landrace.  In most  
trials involving  Institute  flocks both ovulation  rate and litter size were 
measured  but for farm trials  only litter size was obtainable.
An overall  summary  of litter size of Galway  ewes shows  that Fecundin  
gives  a significant  and consistent  increase  in litter size of the order  of 25% 
of the control  mean. When  estrus  is synchronised  with progestagen  spon ­
ges, both the incidence  of estrus  and conception  rate are depressed  unless 
the’interval  between  booster  injection  and synchronised  mating  is greater  
than 21 days. For ewes conceiving  at 14 days post-booster  the results  
suggest  that embryo  survival  is impaired.
With S. Blackface  ewes significant  responses  in ovulation  rate have 
been obtained  consistently  but results,  to date, on litter size have been 
disappointing.
While  most of our trials have involved  mature  parous  ewes, results  in 
two trials involving  2-tooth  multiparous  and older parous  ewes failed to 
show any interaction  between  age and ovarian  response  to Fecundin.  The 
results  of a trial involving  Belclare  Improver  and Improved  Galway  ewe 
lambs  showed  that both breeds  responded  to immunisation.
Immunisation  can also be used to increase  ovulation  rate in out-of ­
season  breeding  and the effects  on ovulation  rate are additive  with the 
effects  of PMSG.Our conclusions  at this stage are that Fecundin  will increase  ovulation  
rate in all breeds regardless  of age or physiological  state and is an 
effective  tool for increasing  lamb output  per ewe in the spring  lambing  
flock.  With proper  choice  of boost-to-join  interval  the incidence  of barren  
ewes is reduced  by Fecundin  treatment.
80
APPRAISAL  OF CURRENT  DEVELOPMENTS  IN SHEEP
HOUSING
P. DUIGNAN,  V. A. DODD  and D. J. RUANE  
University,  College,  Dublin.
The provision  of housing  for overwintering  sheep has recently  gained  
acceptance  in Ireland  as an integral  part of intensive  sheep production.  
It was considered  necessary  to determine  the state of development  of 
housing  in the country  and to evaluate  the environment  prevailing  in the 
houses  built in order  to objoi;;tively  plan further  development  in this area.  
This project  sets cut to identify  and evaluate  the house  types  being  used.
A survey  of sheep  houses  in Galway  and Wicklow  was carried  out and 
the main house types identified  as being of the A-roof  type and the 
haybarn  type, with a tendency  towards  the former  in Wicklow  and the 
latter in Galway.  Internal  layouts  and management  techniques  associated  
with these houses  were also recorded.
In order to determine  whether  or not the house types identified  were 
providing  a satisfactory  environment  for the external  relative  humidity  
and temperature  were recorded  in four typical  sheep houses  during  the 
winter  of 1983/84.  The environment  prevailing  in each of the houses  
monitored  was found  to be consistent  with the environment  recommended.
Airflow  patterns  in sheep houses  were studied  in Water  Table,  and a 
ventilation  problem  in a sheep house in Wicklow  was identified  and 
solved using the table.
Feeding  routines  were also observed  in a number  of houses  and hay 
feeding  was found  to be significantly  faster  than silage feeding.
THE MEASUREMENT  AND  DISPERSAL  OF AGRICULTURAL
ODOURS
P. G. CARNEY  and V. A. DODD  
Agriculture  and Food Engineering  Department,  U.C.D.
Malodours  from livestock  units,  particularly  pig and poultry  have been 
the subject  of increasing  controversy  in Ireland  in the past five years. 
Resolution  of controversy,  including  litigation,  can be helped by an 
objective  measurement  of the odour. An olfactometer  is the term used 
to describe  an apparatus  for the measurement  of odours.
An olfactometer was constructed  by the Department  of Agriculture  and 
Food Engineering  at U.C.D.  giving  dilution  factors  of up to 6000. Samp ­
les of contaminated  air (i.e. the malodourous  air) are collected  at the 
source  in a teflon  coated  bag and brought  to the olfactometer.  The olfac ­
tometer  is designed  to expose  4 panellist  to the malodour  simultanously.  
The samples  are analysed  in terms of detectability,  intensity  and offens­
iveness. Each sample is analysed  by a panel of 6-8 persons  and is 
replicated  3 times. In this way samples  collected  from pig, poultry,  eattle,  
sheep,  slurry  tanks  and even samples  from air contaminated  by spreading  
operations  are collected  and analysed.
In addition  to the measurement  of odours  generated,  their rate of 
dispersal  is also under study. A dispersal  mathematical  model adapted  
from one developed  for the atmospheric  pollution  industry  is being 
tested with a view to identifying  the areas of nuisance,  the level of 
nuisance  and the number  of occurrenee  thereof,  around  an existing  unit 
or a proposed  unit.
81
I LION  E ALBISETA  — POTENTIAL  BIOLOGICAL  CONTROL  
AGENT  OF LIVER  FI>LKE  ?
M. J. GORMALLY
The Agricultural  Institute.  Dunsinea,  Castleknock.  Dublin  15.
Studies  over the last 30 years have shown that all reared sciomzyids 
such as llione albiseta  feed exclusively  on molluscs  as larvae. Ihe 
quantitative  data needed to evaluate  the potential  effectiveness  ot 
Sciomyzidae  in biological  control  began  to accumulate  with preliminary  
observations  of sciomyzid  life-cycles  and biology. The significance  ot 
these observations  however  was limited  because  of variable  temperature  
and light conditions.  When it was discovered  that 1. albiseta  predated  
Lymnaea  truncatula  (vector  of fascioliasis  in Ireland),  research  into its 
biology  was initiated  under controlled  conditions  of tem^rature  arid 
light. This type of information  gained  under controlled  conditions  aids in 
defining  optimal  laboratory  rearing  conditions  which would provide  an 
essential  foundation  for the culture  of the organism  on a continual  basis.
Each stage of the year-long  life-cycle,  i.e. (a) adult fly, (b) egg. (c) the 
three larval instars  and (d) pupae were subjected  to a range of constant  
temperatures  (14°, 17°, 20°, 23°, 26° C) under a 16 hour light - 8 hour  
dark lighting  schedule.  By using the following  combination  of temi^ra-  
tures it was discovered  that it was possible  to complete  the life-cycle  in 
approximately  half the time taken by individuals  in the field (% suryiv^  
::^70%)  • (a) 17°C,  (b) 23°C,  (c) 23°C (first and second  instar)  and 17 C 
(third instar),  (d) 26°C. In the case of egg incubation  penod,  it was 
found  that 70% of embryonated  eggs hatched  after 15 days when placed 
in reducing  medium  of 0.1% ascorbic  ticid at 23"C This is considerably  
shorter  than the duration  of the egg stage m the field (67.3 days). Adult  
fecundity  was highest  at 17°C where  a mean  of 57.8 eggs per female  was 
laid It was also discovered  that newly  hatched  larvae  can survive  up to 
a month  without  food at 14°C. The rate at which  I. albiseta  larvae  pre­
date snails increases  as temperature  rises but the total weight  ot snail 
tissue consumed  during  the larval stage remains  approximately  the same  
regardless  of temperature.  This may help to assess  the number  of mrvae  
needed  to control  a known  snail population  over a given period  ot time 
during  a biological  control  experiment.
82
THE EFFECT  OF AGE AND LIVEWEIGHT  AT STIMULATION  
BY BOAR  CONTACT  WITH OR WITHOUT  PMSG  + HCG ON
PUBERTY  ATTAINMENT  AND REPRODUCTION  IN GILTS
P. J. BURNETT  and N. WALKER
Agricultural  Research  Institute  oj Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  
Co. Down.  BT26  6DP.
Groups  of gilts fed ad libitum  during rearing  were stimulated  for 
puberty  at one of four ages, namely  130, 150, 170 or 190 days. Within  
each age group littermate  pairs were allocated  to two treatments;  (1) 
relocation,  mixing  and mature  boar contact;  (2) these stimuli  plus an 
intramuscular  injection  of 400 i.u. PMSG  + 200 i.u. HCG (PG 600, 
Intervet).  Gilts were mated at puberty  and slaughtered  34 ±3 days post 
coitum.  Interim  results  for 180 gilts are presented  in order of ascending  
age at stimulation.  The mean liveweights  at stimulation  and the number  
of gilts involved  were 72.5 kg, 38; 88.5 kg, 38; 98 kg, 52; 115.5 kg, 52. 
The proportion  of gilts which  attained  puberty,  the proportion  mated  are 
shown  in parenthesis,  within  60 days of stimulation  for treatment  1 were 
0.78 (0.56), 1.0 (0.88), 1.0 (0.96), 0.96 (0.96). The proportion  of gilts 
which  attained  puberty  (mated)  within  6 days of stimulation  for treatment  
2 were 0.89 (0.83),  0.79 (0.74),  0.96 (0.92), 1.0 (0.84). The intervals  in 
days from stimulation  to puberty  (mating)  for the gilts on treatment  1 
were 23.3 (29.4), 11.0 (17.3), 9.6 (11.8), 8.5 (8.5) and for the gilts on 
treatment  2 the corresponding  intervals  were 4.6 (4.9),  4.7 (4.8), 4.4 (4.5),  
4.4 (4.8). The conception  rates for treatments  1 and 2 with increasing  
age at stimulation  were 0.80, 0.93, 0.83, 0.90 and 0.71, 0.71, 0.71, 0.74.  
The corresponding  ovulation  rates were 12.9, 13.6, 12.1, 12.9 and’ 14.6, 
19.9, 16.6, 20.6. The corresponding  number  of embryos  alive at 34 days  
post coitum  were 9.7, 9.5, 8.9, 9.9 and 8.1, 10.2, 9.3, 11.3. The effects  of 
liveweight  within  age at stimulation  were small and mainly  non-significant.
83
THE  EFFECTS  OF HIGH  FEED  INTAKES  IN EARLY  
PREGNANCY  IN SOWS
N. WALKER
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland.  Hillsborough,
Co. Down,  BT26  6DP.
Multiparous  sows were classified  subjaetively  at farrowing  according  
to body condition  as either  fat or thin. The difference  in body condition  
between  the two groups  was increased  by feeding  the ‘fat’ sows gener ­
ously during  lactation  and restricting  the feed of the ‘thii^ sows to a 
maximum  of 4 kg per day of a diet containing  12.5 MJ DE/kg.  After  
weaning  all sows were fed this diet at the rate of 3 kg daily until mating.  
The depth of skin plus subcutaneous  fat was measured  ultrasonically  at 
the Pj position.  At conception  the thin sows weighed  159 kg with a 
measurement  of 13.8 mm with corresponding  values  for the fat mws of 
165 kg and 19.4 mm. Following  mating  half of each group  was allocated  
at random  to feed allowances  of either 2 or 4 kg per day for 30 days. 
Thereafter  all sows were given a common  allowance  cf 2.2 kg per day 
until parturition.  A total of 62 sows completed  the experiment.
There was no effect on the number  of pigs born per litter. The fat 
sows produced  heavier  pigs than the thin sows but the response  of this 
parameter  to generous  feeding  was greater  in the thin sows.  
gross and net liveweight  gains  in gestation  were greater  in the fat than in 
the thin sows at equal feed intakes. From conception  to day IIU ot 
gestation  subcutaneous  fat thickness  increased  slightly  more in the tat 
than in the thin sows. From day 110 to parturition  the losses of sub­
cutaneous  fat were higher  in the fat sows such that the overall  net gain 
from conception  to parturition  was similar  for fat and thin sows given  
identical  feed allowances.  Calculations  based on this data suggested  that 
the daily nitrogen  retention  at equal feed rates was lower in thin sows  
than in fat sows. The thin sows showed  no evidence  of compensatory  
growth.
84
