Irish Grassland  
Association  Journal
2009 VOLUME  43
Irish Grassland  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 43 2009
Edited  by 
David  McGilloway
ISSN 2009-1478
Printed  by Modern  printers,  Kilkenny.
IRISH  GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  
CORPORATE  MF-MBERS  2009
ACC
ACORN  Independent  Merchants  
AIBP
Allied  Irish Bank 
Bord Bia
Dairygold  Co-Operative  
Dairymaster  
Dawn  Meats 
Delaval  Limited  
FBD Insurance  
Germinal  Ireland  Ltd 
Glanbia
Goldcrop  Limited  
Goulding  Fertlizers  Ltd 
IFAC Accountants  
Interchem  (Ireland)  Ltd 
Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation  
Irish Dairy  Board  
Irish Farmers ’ Journal  
Irish Farming  Indo 
Kerry  Group  
Lie Ireland  Ltd 
Monsanto  
Novartis  
Packo  Fullwood
Richard  Keenan  & Company  Limited 
Ulster  Bank
Zero Grazing  Systems  Ltd
M. Barry  
B. BatemanCONTENTS
Rearing  of replacement  dairy stock  
Controlling  somatic  cell count
A. Boland,  J. Humphries Getting  the best from slurry  abd bag fertiliser 
and S. Lalor
M.l O’Donovan,  Grass - can we grow and utilise  more?
E. Kennedy  & R Creighton
J. Donworth,  Off farm rearing  of replacement  heifers
G. Ramsbottom  & R. Gayers
B. Horan,  J. Coleman,  B. 
McCarthy  & A. Brennan
B, O’Keeffe
S. Phelan
R. SayersMaximising  grazed  grass - pushing  up stocking  rate. 
Lessons  from Vurlins  2008
A strategy  for growth
Grass  measurement  and budgeting  to drive  
sustainable  profits  and better  decision  making
BVD - How big an issue  is it and what can we do?
P. Amer,  T. Byrne,  P. Sheep  Ireland:  new data, new indexes  & new
Donellan,  G. Potterton,  M. programmes  for Irish sheep  farmers  
Lynch  and A. Cromie
C. Cleland
M. McHugh
A. Kinsella
M. L. Doherty
R. Evans,  P. Donnellan,  
A. Cromie  and P. Amer
D. Kirwan
M. McGeeWhat  do we need from sheep  breeding  in the future?
Finishing  lambs  In the summer
Increasing  margins  from sheep
Improving  sheep  and flock health:  some  key pointers  
for farmers  and industry
Making  more money  from identifying  the most  
profitable  suckler  cows
Grass  budgeting  - what it can do for suckler 
beef farmers
What  feed efficiency  in the suckler  cow has to offer 
beef farmersPAGE
5
8
12
26
41
50
61
64
74
82
87
91
99
105
110
120
125
COUNCIL  OF THE IRISH  GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  2009
President  
Vice-President  
Past  President  
General  SecretaryPearse  Kelly 
Andrew  Cromie  
William  Kingston  
Mary-Clare  French
Council  Members:
Andrew  Cromie,  Paul Crosson,  Philip Donohoe,  John Donworth,  Michael  Doran,  
Jan Frederiks,  Padraig  French,  Bernard  Ging, Michael  Gottstein,  Deirdre  Hennessy,  
Tim Keady,  Pearse  Kelly, Jack Kennedy,  William  Kingston,  Mary Bridget  Lynch,  
Nicholas  McGill,  David  McGilloway,  Andrew  Moloney,  Padriag  Mulligan,  
Gerard  Murphy,  Eddie  O’Donnell,  Frank  O’Mara,  John Renehan,  Kevin  Twomey.
Contact  details  
for the
Irish Grassland  Association  Office  
available  on
www.irishgrassland.com
Rearing  of replacement  dairy  stock
Michael  Barry
Background
The farm is situated  near Mitchelstown,  Co. Cork, and comprises  190 acres,  of which  
120 are in grass and are available  for the rearing  of dairy replacement  stock. An 
article at the 2006,Teagasc  National  Dairy Conference  in Limerick  provided  the 
kernel  of the idea. A series  of phone  calls to Teagasc  etc., to check  out what systems  
were in place and provide advice, got the project started. In rearing dairy 
replacement  stock, one knows the yearly payment  at the start, thus reducing  the 
likleyhood  of a loss, even allowing  for uncertainty,  with costs of fertiliser  and diesel.
With over 30 years experience  of running  a commercial  dairy farm, the facilities  and 
skills required  to rear dairy calves up to the stage of the heifer calving  down were 
second  nature.
Starling  Out
The business  started  out with an advertisement  in the Farmers  Journal  offering  to 
rear heifers  for dairy farmers.  Approximately  20 calls were received,  enquiring  as to 
how the system  would  work, and what was on offer (see below):
Take in calves  at 10 weeks  when  weaned  of milk.
Rear calves  on grass  and meals  as required  during  the first summer.
House  weanlings  November  1. Feed silage  and 1.4kg meal.
Dose  calves  every  3-4 weeks  while on grass  during  first season.
Dose  for fluke,  worms  & lice three  weeks  after housing.
Stop meal feeding  on February  1 when animals  approx,  one year old (continue  
feeding  meals  to weaker  yearlings).
Yearlings  to grass in early March  (weather  permitting).
Heifers  to bull or Al from April 1 or on a date requested  by the owner.
Heifers  treated  with fly repellent from  July onwards.
Heifers  housed  on November  1 and fed 1.4kg meal and silage  ad-lib.
Heifers  return  to owners'  farm 1 month  pre- calving.
Developinq  a relationship  with clients
Having  made the initial contact,  interested  farmers  were invited  to view the facilities 
on the host farm e.g. land and housing  etc. A reciprocal  visit to the stock owners 
farm was also arranged  to view the stock  concerned  and get an idea of the standard  
of husbandry  expected.  These  visits give both parties  a better idea of each other ’s 
expectations.  A list of queries  are drawn up on both sides, discussed  and agreed.  
The single  most common  question  that tends  to arise is what happens  in the event  of 
a disease  outbreak,  i.e. T.B. or Brucellosis.
All animals  are tested  prior to arriving  on the host farm for T.B. Any animai  over 12 
months  must be tested  for Bruceliosis.  The last confirmed  case of Bruceliosis  in the 
Republic  of Ireland  was April 2006. There  have been a small number  of false positive  
cases  on the Brucellosis  blood test since  April 2006, but all have been subsequently 
proved negative. Today (30/06/2009),  an application  is being made to give the 
Republic  of Ireland,  Brucellosis  free status.
As regards  T.B, the number  of animals  failing the test has been falling in the past 
three years:
2007 - 2.94/1,000  tested.
2008  - 2.84/1,000  tested.
2009  - 2.46/1,000  tested.
The number  of herds  restricted,  as a percentage  of herds  tested  have fallen  to 4.13%  
for the year ending  31/05/09.  With the introduction  of the proposed  blood  test for T.B, 
there is considerable  confidence  that it can be reduced  further  and even eliminated  
completely.
At all stages  the owner  is kept informed  on what is happening,  either  by text or phone  
call. This may be only something  like turn out & housing  dates,  vaccination,  Al and 
introducing  bull dates. The owner  is also welcome  to come  and see his animals  on a 
regular  basis. Belief,  confidence  and trust are necessary  on both sides. To date no 
written  formal  contracts  exist with the dairy farmers  concerned.
Future  in heifer  rearing
At the moment  the farm is rearing dairy replacement  stock for three farmers,  
consisting  of 60 maiden  heifers  and a similar  number  of calves. It also carries  80, 
two year old bullocks.  When more stable markets  return for dairy products,  with a 
milk price that gives a just reward  for the inputs of labour  and resources,  there is a 
bright  future  for heifer  rearing  by non-dairy  farmers.
There are a number  of attractions  to dairy farmers  interested  in off-farm  heifer  
rearing.  These  are as follows:
1. With  dairy farmers  restricted  by land base adjacent  to milking  parlour  and with 
so many of them adjacent  to each other, the opportunities  available  for 
expansion  are restricted.
2. Dairy farmers  want to concentrate  on producing  milk. Rearing  replacement  
stock is an added burden,  as in travelling  to outside  farms in the grazing  
season. Providing  fodder and housing  during the winter period are an 
additional  expense.
3. Many dairy farmers  have problems  staying  within their limits for the Nitrate  
Regulations,  so sending  replacement  stock to another  farm for off -farm  
rearing  will help.
There  are also a number  of reasons  why beef farmers  should  rear dairy replacement 
heifers  for dairy farmers:
1. Regular  monthly  income.
2. No hassle  buying  or selling  cattle.
3. No worry  about  fluctuations  in the market.
4. No monetary  outlay  in purchasing  livestock.
Controlling  somatic  cell count
Barry Bateman
Templemartin,  Bandon,  Co. Cork
Introduction
This paper describes  the lessons  learnt at farm level about controlling  somatic  cell 
Counts  (SCC's).  The paper  I will cover the  following  topics.
• Farm setup;
• Cell count  history  over the last few years;
• How the problem  arose;
• Approach  to solving  the problem;
• The cost to the farm of high cell count ’s;
• Management  factors  that all help in solving  high SCC.
• What  worked?
• Key messages.
Farm set up
The farm comprises  70ha near Bandon,  Co Cork, milking  110 cows with the intention  
of increasing  to 185 cows in 2009. The farm is situated  in one easily managed  
compact  block,  well serviced  with roadways.
Labour
The farm is a family  run farm, with partner  and children  helping  out.
Parlour
Simple 24 unit swing over herringbone,  comprising  parts from 3 different  
manufacturers  (hybrid). There  are no jars, no feeders,  no cluster  removers  and no 
dump  line.
Housing
Cows are housed  in a conventional  30 year old cubicle  house with easy feed and 
automatic  scrapers.  There  is also a small standoff  pad (for 55 cows) which is used 
for calving  cows and holding  an antibiotic  herd in the spring.
Farm SCC history
Somatic  Cell count began to increase  in autumn  2005. At that time the farming  
system  was being changed  from autumn  calving  to 100% spring  calving,  and some  
cows were milking  for 12 to 14 months.  Unfortunately  this was used as an excuse  to 
ignore  the rising cell count. To make matters  worse it decided  not to change  liners  
until March due to the small number  of rows being milked. Cows calved  in spring  
2006 and immediately  ran into trouble  with sore and damaged  teats; this quickly  led 
to more infections  and higher cell counts. It was March before an overall  
examination  of the problem  took place, and all rubber  ware machines  were checked  
out. Cell count remained  high (between  200 and 400000  cells/ml  throughout  2006).
Note also that the milk from 5 % of the herd was withheld  until the last of the bull 
calves  were sold in mid-June.  By 2007 there was an improvement  (cell counts  were  
still fluctuating),  but by 2008,  the problem  was under  control,  with co-op  bonus  points  
achieved  each month.
What  went wrong?
Mindset
Target  was too high at 400000  cells/ml.  This was the level the co-op  bonus  was set 
at, even though  research  was indicating  that money  was being lost if over 200,000  
cells/ml.
Poor machine  maintenance
Delayed  change  of liners  and old buttons  in the claws  caused  a lot of damage.
Teat end damage
Dry, cracked,  and damaged  teats caused  by the delay  in changing  liners  and buttons,  
developed  into black  spot which  presented  serious  problems  for the rest of the year.
Costs
Table 1 shows the cost that the increased  SCC had on the business,  which is 
estimated  at €15,670. (Note that increasing  cow numbers  would be expected  to 
result  in an increase  in SCC on the farm.
Table 1. 
countsEstimate  of the cost to the farm business  of infiated  Somatic  celi
Cost per 540,000  litres
Milk dumped  (€) 1000
Vet/drugs  (€) 750
Co-op  penalty/bonus  (€) 1620
4 Cows  culled  (€) 2800
Milk loss (€) 9500
Total*  (€) 15,670
•This  does not include  the extra labour  resources  required.
Solving  the problem
To solve any problem  it is necessary  to acknowledge  that a problem  exists  in the first 
place. Ignoring  high cell counts  and damaged  teats, hoping  the teats would  heal and 
cell count  improve  without  me making  any effort to remedy  the situation  was a major  
catalyst  to creating  the problem.  Once  the problem  is acknowledged,  it is necessary 
to put a plan together.  With an SCC problem,  there is a need to look at every  aspect 
of farm management  that can affect  cell counts.
The approach
A multidisciplinary  approach  was adopted.  It was decided  that the milking  machine  
would be fully maintained  at all times. A sub-group  from the local discussion  group  
visited  the farm to watch  the milking,  look at the records,  and produce  a written  report  
on the problem.  Main points  in the plan were;
Keep  the machine  fully maintained;
Use high quality  teat spray  on cows;
Pre spray  cows  with infections  or sore teats;
Wear  clean  gloves  and ensure  good standards  of hygiene  control;
Culture  10% of the herd {Staph  aureus  the main offender).
Use an extended  dry cow period  (16 weeks)  to cure damaged  cows.
Management  factors
Keep records
Having always milk recorded,  along with having good records  of cows treated,  
probably  speeded  up the whole  process  of getting  cell counts  below  200000  after 6 
months.  To decide  what the losses  were, and to make  sure solving  the problem  was 
economical,  accurate  records  of the costs incurred  are needed.  A written  plan/report  
is very useful  to refer back  to at any time.
At least 50% of milkings  are done with one person  in the parlour,  so it is essential  
that cow flow is good and the parlour  works  efficiently,  cows walk calmly  in and out of 
the parlour. Milking  routine  is kept to a simple  cups on cups off and teat spray  
system.
A stand-off  pad is used to keep an antibiotic  herd separate  during  the spring. These  
cows come  in at the end of the milking,  reducing  the spread  of infection  and give the 
milker time to deal with problem  cows. It is management  preference  to have a 
separate  herd over a dump  line which  carries  big risks of spreading  infection  to other  
cows, antibiotics  in bulk tank, loss of non antibiotic  milk and loss of time treating  the 
sick cow which  can cause  damage  to other cows. It is important  to be on top of all 
herd issues,  and be aware  that management  factors  like body condition  score  etc are 
very important.
For grassland  management  purposes  roadways  were improved,  but reduced  
lameness,  reduced  stress  and cows arriving  in the parlour  clean, all help reduce  cell 
counts.
The ability  of milkers  to identify  cows and recognise  change  of habit, poor form or a 
drop in milk yield is also an advantage.
As cow numbers  are increasing,  there are a lot of young  cows in the herd. This will 
help to drop cell counts,  but is only an advantage  if heifers  can calve out clean and 
healthy. Since changing  to a spring calving  pattern,  it has been possible  to send 
cows to grass day and night straight  after calving. This reduces  potential  mastitis  
risks from housing  freshly  calved  cows.
10
What  worked?
Bringing  in the vet and discussion  group  members  - even though  their comments  hurt 
for 10 minutes;  they were able to point out problems,  and were essential  in putting  
the written  plan together.
Changing  liners  and the rest of the rubber  ware regularly  made  a big difference.
Watch  the vacuum  level, every  parlour  is different  but in this instance  the parlour  runs 
between  46 and 48 kpa. A digital meter  is essential  - clocks  are usually  poorly  sited 
and do not show  big fluctuations.
With teat spray,  instead  of aiming  to have a drop of spray  on fhe end of the teat, aim 
to cover  the entire teat, to maintain  teat condition  and stop the spread  of bugs from 
one cow to the next. This is very important  in the spring.
Prespray  cows tor 1 week  after calving
Treatments
Non clinical cases were identified  with the Californian  Milk Test (CMT) and are 
treated during the milking season. When treating  chronic  cows (usually  staph  
aureus),  treat only when necessary  during  milking  season. At drying  off, identify  the 
quarter  infected  and inserted  a milking  cow tube at the same  time as inserting  a good  
quality  dry cow tube. Providing  the cow with an extended  dry period  is crucial  to the 
healing  process.  A good degree  of success  resulted  from with this treatment.
The can of beans'
Some vets and other experts  will often use a can of beans to illustrate  a Staph  
aureus  infection;  a capsule  inside the cow’s udder that is impossible  to penetrate.  
The advice  to farmers  is often to cull these  cows. However,  culling  otherwise  healthy  
cows is very expensive.  It is estimated  that culling  a cow from the herd can cost 
approx  €700/cow  culled. Buying  a replacement  for €1300  and selling  a cull for €300; 
- difference  €1000. Drying off the cow early on the other hand will only cost 
€300/cow.  Compared  to culling,  the only costs with this option  are the loss of milk 
and the feed for the dry cow period.
Key Messages
Realise  that a problem  exists. Set targets;
Keep the  milking  machine  fully maintained;
Keep  accurate  records;
Bring in help - a farmer,  a vet, co-opTeagasc  advisor,  someone  to look at the 
routine  and point out the problems;
Cull as a last resort.
SCC's  can be controlled.
11
Getting  the best from slurry  and bag fertiliser
A. Boland,  J. Humphreys  and S. Lalor
Teagasc Moorepark,  Fermoy,  and Teagasc  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
Introduction
The high cost of chemical  fertilisers  experienced  in the last year has contributed  to a 
large increase  in the relative  value of cattle slurry  to the farmer. The price of N has 
doubled  and that of P and K almost  trebled  since December  2006 (Figure  1). These  
increases  mean  that the value  of 1000 gallons  (4.5m®)  has increased  by 168%  during  
this period. The manufacture  of nitrogenous  fertilisers  is an energy-demanding 
processes  and the cost of fertiliser  N is closely  linked to the cost of energy  on the 
world market. Regulations  stipulating  the quantities  of fertiliser  N and P that can be 
applied  to grassland  have been implemented  under  the Nitrates  Directive  (Statutory  
Instruments  (SI) No. 378 of 2006), which came into effect in Ireland  on August  1, 
2006. Under  certain  circumstances,  derogations  from this SI have been granted  until 
July 17, 2010 on Irish farms. The competitiveness  of Irish dairy production  in a 
European  context  is largely  based  on our capacity  to grow and efficiently  utilize  large  
quantities  of low-cost  grazed  grass over a long grazing  season. The production  of 
large quantities  of pasture  per hectare  is predominantly  determined  by input of 
fertiliser  N. The increasing  cost of fertiliser  N, P and K is contributing  to the erosion  
of the profitability  of Irish grass-based  systems  of production.
Rising  costs and statutory  limits are focusing  attention  on fertiliser  N and P use on 
farms. Improvements  in fertiliser  N and P use efficiency  can be achieved  by attention  
to detail when it comes  to applying  fertiliser  N and P, making  use of slurry  to replace  
fertiliser  N and P, regular  soil sampling,  application  of lime if required,  reseeding,  
grass  measurement  and by making  more use of white  clover  in swards.
Figure  1. Change  in fertiliser  nutrient  prices  and the potential  economic  value  
of cattle  slurry  between  Dec. 2006  and Aug. 2008  (Teagasc,  2008)
12
Slurry  nutrient  content  - ‘Fertiliser  Replacement  Value ’
The N, P and K content  of typical  cattle slurry in Ireland  is shown  in Table 1 (O'Bric,  
1991). These  are mean concentrations;  a high level of variability  (up to tenfold)  will 
be observed  in reality, due to variations  in animal  diet, animal  type and dilution  of 
slurry  with water. Slurry  variability  is a major  factor  determining  the reliability  of slurry  
as a fertiliser  resource,  and every effort should be made to assess  the nutrient 
content  of slurry. This can be done using on-farm  assessment  tools, such as slurry  
hydrometer  or N content  assessment  kits, or by having  a slurry  sample  analysed  in a 
laboratory.  In any slurry nutrient  content  assessment,  the importance  of obtaining  a 
well-mixed,  representative  sample  is critical,  and often difficult  to achieve.
Table 1. Typical  dry matter  and nutrient  contents  of cattle slurry in ireland  
(O'Bric,  1991). (Aiternative  total N and P contents,  and N availability  are used  
under  the Code  of Good  Practice  (Anon,  2006))
Mean  contents Typical  Availability FRV/m^ FRV/IOOOgallons
Dry Matter
N6.9 %
3.6 kg/t 25% 0.9 kg 9 units
P 0.6 kg/t 100% 0.6 kg 6 units
K 4.3 kq/t 100% 4.3 kg 38 units
The fertiliser  replacement  value (FRV) of slurry  will depend  on both the total nutrient 
contents,  and on the nutrient  availability  for plant uptake. With the exception  of soils 
with very low soil test P and K levels, P and K are generally  considered  to replace  
chemical  fertiliser  on a 100% basis; i.e. 1 kg of P or K applied  in slurry is equivalent 
in fertiliser  value to 1 kg of P or K applied  as chemical  fertiliser.  The N content  ot 
slurry is less available.  Approximately  50% of the N in cattle slurry is present  in 
organic  substances,  and is not immediately  available  for plant uptake. This portion  of 
the N may become  available  over time, but its release  is slow and can take many  
years. The other  50% of the N is present  as ammonium  (NH/),  which  is available  for 
plant uptake,  but can also be volatilised  into the air as ammonia  gas. Therefore,  
maximising  the N fertiliser replacement  value of slurry requires application  
management  that ensures  (I) high demand  for N from the crop being  fertilized  and (ii) 
minimal  losses  of ammonia to the air.
At current  fertiliser  prices, slurry has a potential  value of €9.17/m^ (€41.25/1000 
gallons). While much of the focus on slurry value is directed  towards  slurry N 
efficiency,  it must be remembered  that approximately  88% of the fertiliser  value is 
attributable  to the P and K content  (Table  2). Slurry  should  therefore  be distributed 
around  the farm in a manner  that utilises  fully all the nutrients  in slurry. The values  
shown  in Table  2 are only achieved  if the application  of chemical  fertilisers  is reduced  
on account  of the slurry application.  Applying  slurry without  adjusting  chemical
13
fertiliser  applications  will result in failure  to achieve  the potential  savings  indicated  in 
Table  2,
Table 2. The potential  economic  value of cattle slurry,  and the proportion  of 
value  attributable  to the N, P and K contents
N P K Total
Value/m^ €1.09 €2.39 €5.69 €9.17
Value/1000  gallons €4.88 €10.77 €25.60 €41.25
% of total value 12% 26% 62%
P and K fertiliser  replacement  value
Each area of the farm will have its own specific  requirement  for P and K fertiliser.  
This requirement  is normally  determined  by two factors. Firstly,  the land use will be 
important.  For example,  the P and K requirements  for a silage crop are normally  
higher  than that of pasture  that is only grazed. Also, the stocking  rate of grazed  
pasture  will affect  the amount  of P and K fertiliser  that is required.  The second  factor 
determining  the P and K requirement  will be the soil test results. Soils with lower  soil 
test P & K levels will have higher requirements  for P & K fertilisers.  In order to 
reduce fertiliser  costs, slurry should be applied to areas that have a P and K 
requirement.  If slurry is applied  to fields that have no P or K requirement  while other  
parts of the farm continue  to receive  chemical  P and K fertiliser,  then there will be no 
savings  in fertiliser  costs. Occasionally  in the past, slurry may have been applied  to 
fields that were more convenient  to the farmyard  and slurry  storage  tanks in order  to 
minimise  slurry-spreading  costs. The distribution  of slurry around  the farm to fully 
maximise  the fertiliser  value of the slurry is worth re-examining.  This may be 
particularly  prevalent  on out-farms  that might have high P and K requirements,  often  
deemed  too far away to justify  slurry transport  costs. With slurry now being more  
valuable,  the higher  transport  or spreading  costs incurred  may prove cost effective.  
Nitrates  limits on P fertilization  rates can be an equally  important  factor influencing  
the need to evenly  distribute  slurry  around  the farm to where  it is most needed.
N fertiliser  replacement  value  (NFRV)
The N fertiliser  value of slurry is dependent  on the losses of ammonia  to the air 
following  landspreading.  Approximately  90% of the total losses of ammonia  will 
occur in the first 24 hours following  landspreading.  The level of ammonia  loss is 
greatly  influenced  by weather  conditions,  with dry conditions,  warm temperatures,  
low humidity,  sunshine,  and wind ail increasing  ammonia  loss. Since weather 
conditions  are generally  cooler and moister  in spring than summer,  savings  on 
fertiliser  N costs by using slurry  will depend  mainly  on the timing  of slurry  application.  
1000 gallons  of cattle slurry will be worth approximately  9 units of N if applied  in 
spring  (25% NFRV). However,  the same  slurry  applied  in summer  will only be worth  
approximately  3 units of N (10% NFRV).
While  spring  application  is generally  recommended,  it can often be difficult  in practice  
due to soil trafficability  or grass covers. Where  spring application  is not feasible.
14
slurry  application  in the summer  period  (e.g. after silage  harvest)  should  be managed  
so that the N efficiency  can be maximised.  Weather  conditions  at the time of 
application  are very important,  and slurry application  should be targeted,  where  
possible,  to days when conditions  are cool, overcast,  or even misty. Hot days with 
sunshine  and wind should  be avoided  where  possible.
Diluted  slurry  will also be more N efficient,  as diluted  slurry  will percolate  into the soil 
faster than thick slurry. Diluted  slurry will also be washed  off any contaminated 
herbage  more  quickly. However,  while  diluted  slurry  will be more N efficient,  the N, P 
and K concentration  will be reduced  on account  of the dilution.
Slurry  application  method
Slurry  application  method  can also improve  the NFRV  of cattle slurry. Low emission  
application  methods  such as shallow  injection,  bandspreading  and trailing  shoe apply  
slurry in confined  bands/lines  rather  than broadcast  evenly  as with the conventional 
splashplate  method  (Figure  2).
Figure  2. Slurry  application  with splashplate  (upper)  results  in a large surface  
area of slurry  being  exposed  for ammonia  loss. Low emission  methods  (lower)  
apply  slurry  in lines/bands,  resulting  in reduced  surface  area for ammonia  loss
15
The reduced  surface  area of slurry  exposed  to the air with the low emission  methods  
results  in reduced  losses  of ammonia,  which means  that a greater  proportion  of the 
ammonium  in slurry is retained  and becomes  available  to the crop. Experiments  
undertaken  in 2006 and 2007 have attempted  to quantify  the fertiliser  replacement  
potential  of these technologies,  and results are shown in Table 3. Application  
method  will not affect  the P and K fertiliser  replacement  value  of slurry.
Table 3. The effect of application  method  and timing on the NFRV, and 
economic  value of cattle slurry applied  to grass silage (Lalor and Schulte,  
2008a;  Lalor  and Schulte,  2008b)
Application
timingNFRVkg N/m^ slurry
(units/1000  gallons  
in brackets)Value  N/m^ slurrv
Splash
plateTrailing
ShoeSplash
plateTrailing
ShoeSplash
plateTrailing
Shoe
April
June29%
10%39%
21%1,05 (9) 
0.36 (3)1.40 (12) 
0.75 (6)€ 1.26 
€0.43€ 1.68 
€0.90
The results  shown  in Table 3 are the mean NFRV%  values  observed  in experiments  
on 3 sites in 2006 and 2007. The mean  effect  of the trailing  shoe application  method  
was to increase  the NFRV  of slurry  by 3 units of N per 1000 gallons  of slurry  applied.  
The effect of switching  application  timing from June to April, without  changing  
application  method,  increased  the NFRV of slurry by 6 units per 1000 gallons  of 
slurry. The largest  benefit  of 9 units per 1000 gallons  was observed  where slurry  
application  could  be moved  from June with splashplate  to April with trailing  shoe.
Towards  soring  application
Based  on these  findings,  the priority  for slurry application  management  should  be to 
apply slurry in spring rather than summer. While spring application  is generally  
advised,  weather  conditions  at the time of application  are the key consideration.  
Applications  should  be targeted  towards  days or periods  of minimal  sunshine  and 
cool temperatures.  Attempting  to capitalise  on spring application  requires  
considerable  flexibility. The two main restrictions  to slurry application  are soil 
trafficability  conditions  and the grass cover  on the areas  designated  to receive  slurry.  
Application  in summer  is normally  easily facilitated  due to soil conditions  that are 
normally  dry at this time, and the absence  of new grass growth in fresh silage  
stubbles.  With splashplate,  earlier  applications  that are targeted  towards  optimising  
the weather  conditions  on the day of application  are more difficult, as such 
opportunities  often arise on occasions  when there is little or no land area available  
with grass covers  that are low enough  to ensure  that grass contamination  will not 
limit the subsequent  grazing  palatability  or silage  quality  of the pasture.
The trailing  shoe offers advantages  in this regard,  as the slurry is concentrated  in 
bands,  with the result  that the majority  of the grass in the sward  does not come into 
contact  with the slurry. By reducing  the grass contamination,  the opportunity  for 
more flexible  application  timing is increased  as the consideration  for grass cover is
16
reduced.  This means  that on days when weather  conditions  that are ideal for slurry  
application  arise (soil trafficability  and reduced  ammonia  loss), more land is available 
to the farmer  with the trailing  shoe compared  to splashplate,  as he/she  is no longer  
restricted  to areas with grass covers that are low enough so as not to affect  
subsequent  grazing  or silage  quality.
The trailing shoe is not the only option to improve  the opportunity  for spring  
application.  The umbilical  application  system,  which pumps the slurry directly 
through  a pipe system  to a low-weight  slurry  application  unit in the field, can be used 
to reduce  soil compaction,  as heavy tankers  are avoided.  Umbilical  systems  are now 
available  with either splashplate  or trailing shoe attachments.  Also, with tanker 
application,  tyre selection  is an important  consideration  to aid soil trafficability  and 
reduce the potential  for damage  that can result from machinery  traffic on soils 
sensitive to  compaction.
Cost-benefits
The trailing  shoe is an expensive  technology  to adopt. In the absence  of grant aid, 
purchase  costs of trailing  shoe tankers  are approximately  two to three times that of 
splashplate  tankers  of equal capacity.  This means  that the technology  will be more  
suited  to contractors  rather than farmer  owned  units.
The largest  economic  benefit  of trailing shoe adoption  to the farmer  comes  when  
spring  application  can be facilitated  where  it was previously  restricted  by splashplate 
application.  However,  the economic  benefits  of other means  of facilitating  spring  
application  (umbilical  system,  tyre specification)  are also worth  considering.
Strategies  to lower  fertiliser  N requirements  on farms
Matching  fertiliser  N use to stocking  rate
The amount  of fertiliser  N needed  at a specific  stocking  rate can vary with the natural  
fertility  of soils, growing  conditions  in a particular  year, etc. Hence,  there has always  
been a need for some flexibility  in the quantity  of fertiliser  N needed  for different 
stocking  rates. Setting  out a clear plan for fertiliser  N use for the year can bring  
about savings  in expenditure  on fertiliser  N. Recent  work at the Teagasc  Solohead  
Farm has shown that, with grass-only  swards, around 170kg fertiliser  N/ha is 
required  to support  a stocking  rate of around  2.0 LSU/ha.  Average  fertiliser  N use on 
Irish dairy farms  stocked  at 2.0 LSU/ha  is 175kg/ha  (Coulter  et al., 2002). Therefore 
there is good conformity  between  the rate of fertiliser  N being used on farms,  
generally,  and that found to be necessary  to support  this stocking  rate at Solohead.  
Under  typical  grassland  management  where most of the silage is made as first-cut 
and the amount  of second-cut  is kept to a minimum  (between  0 and 30% of the 
grassland  area), the fertiliser  N application  strategies  presented  in Table 4 are 
recommended.  These recommendations  adhere  to best agronomic  practice  while  
complying  with the new regulations.
Best response  to fertiliser  N will be achieved  from applications  made during late 
March,  April and May. During  this time of the year, it pays to put on high rates of 
fertiliser  N on the grazing  area, maximise  the stocking  rates on the grazing  area and 
make as much ground  as possible  available  for first cut silage. Due to the high rates
17
of grass growth  during  late April and May, it is possible  to make around  30% more  
silage per ha for approximately  the same inputs costs compared  to second-cut  
silage. Making a large first-cut lowers the need for a second-cut  of silage.  
Therefore,  a smaller  area needs to be closed for second  cut, making  a greater 
proportion  of the grassland  area available  for grazing  providing  substantial  scope  to 
lower  fertiliser  N inputs  onto the grazing  area from June onwards.
When it comes  to lowering  fertiliser  N input to the grazing  area from mid-summer  
onwards,  one question  that often arises is whether  to make large applications  of 
fertiliser  at long intervals,  for example,  40kg N/ha applied  once every  eight weeks,  or 
a smaller  application  at shorter  intervals;  20kg/ha  every four weeks. Small and 
regular  applications  help to maintain  a regular  supply  of high quality  pasture. Large  
applications  at long intervals  result  in a boom-and-bust  situation  where  grass  starts  to 
run out of control,  often triggering  the decision  to harvest  bales, and then the grass  
begins  to disappear  because  there is not enough  N available  in the soil. Applying  
rates ot 15 to 25kg N/ha (around  half a bag of CAN/acre)  at four to six-week  intervals  
during  the summer  is recommended  on moderately  stocked  farms  (Table  4).
The biggest  problem  with making recommendations  is that most farms are not 
average  or typical  in terms  of soil type, land use (for example,  growing  maize  instead  
of first-cut  or second-cut  silage),  the extent  to which farms are fragmented,  etc. In 
Table  5, fertiliser  N rates are recommended  for different  stocking  rates on the grazing  
area at different  times of the year. For example,  on a fragmented  farm, where a 
large part of the silage requirement  is made as maize silage grown on an outside  
block  of land, the stocking  rate on the grazing  area on the home  farm during  May and 
June is relatively  low and hence  the requirement  for fertiliser  N during  this period  can 
be quite low. Putting  on too much fertiliser  N is only going to drive up costs if 
excessive  grass  production  on the grazing  area has to be han/ested  as baled  silage.  
The recommendations  in Table  5 should  only be used as part of an overall  plan that 
keeps fertiliser  use on the farm compliant  with the maximum  permissible  rates  
outlined  in S.l. No. 378 of 2006.
18
(/) tf)— a>
E CO ^ ccCO ^
it
o"
™ _ra
^ »
(X) (0
O)
0)0)
(Q
E 
'x 
2 cLO
S-S^« b
0) CO 
I
= o0)£ , 
S
(0
a>E
' 3
> i
0) 'c 
- EoT 
® (0 "S 
■i o -g
3 — ra
■o
■n 0)
C ^
J5 
w '« 5 
« o
o>^
k_ ^o0)k.u
(0
0)
Q.
p (0 o X£ 
0) c to §
'w'
o «
1 = ®
® O Q.
o S ^O (0 ^
<0 0) cSi£:z  
2-0^  
^ S 
* 0 0 ) ( 0 c o) a> 
? ™ a 
I (0 p
O 3 
O O
DC *2 5(0
0) o r
(0 3 >4- H O O£c
0)
(Q1
oCO S'in'in'SI  o
0CO to o CM oT- T- T- CM CMJCM
TO 1
o1
l“ ^ 1
Tf CM (£> CO c:3ir^
CD C33 1- LO 'd3T- T- CM CM CM,CM
1
}
10
X} O S'!©
ECM CM,CM0
o to to
0CM co;cM
CO 1
1
0 O O CO 13 CM CM CM 1O)3 to to ,< CM CM CO ,
«
00 CD'S
CM CM'CM3
•^1'^
CO COiCO  
,
1
000 00 00 CO Sloo
cCM CM CM CM CM'CM
“3 ^ ^ ^
CO CO CO CO COiCO
J
1
00 00 00 00 ^00
0CM CM CM CM -^'CM
2^
CO CO CO CO lOiCO
1
1_ SSSSSo
’k- CO co^^^^^
Q.< CO CO 03 03 03'03
Tj- Tf Tt rfi'Tt
i
1
SSo  Sols
OCM CM CO CO
000 00 03 O3'C0
CM CM CO Tf'Tt
J
,
0 sssss
LL ^ CM CM CM CM'CM
Cfrt 00 00 00 OO'OO
-3CM CM CM CMICM
i
1
1
z1
o2 c10 0
»- O)o o o o olo
03 1^ 00 03 O ■•- toC °1- ^ I- CM CM’CM
‘v> 0o ^1 I 1 1 1! 1
Q (_}jlO O O O Ol-r-
77l lo CO o) Oi-t-(/) ^■•-'•-■•-••-  CM,CMO) w 0)
§ </> s
CVJ w OS
o .•= 
S 5
CO c —
m O O ® T3 CO 
CO 0) c
S ^ o
CO Q.*0  
CO 03
C S'S
■5 -Q eu “ 5 “=
O to <0 
to ^ o o
< -9 -SCO toto^ to 
.E
® Ql
<D (0 
Ql Ce:;;
2 .:
CO <0
i= ■£
S -- •-^ "CJ "O (0 (D 0 ^ "D X>3 C C03 0 0
E E
SE E E 0)0 0 
<0 o o 
o £ 2 
to to c
o ro tS t “ £ Z o0) 
<“ Q.
o §■
Z E 
o S  
ti Q r
0 ■ei</i
</i
O)0
X30I-
00«
■o tois CO§ 2l 
a? 5
^ 0
0 := 0
0? 0 
0 0 
O —*
E .o
o
o o
o 3) o ^
>nOp- v—' m E CVJ■o0
is = C ^00
«■§ g^0 1-
£Z ^ "2 
— ^ 0 
W ^ $ C —' 0o —* ^•.ff to 00 CO o gc\i E 0 ^i|O Z
0.9
^ O)
H O O.«!  
0 r
0 B ^ 0 0
2 O 
0
■i °> 0
o
S O) t .9 0 ^ o0 2 - 0
1Q.
Q.0
0J2
0
O) ^ 
0 0
0 <0 « ^ O
-§:y
H Q.
« 0 £ u. 0-- 5
"D »- 0 O
0 2 0 ;c:
2 0 
0 M-— o 
c t- 
_g 0£ Q.
19
o ii
(A
a>i
IT £
A
. ra ^ ♦- 
(0 (A 0)
1.1
O) 2c ^ 'C c 3 0)^ 5 
o> ® 
c ■u
N ^
^ 0) 
a> 0) c
O (A —
0) 0)
A (0« o
« ^ 
S £ 
(0 ^ « O
<5 2
ci-a
c ®o {j
in ™ « >- 
■S ® 2 Q.
o) £ 
•E c 
1S3  
2 5
c ®
0) ^
|5>
^ .E
O <D
(A
z ® i1. » c 
® ® = 
:2 a >■
c 2 2® (0 3
^ z iS 
. ^ ») in ® Tj
(u .!2 ®•S = ®.o tr o,2 ai X? ®
.2!
B
CO
o o
55
^ CO
S3
= ®
ll! ^
S3
= ®
B
CO __
"i
o —I 
O
aSO 00 
CM CM
IT) Tf 
CM CO
O 00 t- CM CM
LO Tf 
•*- CM CO
t- 00
CM CM
CO
CM CO
Tj* T- 00 00 00
’I- CM CM CM CM
fv. CO ^ Tj- Tt 
1- CM CO CO CO
LO O LO g c\i CO 00 in 
c^i I I I CO
V O LO O A
CM CM CO
Tti-COlO-»-  
1- CM CM CO
r^cOTfcM-r-
■»- CM CO lO
CO CO o o o 
CM CM CO ^ ^
OO 00 00 CJ) CD
CM CM CO Tt Tj-
lO O LO
rv. o CM
CO ^
I I I ^ 
O lO O A LO o
CO CO o o o 
CM CM CO Tf
00 CO 00 a> CD 
CM CM CO
CO CO CO CO 
CM CM CM CM
00 00 00 00 
CM CM CM CM
x:o
(0 CMrf CD00
00
1 1 1y-L
■OVCM CD A
20
Fertiliser  N application  in soring  and autumn
Strategies  for the application  of fertiliser  N during  the spring  have been outlined  above.  
However,  a question  that often arises  is whether  it is better  to apply  CAN or urea during  
the spring. Numerous  experiments  have been conducted  comparing  the two. In all 
cases  CAN was never  found  to be better  than urea under  Irish conditions  whereas  urea 
was sometimes  better than CAN. The reason  for this is fairly clear. Once urea is 
applied  to the soil during  the spring it is converted  to ammonium.  The ammonium  is 
held reasonably  well to the soil particles.  In contrast,  CAN contains  both nitrate  and 
ammonium  and the nitrate is immediately  at risk of being leached  or denitrified.  
Furthermore,  some recent  research  has shown  that ammonium  is more easily  taken up 
than is nitrate under cold soil conditions.  Urea is cheaper  than CAN per unit of N 
applied. Taking  into account  that the N in urea is used as efficiently  as the N in CAN 
during the spring, urea is clearly  the more cost-effective  fertiliser  to apply during  the 
spring.
It must be noted  that while it takes  time for urea to break  down to ammonium  and that 
the ammonium  adheres  reasonably  well to soil particles,  any ammonium  that is not 
taken up by the sward  will eventually  be converted  to nitrate  in the soil. Therefore  the 
application  of urea fertiliser  does not prevent  nitrate  leaching  or denitrification  during  the 
spring. It just means  that the N in urea is likely to be safely  held in the soil for longer  
than the N from a similar  application  of CAN,  during  the early spring.
The responsiveness  to fertiliser  N declines  during  the autumn.  In general,  research  has 
shown  that there is no worthwhile  response  to fertiliser  N from around  mid-September  
onwards  in the southwest  and from around  the end of August  in the north. Conditions  
may often seem ideal for the application  of fertiliser  N later in the year. However,  when  
fertiliser  is being applied  during  the early spring,  it is being applied  in anticipation  of 
expected  growth. When fertiliser  is being applied during the autumn,  growth is 
inexorably  declining.  Also, not all of the applied  N will be taken up in one go. Fertiliser  
applied  in mid-September  will be taken up at a rate of around  0.5kg N/ha/day  during  the 
remainder  of September  and October.  Therefore,  it takes around  60 days for 30kg N/ha  
to be taken up from the soil. By mid-November,  the requirement  for fertiliser  N will be 
very low and will be within  the supply  capacity  of the background  soil N. Therefore  as 
the application  of fertiliser  N is delayed  into late September  or October  the demand  for 
available  soil N is disappearing  while  the risk of loss increases  exponentially.
Grassland  Measurement
The frequent  monitoring  of grass supply  during  the grazing  season  allows  the farmer  to 
make earlier  and better grazing  management  decisions.  Grass supply  varies on the 
farm from week to week due to factors  such as growth,  level of concentrate  feeding,  
weather,  etc. The main way to monitor  grass supply  is to measure  farm cover  weekly,  
thereby  allowing  management  decisions  to be made according  to the supply  of and 
demand  for herbage  on the farm. Data from Teagasc  Monitor  Farmers  show that
21
substantial  savings  in fertiliser  N costs can be made on farms by measuring  the cover  
(supply)  of grass  on the farm every  week. With high N fertiliser  prices  there is little point  
in spreading  a standard  amount  week in week out across  the middle  six months  of the 
year. Applying  Nitrogen  fertiliser  at levels in excess  of the requirement  for adequate  
herbage  supply  will result  in waste,  either  in the form of topped  grass  or, the production  
of very costly  round  bales.
Lime
As well as providing  information  on the P and K requirement  of the farm, soil tests also 
provide  the pH of the soil and give information  on the requirement  for lime. Maintaining  
the soil pH at approximately  6.5 improves  the natural  capacity  of the soil to supply  N to 
growing  crops. Increasing  soil pH from 5.5 to 6.5 will increase  soil N supply. Applying  
ground  limestone  improves  N availability  at a cost equivalent  of around  60% of applying  
additional  fertiliser  N. This figure does not take into account  that applying  lime also 
increases  the availability  of other nutrients,  particularly  of phosphorous,  as well as the 
availability  of a range  of trace elements.  The higher  the soil lime requirement  (lower  soil 
pH) the greater  will be the benefit  of applying  lime.
White  clover
While  different  ways of cutting  back on fertiliser  N have been outlined  above,  by far the 
biggest  savings  in fertiliser  N costs  that can be made  on many  farms  is by growing  white  
clover. White  clover  is a legume  and so has the capacity  to generate  its own supply  of 
N through  a process  known  as biological  N fixation. It can supply  the equivalent  of 120 
to 150kg/ha  of fertiliser  N (100 to 120 units per acre) per year. This is a lot of N when it 
is considered  that average  fertiliser  N use on dairy farms  in Ireland  is around  170 kg/ha  
(140 units per acre) per year. White  clover  offers huge potential  to cut fertiliser  N costs 
on farms. The supply  of 100 to 120 units of N is the equivalent  of 3.5 to 4.5 bags of 
CAN. With CAN costing  €360 per tonne,  this supply  of biologically-fixed  N is worth  €60 
to €80 per acre. Growing  white  clover  is a bit like having  your own fertiliser  N factory  on 
the farm and this N can be manufactured  at relatively  little cost. It provides  the 
opportunity  to sidestep  the escalating  pricexost  squeeze.
Research  at Solohead  over the last seven years has shown clover-based  grassland  
receiving  fertiliser  N input of 72 units per acre can support  a stocking  rate of 2.2 LU/ha 
(0.9 LU per acre or 190 kg/ha  of organic  N), producing  500 kg milk solids  per cow, while  
being  fed less than half a tonne  of concentrate  per cow per year. This is a high stocking  
rate and milk output  per acre compared  with the majority  of dairy  farms  in Ireland.
22
Conclusions
Escalating  costs and regulation  under the Nitrates  Directive  are creating  pressure  to 
lower  fertiliser  inputs  and increase  the efficiency  of nutrient-use  on farms. Increases  in 
efficiency  are possible  once there is a clear understanding  of the factors  that promote  
the efficient  uptake  of available  nutrients  from the soil by grassland.  The following  are 
ways  to cut fertiliser  N and P costs  on the farm:
• The P and K fertiliser  value comprises  the largest  component  of slurry value.  
Targeting  slurry  applications  using soil analysis  results  is an essential  component  
to maximising  the value  of slurry;
• Targeting  slurry applications  towards  optimising  weather  conditions  that result in 
reduced  ammonia  losses  can help reduce  fertiliser  N costs. Such conditions  are 
normally  more prevalent  in spring;
• By reducing  grass contamination,  the trailing shoe system  can increase  the 
flexibility  of slurry  application,  and help to apply slurry  when timing,  weather  and 
ground  conditions  are optimal;
• Other benefits  of trailing shoe adoption,  such as reduced  odours,  may be of 
significant  value  in individual  cases;
• Umbilical  application  systems,  or improved  tyre specification  on tankers  are also 
very effective  methods  for improving  the opportunity  for spring  application;
• Apply 23 units/acre  (29 kg/ha)  for the first application  in spring (mid-January  to 
early March  depending  on location  and soil type etc.). Urea is more cost effective  
than CAN in spring;
• Replace  the first application  of fertiliser  N by an application  of watery  slurry. 1000  
gallons  of watery  slurry  = 8 to 10 units of N per acre. At Solohead  around  2,500  
gallons  per acre are applied  on two-thirds  of the farm in late January  using an 
umbilical  system.  The other  one-third  is grazed  during  February  and early March. 
Allow  around  six weeks  between  application  and expected  date of grazing;
• Apply  the second  application  of fertiliser  N between  4 and 6 weeks  after the first. 
A 6-week  interval  should  be allowed  with earlier  start dates (mid-January)  and a 
4-week interval with later application  dates (mid-February).  The second  
application  should take place sometime  during March. The third application  
should roughly  coincide  with closing  up for silage in April. Match fertiliser  N 
applications  to stocking  rates on the farm at various  times  of the year (see Table  
4 & 5);
• Replace  some of the fertiliser  N for first cut silage  by slurry. If 92 units per acre 
(115 kg/ha) is applied  for first cut silage,  this can be lowered  to around  69 units 
per acre (85 kg/ha)  along with an application  of 3000 gallons  slurry  per acre. At 
Solohead  3000 gallons  per acre is applied  to around  two-thirds  of the first-cut  
silage area in late March (this is the proportion  of the silage  area that will have  
been grazed  at that stage). The slurry is applied  allowing  at least 6-weeks  
between  application  and expected  silage  harvest  date. An interval  of around  one 
week  is allowed  between  application  of slurry  and the application  of fertiliser  N for 
first-cut  silage. Do not apply fertiliser  N immediately  before  or shortly  after the 
slurry  because  this leads  to losses  of N by denitrification;
23
Try to make  as much silage  as possible  as first cut. i) work out how much silage  
is required,  ii) depending  on requirements,  aim to maximise  stocking  rate on the 
grazing  area during  Aprii and May. This makes  as large an area as possible  
available  for first-cut  silage. There  is a very high response  to fertiiiser  N during  
April and May. First cut silage  yields  will be at least 30% higher  than second  cut 
for more-or-iess  the same  input costs. High grazing  pressure  on the grazing  area 
during  April and May is good for grass  quaiity  iater in the season;
Diluting  slurry  with dirty water  will increase  the efficiency  of utilization  of N in the 
slurry when it is appiied  to silage  stubble  after first-cut  silage. Although  dilution  
will lower  the DM and N content  of the slurry, it will increase  the efficiency  of N 
utilization  (a higher rate of infiitration  into the soil lowers  volatilization  iosses). 
Diiution  should  only be carried  out where  it is a convenient  means  of managing  
dirty water and at times of the year outside  of the closed period for slurry  
application;
If possible,  avoid making  second  cut siiage. Having  the whole  farm available  for 
grazing  from June onwards  lowers  the requirement  for fertiliser  N. Appiy  fertiliser  
N in line with stocking  rate (Tables  4 & 5) and also pasture  cover. If pasture  
cover is above target, iower the amount  - or increase  the interval between  
applications  - of fertiliser  N. Do not skip aoDlications :
Plan to build pasture  cover by extending  the rotation  from mid- to late-July  
depending  on stocking  rate and iocation  (iater on higher  stocked  farms in more 
favourable  locations  and vice-versa).  Fertiliser  N applied  in July and August  has 
greater  bearing  on grass supply  in November  and in the foilowing  spring  than 
appiications  later in the autumn;
Keep records  of quantities  and dates of application  - and study them. Bianket  
spreading  of fertiliser  N simplifies  record  keeping  and this helps to keep overall  
fertiliser  N use on the farm under control  (this can bring about a considerable  
saving  in annual  fertiliser  N use whiie also lowering  baled surpluses).  The first 
three applications  during the spring (during calving)  and applications  during  
August  and September  can be blanket  spread  with no ioss of production.  Blanket 
spreading  during the summer  months  can result in slight (3.5%) lowering  of 
production;
White clover has the potential  to supply up to 120 kg N/ha/year  through  the 
fixation of atmospheric  N by Rhizoblum  bacteria  that grow in symbiotic  
association  with the clover. The wider  adoption  of white  clover  in Irish grassland  
has the potential  to halve the amount  of fertiliser  N used on the majority  of 
grassland  farms  in Ireiand.
References
Anon. (2006). European  Communities  (Good Agricultural  Practice  for Protection  of 
Waters)  Regulations  2006. SI 378 of 2006. Departmenf  of Environment,  Heritage  and 
Local  Government,  The Stationary  Office,  Dubiin,  49 pp.
24
Connolly,  L., Burke,  T. and Roche,  M. (2001). Teagasc  National  Farm Survey  2000. 
Teagasc,  19 Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin  4. 13 pages,  www.teaaasc.ie
Coulter,  B.S., Murphy,  W.E., Culleton,  N., Finnerty,  E. and Connolly,  L. (2002). A survey  
of fertiliser  use in 2000 for grassland  and arable  crops. Teagasc,  Johnstown  Castle  
Research  Centre,  Wexford.
Flumphreys,  J., Lawless,  A., O'Connell,  K. and Darmody,  P. (2005). The development  
of systems  of milk production  and grazing  management  based  on low stocking  rates and 
very low artificial  nitrogen  inputs. End of Project  Report  No. 4468, Teagasc,  19 
Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin.
Humphreys,  J., O’Connell,  K. and Watson,  C.J. (2003). Effect of nitrate legislation  on 
fertiliser  nitrogen  management  for grassland.  Proceedings  No. 517. The Internationai  
Fertiliser  Society,  York, 35 pages.
Lalor, S. and Schulte,  R.P.O.  (2008a). Nitrogen  fertiliser  replacement  value of cattle  
slurry applied  to grassland.  Teagasc,  Johnstown  Castle,  Booklet  of 'slurry  and nutrient  
efficiency  display',  1 May 2008.
Lalor, S.T.J. and Schulte,  R.P.O. (2008b). Slurry application  using trailing shoe - 
potential  benefits  come  at a price, TResearch,  pp. 35-37.
O'Bric,  C. (1991). A survey  of the nutrient  composition  of cattle  and pig slurries,  M.Sc. 
Thesis,  University  College  Dublin.
O'Connell,  K. (2005). Environmentally  sustainable  fertiliser  nitrogen  management  
practices  for pasture  production.  PhD Thesis. Faculty  of Science  and Agriculture,  
School  of Agriculture  and Food Science,  Queen's  University  Belfast,  May 2005, 229 
pages.
O’Connell,  K., Humphreys,  J. and Watson,  C.J. (2004). Apparent  recovery  of fertiliser  
nitrogen  by pasture.  Agricultural  Research  Forum,  Tullamore,  1 & 2 March  2004, page  
18.
O’Donovan,  M. Delaby,  L., Stakelum,  G. and Dillon, P. (2004). Effect  of autumn/spring  
nitrogen  application  date and level on dry matter  production  and nitrogen-efficiency  in 
perennial  ryegrass  swards.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research,  43: 31-41.
Teagasc  (2008). N, P and K fertiliser  prices. Unpublished  data.
Pain, B.F. (2000). Control  and utilization  of livestock  manures.  In: Hopkins,  A. (ed.): 
Grass:  Its Production  and Utilization,  O'"* edition,  pages  343-364.  Blackwell  Science  Ltd.
25
Grass  - can we grow  and utilise  more?
Michael  O’Donovan,  Emer Kennedy  and Philip Creighton  
Teagasc,  Moorepark
1. Irish dairy farmers  should  target  an average  farm grass DM production  of 18t 
DM/ha/year.
2. Grass  cultivars  with over winter growth offer huge potential  for increased  
spring  grass  utilisation  with clear  environmental  gains (less N leaching).
3. The DM production  difference  between  old permanent  pasture  and newly  
reseeded  swards  is 3t DM/ha  or €292/ha.
4. Reseeded  swards have 8% higher milk output per hectare relative to 
permanent  pasture.
5. The  level of reseeding  practised  in Ireland  is too small to make a difference  in 
overall  productivity  and too heavily  focussed  towards  the autumn  period.
6. Grass  breeding  has increased  grass DM production  by 4-5% over the last 
decade.
7. Future  grass  breeding  and evaluation  needs  to focus more on characteristics  
that influence  animal performance  under grazing  rather than under cutting  
and conservation.
8. Grass  variety  breeding  and testing  has, and will continue  to play an important  
role into the future  in enhancing  the profitability  of Irish grassland  farmers.
Introduction
The production  and utilisation  of grass has a central role in maintaining  the 
competitiveness  of the Irish dairy industry.  Economic  analysis  (Shalloo  et al., 2004)  
shows  that maximum  profitability  within Irish milk production  systems  is achieved  
through  the optimum  management  of pasfure  both within the current  quota regime,  
and within future scenarios  where additional  quota will be available  to Irish dairy 
farmers. The ability of dairy farmers  to maximise  the performance  of their herds  
from grazed  grass produced  within  the farm gate will be a significant  factor  deciding  
their future business  success. Dillon et al., (2005) suggests  that regardless  of 
country  or quota existence,  a 10% increase  in grazed  grass in the feeding  system  
will reduce the cost of milk produced  by 2.5c/l. One strategy  to increase  
competitiveness,  irrespective  of milk price  is to continue  to increase  the grazed  grass  
proportion  of the diet, Irish dairy farmers  can reap greater  benefits  from improved  
pasture  management  compared  to any of our main competitors,  through  the uptake  
of better  grassland  management  techniques.
The objective  of this paper is to explore  and discuss  the current  and potential  
avenues  of increasing  grass  production  and utilisation  on Irish dairy farms:
• The potential  performance  from pasture;
• Management  practices  to increase  grassland  productivity;
• Current  reseeding  levels  in Ireland;
• Productivity  of permanent  pasture  versus  reseeded  swards;
26
The contribution  of grass breeding  and grass evaluation  programs  to 
grassland  productivity;
Future challenges  facing  grassland  production  systems.
Potential  performance  from pasture  on Irish dairy  farms
In 2008 Teagasc  Moorepark  undertook  a survey  of a number  of Co-op ’s in different 
regions  across  the country  to investigate  a number  of grassland  related  issues at 
farm level. In total 320 milk suppliers  were surveyed,  200 from Kerry  Co-op  and 120 
from Connacht  Gold. In addition,  two discussion  groups  (Technical  groups)  that 
represent  the top 10% of dairy farmers  in the south of Ireland  were also surveyed.  
Table 1 shows  the current  physical  performance  of the two surveyed  Co-op  regions  
compared  to the technical  farmer  group. A number  of key issues  are evident  in this 
Table;  i) Irish dairy farms are under  stocked,  ii) milk solids production  per cow and 
per ha are too low for the levels  of feed input, and iii) high levels of milk production 
per cow and per ha can be achieved  on less concentrate  when technologies  such as 
grass budgeting  are adopted. Farmers  undertaking  grass measurement  have 
substantially  increased  their grazing  days. Further  increases  in efficiencies  can be 
undertaken  through  increased  grass DM production,  better  grassland  management,  
increased  utilisation,  compact  calving  and longer lactations.  To achieve  current  
research  targets  of 1250kg  milk solids/ha,  efficiency  will have to increase  by nearly  
60% in Kerry and Connacht  Gold and 20% in the technical  group. Is this 
achievable?
Table 1. Current  physical  performance  of two co-op regions  and a high 
performance  technical  group
Connacht  Gold Kerry Technical  group
Grazing  platform  (ha) 30.9 36 80
Stocking  rate (cows/ha) 1.9 1.7 2.3
Milking  cows 55 55 182
MS/cow 286 309 434
MS/ha 560 520 995
Grazing  days 220 239 291
Concentrate/cow 934 726 464
% Grass  budgeting 17.4 6 85
Management  practice  to increase  grassland  productivity
Many  changes  have been adopted  in grassland  management  practices  over the past 
decade. Rising  costs (5%/year  in the last three years)  require  increased  production 
efficiency  on Irish dairy farms to offset falls in farm income. Increased  emphasis  
must be placed  on technology  to extend  the grazing  season  earlier  into spring  and 
later into autumn  to reduce  the requirements  for alternative  higher  cost feeds. Early  
turnout  (post-calving)  is now normal practise  on many farms with clear benefits  
(Kennedy  et al., 2006). Autumn  management  has evolved  to utilise higher farm 
grass covers  - built to provide  a grass supply  into November,  with some pastures
27
closed  to store grass over winter  so that herbage  is available  for spring  grazing. A 
300-day  grazing  season  is now an achievable  target  for focussed  grassland  farmers.  
However  at farm level, survey  results  indicate  a wide range from 211 - 311 (100 
days)  as more  typical.
The evolution  of management  practice  within Moorepark  since the mid-1980s  is 
summarised  in Table 2. Over the past 24 years, mean calving  date has been  
delayed,  and stocking  rate has been reduced  to facilitate  the incorporation  of a 
greater  proportion  of grazed  grass in the diet of the dairy herd. However  stocking  
rate is still substantially  higher  than average  stocking  rates at farm level. Current  
grazing  season  length  is 300 days, with the main increase  in the number  of grazing  
days realised  through  earlier  spring  turnout.  The grass  growth  potential  of the sward  
has increased,  achieved  mainly  through  reseeding  of older pasture  and through  the 
more efficient  use of artificial  and organic  fertilizer. There has been a consistent 
reduction  in the proportion  of second  cut grass  silage  taken,  as the demand  for grass  
silage has been substantially  reduced  with a longer  grazing  season. The demand  
for grass silage has been almost  totally replaced  by grass in the early lactation  
period.
Due to the extension  of the grazing  season  the feed budget  of the dairy cow has also 
changed  over the past 24 years - grass allowance  has increased  by 40% coupled  
with a 30% decrease  in grass  silage  input along with a 50% reduction  in concentrate 
offered. In the future a further  increase  in the quantity  of grass in the overall  feed 
budget  is likely. There  is no time for sitting  still - further  progress  has to be made  to 
increase  stocking  rate at low concentrate  levels. The aim is to produce  more  
pasture  to utilise  and further  reduce  production  costs on the farm unit.
Table 2. Changes  in the Moorepark  system for spring milk production  
between  1984 and 2008
1984 2008
Mean  calving  date 2/2 24/2
Stocking  rate (LU/ha) 2.91 2.8
N input (kg N/ha) 423 240
Grazing  season  length  (days) 250 290
Turnout  by day March  10 Feb 1
Turnout  full time April 1 Feb 1
Housing  date
Annual  dairy  cow feed budgetNov 15 Nov 28
Grass  (t DM/ cow) 2.8 3.9
Silage  (t DM/ cow) 1.5 1.0
Concentrate  (t DM/ cow) 0.75 0.30
Grass  DM produced  (t/DM/ha) 14.5 15.9
28
Grass  production,  quality  and grazing  management
Typically  in highly stocked,  technically  efficient  systems  that implement  a good  
reseeding  programme,  grass production  is of the order of 15 - 16t DM/ha. In such 
systems,  grazing  management  is focussed  on providing  high quality  pasture  to the 
herd over a long grazing  season. Increases  in grass production  on farm have not 
come  in the mid season  but more in the winter/spring  periods.
Winter  grass  growth
A growing  day is classified  in the context  of Figure  1 as a day where  soil temperature 
is >5 degrees  at 09:00am.  Figure 1 shows  a substantial  increase  in the number  of 
growing  days at Moorepark  from 1990 to the present  day. As expected  large year-  
to-year  variation  exists;  in 1996 there were 300 growing  days (the least) but in 2005  
a total of 349 growing  days were recorded. In total there has been an 18-day  
increase  in growing  days from 1990 to date, which  is a substantial  increase  given the 
1990 base level was 319 days. Whether  this advancement  in growing  day’s 
increases  grass  growth  is debatable,  what is important  however  is that varieties  are 
selected  which  can capitalise  on the higher  temperature  in the autumn/winter  period.  
November  and December  are the months  with greatest  increase  in growing  days.
Figure  1. The increase  in growing  days  from 1990 to present  day
340  T
335 
II) 330337
325
320
315
310
305a Growing  days
1990-96 1997-02  
Six year periods2003 to date
Such a change  or advantage  is useless  if not capitalised  upon. In recent  years at 
Curtins  farm in Moorepark  and on commercial  farms measuring  pasture  production, 
substantial  increases  in winter growth rates have been recorded. In Clonakilty 
Agricultural  College,  winter  grass growth  from October  to February  for the period  
2006 - 2008 has averaged  8kg grass growth  per day. In recent  years some New 
Zealand  grass varieties  have been investigated  at Moorepark  to examine  levels of 
out of season  DM production  relative  to European  bred varieties.  Table 3 shows  the 
potential  of these winter tolerant  grass varieties  and their potential  to grow over
29
winter. Such varieties  have the capacity  to increase  the grass growth  potential  by 
500 kg DM/ha  in the closed  (winter)  period.
Table 3. Effect  of closing  date and opening  date on the DM production  and 
over winter  growth  of 9 perenniai  ryegrass  varieties  defoiiated  in February,  
March  and April across  two years  (2007-2008)
o 5o
<o
OJo
CD0)o
z»c3Q<0oc0)
O■D
OO)coo
O0)
o
E
to
_JC
CD>
COz_co
K
DM yield Feb (kg) 816 802 848 459 479 543 394 504 465
Winter  growth  Feb 
(kg/day)7.0 6.9 7.3 3.9 4.1 4.5 3.3 4.2 3.9
DM yield Mar (kg) 1406 1565 1538 1136 1151 1091 1045 1002 1094
Winter  growth  Mar 
(kg/day)9.9 11.0 10.9 7.9 8.0 7.6 7.3 6.9 7.6
DM yield April (kg) 1271 1287 1261 1092 1092 1075 1095 1059 1184
Over the past two years  winter  production  (from October  to March),  of the three New 
Zealand  varieties  was substantially  higher  than Irish and European  bred varieties;  
50% higher  in October  closed  swards  and 28% higher  in November  closed  swards.  
Of the three New Zealand  varieties  Bealey,  appears  to be the most productive  over 
winter. However,  Bealey is an aggressive  growing  variety and needs to be 
frequently  grazed  during  the mid season,  therefore  if grazing  management  practices  
are not optimum  it may be wiser to consider  an alternative  variety. Additionally,  
Bealey  has an open growth  habit. This limitation  can be overcome  by combining  it 
with a compatible  late diploid  with good tiller density. Varieties  such as these when  
combined  with appropriate  autumn  closing  strategy,  can transform  the winter  closed  
period  into a period  of DM accumulation  on Irish farms.
Spring  grazing
Spring  grazing  is the key to increasing  farm grass DM production,  the number  of 
days at grass and increasing  the proportion  of grazed  grass in the cow’s diet. The 
first grazing  rotation  stimulates  herbage  growth  and leads to higher  DM production  
on early grazed  pastures  relative  to swards  grazed  in the late March/April  period. It 
is normal  to record  higher  grass  growth  on grazed  swards  in late March  compared  to 
ungrazed  swards. Kennedy  et al., (2007)  found  early spring  grazed  swards  had 6% 
higher  growth  rate in subsequent  rotations  compared  to April grazed  swards;  further 
to this sward  quality  was 2 units higher  with the early grazed  swards. O’Donovan  et 
al., (2004)  found  similar  results  with a study  completed  in France.
Tight spring grazing,  which is now widely  advised  (grazing  to 3.5 - 4cm), clearly  
increases  sward quality  in subsequent  rotations  (Holmes  and Hoogendoorn,  1992;
30
Stakelum  and Dillon (2007). Increased  levels of milk production  performance  {+2kg  
milk/cow/day)  are due to swards  with higher  leaf content,  lower pre grazing  masses  
and higher  sward  quality.
Summer
In recent years, the concept  of grazing  lower herbage  masses  (1200 - 1600kg  
DM/ha)  has been adopted.  The basis of this work comes  from grazing  swards  at the 
‘3 leaf stage'. The fundamentals  behind  this philosophy  are that grass is a ‘3 leaf 
plant' - that is only 3 green leaves/tiller  exist at any one time, with the initiation  of a 
new leaf coinciding  with the senescence  of the oldest  fourth leaf. Grazing  swards 
older  than 3-leaves/tiller  will not only lead to wastage  of grass but also the senescent 
(dead) material  builds up at the base of the sward and reduces  overall  quality  of 
herbage.  In Moorepark  over the past 2 years (Table  4) a study  investigating  the milk 
and sward production  of grazing  swards  at two different  herbage  masses  (1600kg  
DM/ha  versus  2300kg  DM/ha)  was investigated.  The results  show that higher  milk 
production  per cow and per ha was achieved  by grazing  swards  at a low herbage 
mass 1200 - 1600kg DM/ha. Grass  growth  on the low herbage  mass farmlets  was 
5% higher  than that grown on the high herbage  mass farmlets  (15.2 versus  14.4t  
DM/ha). More frequent  rotations  stimulate  higher growth; lower herbage  mass  
swards  have higher  levels  of green  mass in the lower  horizons  of the sward.
Table  4. Effect  of low and high pre grazing  herbage  mass on milk production  
per cow and per ha from (April  to October)
Pre grazing  mass (kq DM/ha) 1600 2300
DMA 16 20 16 20
Year 1
Milk yield (kg/cow) 18.0 19.3 18.0 18.5
Milk Fat (%) 4.07 3.98 4.13 3.97
Milk protein  (%) 3.41 3.47 3.41 3.45
SR (LU/ha) 4.45 4.04 4.31 3.8
Year II
Milk yield (kg/cow) 18.2 20.1 17.9 18.9
Milk Fat (%) 4.08 3.99 4.06 4.06
Milk protein  (%) 3.50 3.55 3.52 3.52
SR (LU/ha) 4.0 3.85 4.01 3.93
MS/ha  2007 1295 1248 1259 1121
MS/ha  2008 1104 1174 1104 1124
Difference +52 (+4%)
Economic  impact  of increased  herbage  production
Animal  productivity  from grass is determined  by the amount  of grass grown,  utilised  
and its quality. Table 5 shows that as pasture  grown increased  from 12 to 16 t 
DM/ha,  the stock carrying  capacity  on 40ha increases  from 2.25 LU/ha to 2.81 
LU/ha.
31
For a 4t increase  in DM production,  carrying  capacity  increased  by 25%, resulting  in 
milk solids  increasing  from 32,353kg  to 40,435kg.  While  total costs increased  due to 
extra animals,  feed costs per kg reduced  (from 5.3 to 4.5c/kg)  as additional  grass  
was grown  for the same overall  land rental and maintenance  costs, and the overall  
profitability  of the system increased. When pasture utilisation  is maintained,  
increasing  total pasture  growth  increases  farm profit by €3,610  (€90/ha)  and €5,611  
(€140/ha)  where  milk price is 22.3 and 30.0c/litre,  respectively.
Table  5. The effect  of herbage  production  per hectare  and grass  utilisation  on 
key herd parameters  in a fixed land scenario  using anticipated  future  costs  
and prices  (Horan  and Shalloo,  2007)
Herbage  utilisation 75% 85%
Herbage  production  
(t DM/ha)12 14 16 12 14 16
Utilisable  herbage  
(t DM/ha)9 10.5 12.0 10.2 11.9 13.6
Total hectares  (ha) 40 40 40 40 40 40
Cow calving  (LU/ha) 77.2 87.3 96.9 85.4 96.2 106.4
Stocking  rate (ha) 2.14 2.42 2.68 2.36 2.66 2.94
Labour  units (h) 1.38 1.48 1.57 1.46 1.57 1.67
Milk produced  (kg) 452,794 512,044 567,764 500,486 564,153 623,653
Milk solids  sales 30,735 34,756 38,538 33,972 38,293 42,332
Labour costs (€) 31,466 33,778 35,952 33,327 35,811 38,133
Feed  costs/kg  milk (c) 5.4 5.1 4.8 5.1 4.8 4.5
Total costs (€) 100,519 108,018 115,062 106,317 114,348 121,851
Milk Price  (g) 22.3c/l
Milk returns  {€) 96,763 109,425 121,322 106,955 120,561 133,276
Margin  per cow (€) 151 216 265 205 262 305
Margin  per kg milk© 2.58 3.69 4.51 3.49 4.47 12.71
Total profit/farm  (€) 11683 18871 25629 17469 25192 32406
Milk Price  @ 30.3c/l
Milk returns  (€) 131,458 147,654 163,721 145,304 162,680 179,837
Margin  per cow (€) 603 656 705 657 702 745
Margin  per kg milk© 10.29 11.2 12.03 11,2 11.98 12.71
Total profit/farm  {€) 46,590 57,333 68,277 56,052 67,568 79,252
DM productivity  of permanent  pasture  versus  reseeding  swards
The focus of reseeding  is to establish  swards that will allow high animal  
performance,  DM production  and grass utilisation.  Much reseeding  in the past has 
focused  on the silage area, with little reseeding  on the grazing  platform. This 
strategy  is changing.  On dairy farms cows are the income  generators  and their 
grazing  area should have preference  for pasture  renovation.  Feed and fertiliser
32
costs are increasing,  and so it is logical therefore  to establish  swards  that are 
responsive  to fertiliser  and facilitate  the opportunity  to replace  grass silage and 
concentrate  at the  shoulder  grazing  periods.
The advantages  to reseeding  are;
• An 8% higher  milk output  per hectare  relative to permanent  pasture;
• Increased  sward  productivity  (+50%  in spring  and 20% in autumn);
• Improved  grass  quality,  up to 4 units (up to mid May);
• Nitrogen  responsive  swards  (24%  more responsive);
• Reduced  silage  requirement  - more  grass  available  in spring;
• Set up the farm to produce  grass  for high stocking  rates.
Current  reseeding  levels in Ireland
The total amount  of reseeding  in Ireland  (on an annual  basis) is low at about  3% of 
the agricultural  area (c. 140,000ha)  being reseeded  each year. To attain high levels  
of performance  from grass, the level of reseeding  by dairy farmers  will have to be 
significantly  increased.  Given poor performance  nationally  per cow and per ha, it 
appears  that the quality of grass swards  on farms is poor. Table 6 shows the 
amount  of certified  forage  mixtures  sold in the last decade. Last year the level of 
seed sales dropped  considerably  (24%),  due mainly  to the poor weather  conditions 
last autumn  where  farmers  didn't  get a chance  to reseed  pasture.
Year Tons/sold
07/08 2492
07/06 3281
06/05 3334
05/04 3232
04/03 3315
03/02 3165
02/01 3353
01/00 3341
00/99 3511
Source:  Department  of Agriculture,  Food and Fisheries
One of the interesting  results from the reseeding  survey (carried  out in autumn  
2008),  is the time of year when reseeding  is carried  out. It appears  that (especially  
in the Kerry and Connacht  Gold regions  - Table 7), too much reseeding  is being  
targeted  for the autumn  period. From the weather  conditions  of 2007 and 2008,  
spring reseeding  appears  to offer a more reliable  window. Difficulties  encountered 
with autumn  reseeding  are: i) weather  can be variable,  and ii) if there is a delay  tilling  
land, post emergent  spraying  of the new reseed  is delayed  to the following  spring.  
This is too late to kill seeding  docks,  which  have become  well established.  Generally  
farmers  are now giving preference  to the grazing  area when reseeding  and this is 
correct,  silage ground,  which might not be part of the grazing  block, should  not be 
given preference  over the grazing  platform. From the three groups  surveyed  on 
average  23% of farmers  did not reseed  in the past three  years,  this figure  is too high.
33
All farms irrespective  of location  have poor performing  pastures.  Overall  farm DM 
productivity,  can only be increased  by renewing  the worst performing  of these  
annually.  Dairy  farmers  should  be targeting  at least 8-10%  of the farm for reseeding  
annually. In an era of dairy production  expansion,  the DM production  capacity  of 
expanding  farms  must be increased;  pasture  reseeding  will achieve  this.
Table  7. Results  of Kerry,  Connacht  Gold and a Technical  group  on reseeding  
management  on dairy  farms  in the last three  years
Area reseeded  annually
Area reseeded  (ha) 0 <2 <4 <8 <12 >12
Technical  group 24.6 12.3 14.0 21.0 6.1 21.9
Kerry 26.5 26.7 37.4 8.2 0.6 0.7
Connacht  Gold 17.1 8.6 60.1 12.4 1.5 0.3
Timing  of reseeding Area  completed
Spring Summer AutumnGrazing
AreaSilage
AreaGrazing
and
Silaqe
Technical  group 32.4 8.4 32.2 52.8 0 47.2
Kerry 11.9 5.2 69.1 54.8 5.9 39.3
Connacht  Gold 5.6 0.9 82.0 39.5 12.0 48.5
The net result  of a successful  reseeding  programme  is to create  a longer  and more  
productive  grass-growing  season. The target  for intensive  dairy farmers  is to grow  
18t grass per annum and utilise 85-90%  of what ’s grown (Moorepark  currently 
achieves  16t DM/ha). In addition,  high dry matter  intakes  can be achieved  from 
reseeded  pastures  that promote  high production  levels. Research  work at 
Moorepark  has shown milk output per ha increased  by 8% with a higher  grazing  
stocking  rate, from reseeded  swards  compared  to permanent  pasture  (Table  8). The 
biggest  limitation  of permanent  pasture  is poor growth in spring and poor pasture  
quality  mid-season.  On dairy farms this is the key period where major economic  
gains are made. At grazing,  a 1-unit increase  in digestibility  will increase  milk yield 
by 0.24kg/cow/day  and grass  dry matter  intake  by 0.2kg  cow/day.
Reseeding  doesn ’t mean  all of the above  will be realised,  it has to be combined  with 
good grazing  management  practice  and adequate  soil nutrient  status. However,  
protecting  the new sward  in the initial grazing  year ywill help achieve  some of these  
benefits.
Table  8. Milk production  from permanent  and reseeded  pastures (litres/cow)
Stocking  rate
PastureLow (2.09cows/ha)
Permanent ReseedHigh (2.63cows/hai 
Permanent Reseed
1978-1981
Increase3307 3418
3.4%3177 3420
Source;  McCarthy,  19847.7%
34
How much DM production  is lost bv not reseeding?
On farms,  swards  vary in productive  capability;  the perennial  ryegrass  content  of the 
pasture  determining  differences  in total DM and seasonality  of production,  A recent  
study in Moorepark  quantified  these differences,  ,where swards with different 
perennial  ryegrass  (PRG)  content  were established  (grass  seeding  rates varied  from 
2-12kg/ac  to achieve  this). All swards  received  the same level of chemical  fertiliser  
(230kg  N/ha). The differences  in DM production  are shown  in Table  9. As expected  
the largest difference  in DM production  (23%) was between  the swards  with the 
lowest and highest  PRG content. Over half of the DM production  difference  took 
place In the first two grazings  of the year (February  and April), Illustrating  that 
increasing  the proportion  of grass in the diet in early spring grazing is virtually 
impossible  with swards  with low levels  of PRG. Even swards  with 40% PRG had up 
to 46% lower DM production  in the Feb - April period  compared  to the 100% PRG 
pasture. The increases  in DM production  are obvious  when comparing  reseeded  
versus  old permanent  pasture;  however the difference  in response  to nitrogen  is also 
important.  Nitrogen  responses  decreased  by 7, 13, 18 and 24% for the 65, 40, 25 
and 10% PRG swards  compared  to the 100%  PRG treatment.
Table 9. Effect of swards  with different  levels of perennial  ryegrass  on 
seasonal  and total DM production  and the difference  (2008)
%
RyegrassFeb
28April
22May
12June
3June
27July
24Aug
13Sept
11Oct
26Total kg 
DM/ha
10 474 806 1319 1664 526 1405 1192 1309 1054 9749
25 520 1081 1537 1687 704 1625 1113 1228 920 10415
40 626 857 1456 1921 641 1451 1312 1471 1218 10958
65 969 1127 1576 1903 704 1607 1195 1426 1191 11697
100 1417 1347 1718 1921 783 1613 1263 1362 1253 12678
Percentage  reduction  inDM yield as percentage  of perennial  ryegrass  Increases
10 67 40 23 13 33 13 6 4 16 23
25 63 20 10 12 10 1 12 10 27 18
40 56 36 15 0 18 10 4 8 3 14
65 32 16 8 1 10 0 5 5 5 8
The economic  loss associated  with reductions  in DM production  between  productive 
and none productive  swards  is far greater  when swards  contain  only a minimal  
quantity  of PRG; - €292 in swards  with 10% PRG, €237 in swards  with 25% PRG,  
€202 in swards  with 40% PRG and €111 in swards  with 65% PRG when compared 
to the 100% PRG swards. Table 10 shows full reseeding  costs with all costs  
incorporated,  however  most farms have lower reseeding  costs than those outlined.  
Reseeding  is a medium  term investment  and should always be carried out to 
achieve  the best possible  results. In general,  the cost of reseeding  can be reduced  
to the contractor  cost (cultivation  and spraying),  seed and spray costs. Most of the 
machinery  costs are offset  by the farm itself. From the survey  results,  most farmers
35
place the cost of reseeding  at between  €150-200/ac  (€370-500/ha).  Given the 
economic  loss associated  with poor levels of PRG in pastures,  newly reseeded  
swards  will cover  the reseeding  costs within  2 years. Reseeding  swards  with <65%  
PRG Is worthwhile,  however  there may be other reasons  to reseed  swards,  e.g. 
poaching,  weeds  Infestation,  previous  poor variety  choice  etc.
Table  10. Conventional  method  full reseeding  (costs  2008/09)
€/acre
Soil test (€25 per 5 acres)  5
Spraying 10
Glyphosate  (Round-Up  (2 litre/acre)  21
Ploughing  (40) / Till & sowing  (one pass) (35) 75
Fertiliser  (2 bags x 10:10:20)  47
Fertiliser  spreading 10
Levelling 10
Rolling  10
Grass  seed  55
Total  - ex post emergence  sprays 243
Post  emergence  herdicide  soravs
Alistell-(1.5litre/ac-€30)  30
Legumex  DB - (2.8litre/ac  - €23) 23
Duplosan  - (1 litre - €9/ac)  9
Spraying  10
The contribution  of grass  breeding  to grassland  productivity
Gains from forage  grass breeding  have varied  widely  from one region  to another.  
Over  the last 50 years  gains in dry matter  yield (DMY)  of the important  forage  grass  
species,  such as perennial  ryegrass,  have been 4-5% per decade  in North Western  
Europe.  More recently  in the UK, the DMD of perennial  ryegrass  has been improved  
by 10g/kg (1%) per decade.
Table  11. Northern  Ireland  recommended  list data 1994-1995  to 2008/09
Grazing  DM yield 
(t/DM/ha)Silage  DM yield 
(t/DM/ha)
1994/95 11.8 13.6 Mean  of 50 varieties
2003/04 12.2 14.8 Mean  of 50 varieties
2008/09 12.4 15.2 Mean  of 52 varieties
Increase  (t/ha) 0.6 1.6
Increase/year 0.04 t DM 0.114  t DM
Source:  Northern  Ireland  Recommended  list
36
Grass DM production  from the Northern  Ireland  recommended  variety  list (Gilliland,  
2007) has Increased  by 0.04t DM/year  in grazed  s\wards  (frequent  han/esting)  and 
0.114t DM/ha/year  in silage swards (infrequent  harvesting).  This data shows a 
progressive  increase  in DM production  - on average  a net increase  of 5% DM yield 
over the last decade. Results  from Teagasc  Moorepark ’s grass growth  data would  
agree  with these  findings.
Current  evaluation  procedures  for Recommended  Lists
In Ireland,  North and South,  a grass  variety  recommended  list is published  annually.  
The Department  of Agriculture  In both countries  are responsible  for their respective  
lists. These lists are vital for the recommendation  of grass cultivars  and are the 
internationally  practised  method  of screening  cultivars  for the industry. However,  
there are differences  in the methods  (evaluation  protocols)  employed  by both 
departments  when evaluating  varieties.
Republic  of Ireland
Varieties  are evaluated  tor a minimum  of two separate  sowings  and four harvest  
years. Trials are conducted  at Backweston  Farm, Leixlip,  Co. Kildare;  Fermoy  Co, 
Cork; Raphoe,  Co. Donegal;  Athenry,  Co. Galway  and Kildalton  Co. Kilkenny.  
Perennial  ryegrasses  are sown In the autumn  and assessed  over the following  two 
years under  a 6 cut system  with 350kg  N/ha applied  per annum.
The main characteristics  considered  are:
(1) DM yields; Expressed  as a % of the yield of a basket  of control  varieties  
(selected  from the top 50% of varieties  on the outgoing  RL).
(2) Heading  date: is based  on the first heading  date in spring
(3) Ground  cover  score: Based  on visual assessment  of sward openness  at the 
end of fhe second  harvest  year.
(4) Spring  Growth:  Based  on the yield of first cut which  is harvested  in early-April
(5) Autumn  Growth:  Based  on the combined  yield of the last two cuts, which is 
measured  from mid-August.
(6) Grass DMD and VtfSC: Measured  from the spring,  two silage harvests  and 
autumn  DM yield
Agri-Food  and Biosciences  Institute  of Northern  Ireland  (AFBNI)
The AFBNI  system  is conducted  at a single  centre,  Crossnacreevy.  A three stage  
hierarchical  recommendation  scheme  is operated,  with varieties  entering  the list as 
provisional  'P' recommendation,  and then as more trial data are produced,  varieties 
potentially  progress  into the’ plain type' category  and finally  to the highest ’ bold type' 
class. This is achieved  through  a programme  of re-sowing  and sequential  testing  
that is designed  to link into the National  List programme.  At the end of the National  
List testing programme,  replication  of years permits  immediate  consideration  for 
provisional  recommendation.  Only consistently  very high performing  varieties  attain  
the bold type classification,  the main distinction  between  these three categories  is 
the amount  of data available  and so the precision  of the recommendation.
Perennial  ryegrass  varieties  are assessed  under simulated  rotational  grazing  
management  with 320kg N/ha applied per annum and under a 3-cut silage
37
management  with simulated  grazing  thereafter  - 350-kg  N/ha per annum  is applied.  
In the first year potential  new varieties  are grazed  with cattle with no yield data Is 
recorded.  In the second  and third year, they are assessed  for long-term  DM yield 
potential  under a simulated  rotational  grazing management  and a 3-cut silage  
management  respectively.  The seasonal  grazing  yield is calculated  from cuts taken  
at three weekly  Intervals  until June,  followed  by monthly  cuttings  after July 1. These  
cuts are divided  into four seasonal  periods  of spring (end of April), early summer  
(May-July),  late-summer  (July-September)  and autumn  (September  to November).  
The seasonal  silage yields comprise  a total of 5-cuts,  with 1, 2 and 3 cuts being  
taken  as the main silage  cuts, and the remaining  two cuts combined  as the aftermath  
grazing  performance.
The main characteristics  considered  are;
(1) DM yields: Total DM yield Is expressed  as a percentage  of the bold type 
diploid  varieties  in each group.
(2) Ground  cover:  Assessed  at the end of a harvest  year on a scale of 0 to 9 of 
increasing  density.
(3) Seasonal  grazing  yield: DM yield Is divided  into four seasonal  periods  of 
spring  (up to the end of April),  early summer  (May to July), late summer  (July 
to Sept.)  and autumn  (Sept,  to Nov.)
(4) Seasonal  Silage  yields:  Comprises  of a total of five cuts,  with first, second  and 
third being taken as the main silage cuts and the remaining  two cuts 
combined  as the aftermath  grazing  performance.
(5) Heading  date: is based  on the first heading  date in spring.
(6) In recent  years digestibility  of both 1^ and 2"“ cut silage  yield and simulated  
grazing  cut 6 are being  estimated.
Future  evaluation  systems
Current  grassland  management  practise  has moved  considerably  from traditional  
conservation  regimes  to more focussed  grazing  regimes. Evaluation  systems  of 
grass  cultivars  have moved  in some instances  (simulated  grazing  to mirror  frequent 
livestock  grazing).  In many ways the animal  effect is vital as it represents  the true 
evaluation  of a grass from both a grazing  and treading  perspective.  Internationally  
there is no common  approach  to grass evaluation,  however  a number  of countries  
have adopted  a simulated  grazing  protocol,  UK, Northern  Ireland, Holland,  New 
Zealand  (actual grazing). Work underway  at Moorepark  is comparing  varietal  
performance  between  actual grazing  and simulated  grazing  protocols,  with current 
evaluation  methods.  The focus is to develop  a simulated  grazing  protocol  that will 
represent  animal  grazing  systems.  This will mirror  the seasonality  of DM production  
of varieties  as achieved  in a commercial  farm grazing  situation.
Conclusions
On farm productivity  gain can be achieved  with better standards  in grassland  
management.  A key structure  that needs to be put in place is a productive  high 
quality  sward  - combined  with best grazing  management  practise  this will ensure  
high levels of performance  from the dairy herd. Currently  research  farms and the
38
better  commercial  farms are producing  16t grass DM/ha. It is possible  to increase  
levels beyond  this point. A realistic  objective  is to target 18t DM/ha  grass grown  on 
dairy farms. To achieve  this a number  of key grazing  management  guidelines  are 
listed  below:
i) Target  a long grazing  season  (280-300  days) with 10-11 grazing  rotations.  
The first and last rotation  should  be the longest  in length.
ii) Target  early spring  grazing  with high utilisation  - achieved  by grazing  to 
(4cm);
iii) Maintain  grazing covers of between  (1200-1 600kg DM/ha) during the 
grazing  season;
iv) Implement  a reseeding  strategy  (8-10%  of farm every  year), targeting  the 
lower  producing  paddocks;
v) Reseed  the grazing platform  - preferably  in spring (after the second  
rotation  in April);
vi) Choose  varieties  from the Irish Recommended  lists (Republic  and 
Northern  Ireland),  generally  three varieties  are sufficient  but ensure  the 
varieties  chosen have higher than average  figures for seasonality  of 
production,  quality  and density.
vii) Ensure  soil fertility  is at its optimum  for grass  DM production  i.e. soil test.
References
Dillon, P., Roche,  J.R., Shalloo,  L. and Horan,  B. (2005). Optimising  financial  return  
from grazing  in temperate  pastures.  In: J.J. Murphy  (ed.). Utilisation  of grazed  grass  
in temperate  animal  systems.  Pp: 131-148.  Proceedings  of a satellite  workshop  of 
the XXth International  Grassland  Congress,  Cork, Ireland. Wageningen  Academic  
Publishers,  The Netherlands.
Gilliland,  T. Northern  Ireland Grass Variety Recommended  List (Agri-Food  and 
Bbioscience  Institute  annual  publications)
Holmes,  C.W., Hoogendoorn,  C.J., Ryan, M.P. and Chu, A.C.P. (1992). Some  
effects  of herbage  composition,  as influenced  by previous  grazing  management,  on 
milk production  on ryegrass/white  clover  pastures.  1. Milk production  in early spring:  
effects  of different  regrowth  intervals  during  the preceding  winter  period. Grass  & 
Forage  Sci., 47:309-315.
Kennedy,  E., O'Donovan,  M., Murphy,  J.P., Delaby,  L. and O'Mara,  F. (2006). The 
effect of spring grazing  date and stocking  rate on sward characteristics  and dairy  
cow production  during  lactation.  J. Dairy  Sci. 90: 2035-2046.
Kennedy,  E., O'Donovan,  M., Murphy,  J.P., O’Mara, F. and Delaby,  L. (2007). The 
effect of initial spring grazing  date and subsequent  stocking  rate on the grazing  
management,  grass  dry matter  intake  and milk production  of diary cows in summer.  
Grass  & Forage  Sci., 61: 375-384.
MacCarthy,  D. (1984). Milk production  from grassland,  pi-66. In: Moorepark  25"’ 
Anniversary  Publication.  Part 1; Milk production;  AFT publication.
39
O Donovan,  M., Delaby,  L. and Peyraud,  J.L. (2004). Effect  of time of initial grazing  
date and subsequent  stocking rate on pasture production  and dairy cow 
performance.  Anim. Res. 53: 489-502.
Shalloo,  L., Dillon,  P., Rath, M. and Wallace,  E.M. (2004). Description  and validation  
of the Moorepark  Dairy  Systems  Model. J. Dairy Sci. 87:1945-1959.
Stakelum,  G. and Dillon, P. (2007). The effect of grazing  pressure  on rotationally  
grazed  pastures  in spring/early  summer  on subsequent  sward  characteristics.  Irish 
J. Agric. Food Res. 46:15-28.
40
Off farm rearing  of replacement  heifers
John Donworth,  George  Ramsbottom  and Riona  Sayers  
Teagasc
Summary
• Off-farm  rearing  of replacement  heifers  has the potential  to increase  profit/ha  on 
beef farms.
• Several  advantages  exist for the rearers,  including:
o Improved  cash flow due to a steady  monthly  income;  
o Freeing  up of the capital  required  to stock  the farm.
• Challenges  also exist for the rearer. These  include:
o Complying  with the wishes  of a third party (in this case the heifer owner)  on 
how the heifers  are raised;
o Engaging  in a new enterprise  with different  targets  - live weight,  reproductive  
and husbandry  than those  associated  with conventional  drystock  production.
• Animal  disease  issues,  both regulatory  and non-regulatory  may represent  a serious  
challenge  to both owner  and rearer  of replacement  heifers.
Introduction
A total of 225,400  in-calf  dairy heifers  were present  on Irish dairy farms in June 2008  
(CSC). Virtually  all of these were reared by their owners. This contrasts  with the 
situation  in New Zealand,  where  almost  90% of yearling  heifers  are contract  reared. If a 
similar  proportion  of heifers  were reared  on Irish beef farms,  approximately  7,000 beef 
farmers  could become  involved  in the business  (assuming  that on average  30 yearling  
heifers  were reared  per beef farm).
The structure  of the Irish dairy industry  is changing.  Issues  such as labour,  the size of 
the ‘grazing  platform ’ and the cost of investing  in additional  dairy facilities  become  
increasingly  important  as dairy farms expand. Such issues make off-farm  rearing  of 
replacement  heifers  an increasingly  attractive  option  for dairy farmers.  The objective  of 
this paper is to explore  the potential  of off-farm  heifer rearing  from the beef farmers  
perspective.
41
What  are the attractions  from the beef farmer ’s perspective?
Off farm heifer  rearing  is attractive  to the beef farmer  for a number  of reasons:
• It can provide  beef farmers  with a means  of utilising  their land and buildings 
without  investing  in stock  - reducing  the risk involved.
• The enterprise  can often be run as a part-time  enterprise.
• The need to go to the livestock  mart to buy and sell stock  is reduced.
• Cash flow can be improved  because  the ‘norm ’ is that the rearer  is paid by direct  
debit  on a monthly  basis.
• The business  may return  a higher  profit  than the rearer ’s existing  enterprise!
What  are the risks from the beef farmer's  perspective?
The issues  that need to be considered  with off-farm  heifer  rearing  include;
• Loss of control  in the day-to-day  management  of the replacement  heifers.
• The risk of a disease  outbreak.  With animals  on two farms,  the risk of either  
group contracting  diseases  such as TB, Leptospirosis  etc. is doubled. If the 
rearer  is simultaneously  taking  heifers  from other  owners  or has another  livestock  
enterprise  the risks may be further  multiplied.  Contingency  plans must be put in 
place to ensure  that an outbreak  of disease  does not have implications  for the 
smooth  return  of the heifers  to the dairy farm at the end of the rearing  period  or 
result  in calving  heifers  ‘stuck ’ with a rearer  with no facilities  to calve  or milk such 
animals.
• Possibly  poorer  replacement  heifers. Not all rearers  will be suitably  skilled to 
achieve  the target  weights  set down for replacement  heifers. It is imperative  that 
heifers  are weighed  at defined  times throughout  the rearing  process  to ensure  
that the appropriate  targets  are achieved.  A plan should be put in place in 
advance  of entering  the contract  to address  the issue where targets  are not 
reached  e.g. through  concentrate  supplementation  over winter.
• Risk of conflict  between  the owner  and rearer. In all cases,  clear targets  must be 
agreed  bv both parties  in advance  of entering  the contract  arrangement . In
addition,  an independent  arbitrator  should  be agreed  in advance  in the event  of a 
conflict  occurring  between  the owner  and rearer.
Many of the risks outlined  above  can be minimised  by preparing  a written  contract  of 
agreement.  It underdeveloped  heifers  are returned  to the farmer  who is at fault? The 
easy answer  is the rearer, however,  both parties  are at fault. The rearer failed to 
manage  the heifers  and the dairy farmer  failed  to manage  the rearer. Who will pay the 
higher  price? It is the dairy farmer ’s future  that has been damaged.  Heifers  that are 
underweight  at calving  will produce  less milk during  their lifetime.
42
Off farm rearing  of replacement  heifers  - The New Zealand  Experience
In New Zealand,  over 95% of the one million  yeariing  replacement  heifers  and 75% of
the yearling  heifers  are reared  off the main grazing  platform.
• The main reason  why heifers  are grazed  off farm is because  of the high stocking  
rates on the grazing  platform  - the national  average  is 2.8 cows/ha.
• Demand  for quality  heifer  rearers  is high, and exceeds  supply  as the dairy herd in 
New Zealand  has increased  by approximateiy  one third over the past 10 years.
• Formal  written  contracts  for rearing  repiacement  heifers  have been in piace for 
over 20 years. Approximately  70% of heifers  are grazed  off-farm  with a written  
contract  in place. The balance  don’t have a written  contract  and usually  involve  
owners  and rearers  who have a long established  business  relationship.
• Farmer experience  with replacement  heifer contracts  is that they are not 
foolproof , however  they are useful  in highlighting  the key management  issues  and 
targets  that need to be agreed  before  heifers  arrive  on the rearers  farm.
• TB is not a widespread  disease  in New Zealand  (0.34%  of herds are affected  
nationally)  and is rarely  an issue.
• The control of Bovine Viral Diarrhoea  (BVD) however,  is a major issue.  
Vaccination  of heifers  usuaily  takes place on the rearers'  farms. This is done  
primarily  for insurance  purposes  to ensure  that high pregnancy  rates are obtained  
as heifers  from different  sources  are mixed on rearers  farms. In addition,  stock  
bulls, by far the most commonly  used method  of breeding  heifers,  are usually  
BVD tested before  they are introduced  to the breeding  mobs on the rearers ’ 
farms. This test is carried  out to identify  the persistency  infected  (PI) stock bulls  
and ensure  that they do not come  in contact  with the heiters.
A variety  of payment  systems  are used.
• These  vary from a weekly  rate where  no formal  contract  exists  (they operate  most 
successfully  where established  grazers  with proven  track records  consistently  
deliver  replacements  of the required  standard).  Generally  such rearers  are in 
high demand  and deal with the same group  of customers  over a long period  of 
time so opportunities  to avail of their services  are limited.
• Fixed price contracts  with a ‘guarantee ’ to achieve  a certain  liveweight  gain are 
the second  payment  system. Such contracts  were more commonly  employed  by 
the grazing  companies.  Heifer  liveweight  gain is monitored  frequently  (every  6-8 
weeks)  as such weighings  form the basis  for payment  and are a usefui  means  of 
informing  the owner  of how his animals  are performing.  These  contracts  usually  
have inbuilt  bonuses  and penalty  clauses  for liveweight  gain above  or beiow  the 
agreed  targets. While generally  higher  cost, the additional  costs involved  could  
be viewed  as an insurance  policy  to ensure  that the appropriate  liveweight  gains  
are being  achieved.
43
In general,  payment  is made on ‘the first of the month basis' directly  into the 
grazier's  bank account. In addition  to the ‘bed and breakfast'  costs outlined  
above,  extra  costs  are also incurred  whiie heifers  are off-farm.  These  include  the 
costs of bull hire, dosing, vaccination  and synchronisation  programmes  and 
transport.
Disease  control  in Ireland
Diseases  associated  with replacement  heifers fall into two categories  - regulatory  
diseases  (TB and brucellosis)  and non-regulatory  diseases.  These include  the viral 
diseases,  BVD and IBR, bacterial  diseases,  leptospirosis,  Johne ’s, Salmonellosis,  
Mycoplasmosis  and parasitic  diseases  such as Neosporosis.
The fundamental  step in any biosecurity  programme  to protect  against  the diseases  
listed  above  is the maintenance  of a closed  herd policy,  i.e. no cattle movement  onto the 
farm. Engaging  in off-farm  heifer  rearing  makes  closed  herd farming  an unrealistic  goal, 
and a number  of other biosecurity  measures  should  be strictly  implemented  to reduce  
the disease  risk.
When  off-farm  heifer  rearing  is being practised,  always;
♦ Establish  the current  disease  status of the herd of origin. Such information  is 
important  in determining  the likelihood  of disease  exposure  before  the heifers  leave 
the farm, and is absolutely  critical  to management  of the heifer herd once they are 
re-introduced  to the herd. They will need protection  (e.g. management  and 
vaccination  strategies)  against  circulating  diseases  in the herd of origin before  their 
re-introduction.
♦ Ideally  engage  in a contract  with a single  dairy  farm.
♦ Implement  a strategic  vaccination  protocol  for heifers  based  on the disease  status  of 
the farm of origin,  e.g. if required,  BVD vaccination  should  be carried  out at a specific  
time before breeding  (specified  by the vaccine  manufacturer)  and heifers should 
receive  a primary  course  of two injections  separated  by a correct  time interval.  
Incorrectly  administered  vaccines  will not yield the desired level of disease  
protection.
♦ Implement  a parasite  control  strategy  to include  roundworm,  fluke and lungworm.
♦ Return  in-calf  heifers  to the owners  farm 6 weeks  before  they calve  down. This is to 
ensure  that they are not being transported  on the point-of-calving  and are properly  
acclimatised  to their environment  so that they also have the required  level of 'local'  
antibodies  in their system  before  calving.
44
♦ The pre-movement  test should  be carried  out when heifers  are approximately  22 
months  of age. Its specific  date should  take into account  the time lag between  the 
taking of tests and the results  being returned  to the farmer,  e.g. a TB test takes 3 
days before  the results  are relayed  back to the farmer. If a blood  test is required,  at 
least 5 days will elapse  before  the results  are relayed  back  to the farmer.
Replacement  heifer  liveweight  targets
Liveweight  is a key component  of successful  heifer  rearing.  Replacement  heifers  should  
weigh 30%, 60% and 90% of mature  liveweight  at 6 months  of age, pre-breeding  and 
pre-calving  respectively.  The recommended  pre-calving  weights  of replacement  heifers  
for a variety  of breeds  are presented  in Table  1.
Table  1. Recommended  pre-calving  liveweights  of replacement  heifers  by breed
Breed Weight  (kg)
Holstein-Friesian 560
Norwegian  Red 530
Norwegian  Red / Holstein  Friesian  Cross 560
New Zealand  Friesian  (pure) 530
New Zealand  / Holstein  Friesian  Cross 560
Montbeliarde 560
Jersey 410
Jersey  / Holstein  Friesian  Cross 490
Economics  of replacement  rearing  for the beef farmer
Rearing  replacement  heifers  is justified  if both the dairy and the beef farmer  benefit  from 
the process.  For the enterprise  to be attractive  to the rearer,  the margin  earned  must be 
greater  than that currently  available  from sheep  or cattle  farming.  The data in
45
Table  2 shows  the trends  in net profit  (€/ha)  excluding  premia  for the top 1/3 of breeding  
and non-breeding  beef farms  for the years  2006,  2007  and 2008.
Table  2. Net margin  (€/ha)  for the top 1/3 of suckler  and non-breeding  beef farms  
(2006-2008  inclusive)
YearNet margin/ha  
Suckling  farms/haNet margin/ha  
Non-breeding  farms/ha
2006 €134 €324
2007 €97 €199
2008 €61 €83
Average €97 €202
For many beef farmers,  the data suggests  that a review of the income  generating  
potential  of their beef enterprises  is warranted.  For some,  the option  of improving  their 
income  through  rearing  replacements  for the dairy industry  may be a real alternative.  In 
estimating  the potential  profitability  of the enterprise,  it is necessary  to first look at the 
costs  of replacement  heifer  rearing.
The costs included  in Table 3 are those incorporated  in the EBI model (Shalloo,  2003) 
and updated  in 2007.
46
Table 3. Costs associated  with rearing  replacement  heifers  to calving  at 24 
months  of age (based  on Fischler  costs  and prices)
Category Cost (€)
Variable  costs
Concentrates 142
Fertilizer,  lime & reseeding 201
Land rental 194
Machinery  hire 9
Silage  making 89
Vet, Al & medicine 128
Total  variable  costs 763
Fixed  costs
Car use, water  & electricity 30
Labour 221
Machinery  operation  & repair 20
Phone 10
Insurance,  A/C’s, transport,  sundry 39
Interest  repayments  - term loan 66
Total  fixed costs 386
Depreciation
Buildings 55
Machinery 22
Total  costs 1,226
Initial value  of the calf 350
Sales  of heifers  failing  to conceive -23
Net cost of rearing  a replacement  heifer 1,553
The net cost of rearing  a replacement  is €1,553  per head. The figure  includes  a charge  
of €221 per head for the farmers ’ own labour. A land charge  based  on an opportunity  
cost of €291/ha  (€118/ac)  is also included. An adjustment  for the cost of empty  
replacement  heifers  is incorporated  in the model. The rearer  will incur both variable  and 
fixed costs. Typically,  calves  will move to the rearer ’s farm on the May 1. They will 
return  home  in early December  of the following  year.
47
The data in Table 4 indicates  the level of cost that may be incurred  while on the beef 
farm. It excludes  the costs incurred  prior to the arrival  on the beef farm (at 3 months  of 
age) and those incurred  after the heifers  return home  to the dairy farmers  own herd (at 
22 months  of age).
Table 4. Estimate  of variable  and fixed costs incurred  in rearing  spring born  
replacement  heifers  from May 1 to December  1 of the following  year
No. days
Breed  of animalMay 1 to December  1 
579
Holstein  Friesian
Concentrates' €48
Grass^ €183
Silage® €99
Vet/AI €70
Fixed  costs €104
Labour €180
Total €684
Cost/week €8.27
Cost/day €1.18
Average  daily gain 0.83 kq
'Concentrate  input estimated  at 220kg  from May 1 to Dec. 1 the following  year.
^Grass  and silage  costs  include  a land charge  estimated  at €350/ha  for the beef farmer ’s 
land.
^No silage  is fed during  the second  winter  on the beef farm
The costs  of rearing  replacements  will vary considerably  from farm to farm.
• Some  rearers  will feed more  concentrates  than the quantity  assumed  in Table  4.
• Additional  silage  may be required  at the start of the second  winter.
• Some  farmers  may feed kale during  the first winter,  which  would  decrease  costs.
The daily heifer  rearing  costs  will range  from €1.00/day  to €1.35/day.
48
The labour  charge  assumed  in Table  4 is €15 per hour and the time incurred  is 12 hours  
per heifer  for the 579 day period. This includes  the cost of heat detection.  The number  
of hours  spent  rearing  the replacement  heifers  may be lower  on beef farms  where  labour  
is more efficiently  employed  than average,  or where  heifers  are bred to a stock bull (so 
that labour  intensive  heat detection  is not required.
In Table  5, the return  to labour  per hectare  for the beef farmer  for rearing  replacement  
heifers,  for different  stocking  rates and charges  based  on the costs outlined  in Table  4 
before  labour,  is estimated  as follows.
Table  5. Estimated  return  (€/ha)  to the beef farmer  for replacement  heifer  rearing
Fee (€/heifer/day)
Stocking  rate (heifer  unit/ha)'0.90
2 31.00
2 31.
210
31.20
2 3
Receipts  (€/ha) 1042 1563 1158 1737 1274 1911 1390 2084
Costs  excl. labour  (€/ha) 1008 1512 1008 1512 1008 1512 1008 1512
Margin  for labour  (€/ha) 34 51 150 225 266 399 382 572
~A heifer  unit is a weanling  and yearling  heifer,  i.e. 3 heifer units per hectare  equals  3
weanling  and 3 yearling  heifers  per hectare.
According  to the data presented  in Table 5, the margin  obtained  per hectare  for labour  
varies  considerably  with the daily fee paid, and the stocking  rate. At current  milk prices,  
dairy farmers  will be especially  sensitive  to the fees charged  for off-farm  rearing  of 
replacement  heifers.
Depending  on the fee agreed,  the return per hectare  might potentially  be higher  than 
that generated  on the top one-third  of suckling  and non-breeding  beef farms. However  
stock and grassland  management  skills must be excellent  to achieve  the target  weights  
demanded  of replacement  heifer rearing. In addition,  excellent  skills in reproductive  
management  are required  of the beef farmer. They must also have suitable  facilities  for 
over wintering  the heifer. Ideally  such animals  should  be housed  in cubicles,  as this is 
generally  the preferred  overwintering  option  of mature  cows.
49
Maximising  grazed grass  
Lessons  from Curtins  2008pushing up stocking  rate.
Brendan  Horan,  John Coleman,  Brian McCarthy  and Aidan  Brennan  
Teagasc  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork
‘On the seabed,  the strongest  coral  always  grows  In the most  turbulent  waters ’
Introduction
The introduction  of milk quotas  on Irish dairy farms capped  production  and focused 
producers  on profitabilify  per litre of quota by reducing  production  costs on their fixed 
quotas  (Shalloo  et a!., 2004). This policy  indirectly  motivated  producers  to increase  milk 
production  performance  per cow and resulted  in gross under  production  and utilisation 
of homegrown  feed on Irish farms. Recent  analysis  carried  out within the EU has 
suggested  that milk quotas are now constraining  the development  of an efficient  
European  dairy industry  (van Berkum  and Helming,  2006). Quota deregulation  will 
result  in a reduction  in dairy farm numbers  with international  prices  determining  the price 
received  by farmers  for their milk, an expansion  in production  with increases  in cow 
numbers  and land conversions  from other enterprises  to dairying,  reductions  in input 
costs, increases  in productivity  as farmers reduce expenditure  and redistribute  
resources  to areas of comparative  advantage  (Philpott,  1995). Ireland has a 
comparative  advantage  over other countries  in the production  of milk because  of our 
temperate  grass growing  climate  and lower costs of milk production.  Lips and Rieder 
(2005),  in an international  analysis  of the impact  of quota change  projected  that EU 
quota  abolition  will allow  production  to move  to areas  of competitive  advantage  such as 
Denmark,  Ireland  and the Netherlands,  predicting  that milk production  in Ireland  could  
increase  by up to 39% post quotas. A further  study of Irish dairy farmers  in 2007  
(O’Donnell  et a!., 2008) showed  that with best practice  management  among  existing  
suppliers,  milk production  could  increase  by 80% post milk quotas.
Recent  EU level policy outlook  press releases  suggest  that EU milk quotas  will be 
increased  by 9% between  2008 and 2015. This increase  which includes  a 2% rise in 
April 2008 is anticipated  to include  an approximate  2% increase  due to the removal  of 
butterfat  correction  on quotas  as part of fhe Health  check review  in 2009 and further  
annual  1% increases  in overall  EU quotas  between  2009 and 2015. There  are only 6 
countries  anticipated  to increase  milk production  inline with quota increases  (Austria,  
Denmark,  Germany,  Ireland,  Italy, Luxembourg  and The Netherlands)  and it is also 
expected  that only 2/3^'* or 6% of the total increase  in quotas  will be taken up in the 
period  to 2015. On that basis  and taking  into consideration  the EU preference  for a ‘soft 
landing'  for dairy markets  prior to quota  removal  in 2015, EU dairy farmers  are unlikely  
to experience  milk quotas  beyond  2011 if not before.
50
A brief history  and change  in objective  for dairy  production  research
Under the quota system, increased  profitability  could only be achieved  through  
increases  in efficiency  at farm level, \with producers  focused  on management  strategies  
that reduced  costs of production  to a minimum. With the removal  of milk quotas,  the 
objective  of the production  system  must become  profit maximisation  achieved  through  
increased  scale at farm level and the development  of a new business  ethos on Irish 
dairy farms as the production  frontier  changes  to the next most limiting  factor of 
production.  While  in the short-term,  expansion  at farm level may be constrained  by the 
availability  of replacement  heifers,  the inevitable  longer-term  limitation  will be the area 
and pasture  productivity  of land within walking  distance  of the milking  parlour. The 
objective  of farm systems  at both farm gate and research  level must  therefore  be 
to maximise  profitability  per hectare  through  excellence  in grassland  management  
practice  to facilitate  increased  overall  farm stocking  rates in combination  with the 
realisation  of appropriate  animals  to suit expansive  systems.  Successful  farming  
systems  must also facilitate  sustainable  profitability  irrespective  of fluctuations  in milk 
prices,  interest  rates and operational  costs. At a practical  level,  for the first time Irish 
dairy  farms  must  now deliver  sufficient  feed to allow  dairy  farmers  to expand  herd  
size post quotas  without  increasing  their exposure  to high cost external  feed 
sources.
Table 1 below outlines  the overall  changes  in management  practice  at Curtins  farm, 
Moorepark  over the last 8 years  as well as the impact  of management  changes  towards  
the development  of superior  milk production  systems  for a quota  free environment.  The 
overall  objective  of all systems  research  is now to increase  farm profitability  per hectare  
by implementing  practices  that increase  the amount  of energy  harvested  per hectare  for 
milk production,  by increasing  milk solids production  from home grown feed while  
improving  nutrient  use efficiency.  Unlike  the results  presented  from Lincoln  University  
dairy farm, Curtins  can still be considered  at an early developmental  phase  in terms  of 
these new systems  characteristics.  As illustrated  in the Table  1, the stocking  rate on the 
farm has increased  from 2.5 LU/ha  in 2005 to 2.82 LU/ha  in 2008, while reducing  both 
concentrate  use and artificial  fertiliser  usage. Grazing  management  practice  has 
resulted  in total pasture  production  increases  by 25% from 12.5ton  DM/ha  on grazing  
paddocks  in the 2001 to 2005 period  to 15.7 tons DM/ha  in 2008. (This increase  in total 
growth  has resulted  in the development  of a surplus  of 1.6 tons of DM per hectare  on 
the farm, which will increase  stock carrying  capacity  to 3.3 LU per hectare  for next 
season.)  Milk solids  production  per cow has fallen  from 500 to 430kg  due to increased  
grazing intensity  and reduction  in concentrate  usage, and consequently  milk solids  
production  per hectare  has largely  remained  static. The net consequence  of these  
initial 2 years  of development  have been to identify  significant  quantities  of extra  
feed within the system,  which coupled  with a further  increase  in overall  farm  
stocking  rate to 3.3 LU/ha will facilitate  the realisation  of increased  milk solids  
production  per hectare  from home  grown  feed in future  years. The productivity  gain 
indicators  on which success  will be judged  over the next 5 years are outlined  in the 
target  column  of Table  1 below.
51
In terms of the individual  management  practices,  the challenge  within the farm gate is 
essentially  four fold:
• Environmental  sustainability  based  on increased  nutrient  use efficiency;
• Grow  more higher  quality  grass  on each paddock  within  the farm;
• Manage  for high animal  performance  and a long grazing  season;
• Develop  appropriate  animals  for high productivity  within  this system.
Table  1. A comparison  of the Curtins  farm production  system  2001-2008
Year 2001-2005 2007 2008 Target
Stocking  rate (LU/ha) 2.5 2.65 2.89 3.3
Concentrate  (kg/cow) 350 190 275
Fertilizer  (kg N/ha) 300 305 246 250
Grass  growth  (t DM/ha/yr) 12.5 14.7 16.0 18
Surplus  feed (t DM/ha) - 1.7 1.6
Milk solids  (kg/cow) 500 478 420 450
(kg/ha) 1,250 1,254 1,220 1,500
Environmental  sustainability  based  on increased  nutrient  use efficiency
Increased  nutrient  efficiency  must be a primary  objective  of all production  systems  into 
the future and therefore,  the optimisation  of agronomic  practices  and strategies  to 
minimise  environmental  impact  are paramount  within higher  stocking  density  systems. 
The N surplus  of a farm taking into consideration  total N input (i.e. fertilizer  and 
concentrates)  and output  (milk, meat and harvested  feeds)  can be used as a stable  and 
informative  index of efficiency  of N use within the farm. Table 2 shows  the farm gate 
surplus  and N use efficiency  for a range of Irish milk production  systems.  The mean  
annual  farm-gate  N surplus  based on the average  National  Farm Survey  (NFS) dairy  
farm is 162kg  with N use efficiency  of 24%. This is achieved  at a stocking  rate of 1.9 
cows/ha,  nitrogen  input of 175kg N/ha, concentrate  input of 669kg/cow  and with a milk 
output  of 638kg  of milk solids/ha.  Using data from Curtins  farm average  from 2001 to 
2005 (McCarthy  et ai, 2007),  the mean annual  farm-gate  surplus  was 226kg  N/ha with 
an N use efficiency  of 29%. This was achieved  at a stocking  rate of 2.47 cows/ha, 
nitrogen  input of 300kg N/ha, concentrate  input of 358kg/cow  and a milk output of 
1,225kg  of milk solids/ha.  The target  for 2010 is that N surplus/ha  is reduced  to 155kg  
and efficiency  is increased  to 43% with a milk output  of 1,500 kg of milk solids/ha.  
These increases  will be achieved  through  better grazing  management  (growing  and 
utilising  more grass),  which also results  in more active nutrient  cycles (N, P, K, S), 
greater  tactical  use of chemical  N fertilizer  and increased  use efficiency  of organic  N 
fertilizer.
52
Table  2. Effect  of various  Irish grass-based  systems  on N-use  efficiency
NFS' CRT 2005'' CRT2010'^
Cow intakes  - grass  (kg DM/cow) 2546 4040 3,516
- silage  (kg DM/cow) 1272 1133 981
- concentrates  (kg DM/cow) 669 358 324
Stocking  rate (cow/ha) 1.90 2.47 3.3
Nitrogen  (kg N/ha) 175 300 250
Milk solids  (kg/ha) 630 1217 1,500
N imported  (kg/ha) 214 320 274
N exported  (kg/ha) 52 94 119
Grazing  days (No.) 220 275 285
N surplus  (kg/ha) 162 226 155
N efficiency  (%) 24 29 43
Growing  more  higher  quality  grass
The extent  to which new growth  occurs  is dependant  on soil fertility,  climatic  conditions  
(moisture,  sunlight)  and sward  characteristics  (variety  and leaf area). The approach  to 
maximising  pasture  production  has focused  on creating  the ideal environment  for growth  
by:
• Annually  reviewing  soil fertility
• Maximising  sward sunlight  penetration  bv grazing  to 3.5cm residual  height . The 
sward  grazing  residual,  combined  with grazing  interval  and pre-grazing  height  are 
the primary determinants  of overall pasture production,  where net pasture  
production  results  from the difference  between  pasture  growth  and decay  within  the 
sward. Optimal  growth  will be achieved  by grazing  to keep stem compressed  and 
the growing  point below  grazing  height. If stem is allowed  to elongate,  the growing  
point will be removed  during the grazing  process  resulting  in reduced  regrowth  
rates. The optimum  postgrazing  height  for net pasture  production  is 3.5cm. In 
poorly grazed  swards  (>4cm residual),  the remaining  material  decays  while the 
shading  effect of this material  prevents  light reaching  the primary  growing  points  
(newly  formed  tillers at the base of the sward). Figure 1 below illustrates  the 
impact  of residual  grazing  height  on net leaf production  from the sward.
53
Figure  1. Relationship  between  herbage  mass  and leaf growth,  leaf senescence,  
and net herbage  production  in continuously  grazed swards (adapted  from  
Bircham  and Hodgson,  1983)
120
TOO
80
60 -
600  1OOO  1500
llerhst^v  mass  <k|£ l>>Nf/tia>
S^ard  hei}>ht  (cm)
When  residual  grazing  height  is 6cm, approximately  30% of the material  remaining  
in the sward  is senesced  and unavailable  for future  production.  At a practical  level,  
grazing  to 3.5cm  removes  the requirement  for topping,  which further  reduces  total 
annual  production  by 3 to 5%.
Maximise  sward  leaf area bv realising  the optimal  grazing  horizon . Leaf area within 
the sward  determines  the portion  of incoming  solar radiation  that is intercepted  and 
absorbed  by green leaf. While  maintaining  an optimal  grazing  residual  will ensure  
green leaf availability  to the sward base, ensuring  that the pregrazing  herbage  
mass is maintained  at 1,200 to 1,400kg DM per hectare  will ensure  that the 
postgrazing  pasture  is leafy to the base and capable  of trapping  light from the day 
of grazing.
Identify  and reseed  15% of the lowest  productivity  sward each season . At high 
stocking  rates,  feed budgetary  requirements  will restrict  opportunities  for reseeding.  
Spring  reseeding  in mid-April  will allow area to be removed  from the system  for 7 
weeks  without  influencing  the overall  feed budget. Varieties  currently  being used  
include  Tyrella  and Bealey.
54
Manage  for high animal  performance  over a long grazing  season
Within  the context  of the grazing  residual  criteria  outlined  above,  management  practice  
will continue  to have a significant  impact  on the ability  of herds to achieve  high animal  
performance  over an extended  grazing  season. In this respect  there are three critical  
components:
a) An understanding  that production  today  is of less importance  than production  for 
the year.
b) Measurement  and feed budgeting.  As stocking  rates increase,  the financial  
implications  of deviation  from the herd feed budget  are likely to cause  significant  
financial  loss. On that basis, management  practice  must be disciplined  to react  
swiftly  (based  on measurement)  to any surplus/deficit  within  the system. Figure  2 
below  represents  the feed budget  for Curtins  farm over the winter/spring  period  
and illustrates  how immediate  reaction  to unanticipated  changes  to pasture  
growth  can ensure  that minimum  additional  cost is incurred  while still extending  
the grazing  season  into late November.
Figure  2. Curtins  farm feed budget  2008/2009
c) Maintaining  the grazing  horizon. The DM intake of the dairy herd is partially  
determined  by residual  grazing  height, but also by the relationship  between  
pregrazing  herbage  mass and postgrazing  residual  height. As evident  from 
Figure  3 below  (INRA,  2007),  a DM intake  of 15kg per cow per day will only be 
achieved  where  pregrazing  sward height  is maintained  at 8cm. For every 1cm 
increase  in pregrazing  sward height above 8cm, pasture  DM intake will be 
reduced  by 0.5kg DM per cow per day or equivalent  to 0.11kg MS per cow per 
day.
55
Figure 3. The relationship  between  pasture pregrazing  height, pasture  
postgrazing  height  and DM intake  per cow per day (adapted  from iNRA,  2007)
d) Changing  cow behaviour  to increase  DM intake. The habitual  behaviour  of dairy 
cows is often ignored  by dairy farmers  and can have important  consequences  on 
animal  performance  from pasture.  Previous  grazing  behaviour  experiments  have  
observed  two main grazing  bouts  during  the day, one in the morning  and another  
in the evening  (Linnane  et al., 2001; Rook et al., 1994),  generally  coinciding  with 
the time cows return  to pasture  after milking.  Kennedy  et al., (2009)  designed  an 
experiment  to manipulate  cow grazing  behaviour  to increase  daily DM intake  and 
maintain  performance  during periods  of inclement  weather.  The hypothesis  of 
the experiment  was to restrict  access  time to pasture,  to periods  of the day when  
advantage  could be taken of the cow’s natural  instinct  to graze/forage  - early in 
the morning  and later in the evening. Three treatments  were used during  the 
experiment;  cows at grass  full-time  between  milkings  (24hr),  cows at grass  for 9 
hours between  morning  and evening  milking  only (9hr) and finally  cows at grass 
for 2 periods  of 3 hours after each milking  (2x3hr)  with no silage offered  to 
animals  when housed.  Table  3 below  illustrates  the results  from this experiment.
56
Table  3. The impact  of restricted  access  time on animal  performance  and grazing  
behaviour
Access  time (hr) 24 9 2x3
Milk solids  yield (kg/day) 1.7 1.7 1.6
Grazing  time (hr/day) 9.0 7.2 5.8
% of time spent  grazing 41 80 97
DM Intake  (kg/cow/day) 17.4 15.7 16.6
% of 24hr intake  achieved 90 95
Kennedy  et al., 2009
The results  show  that where  cows are given access  to pasture  for only 6 hours  per day 
in two three hour blocks/periods,  animals  have a much greater  grazing  efficiency,  and 
will compensate  for the short access  time by adjusting  their natural  grazing  behaviour  
(grazing  time and bite rate) to achieve  95% of total 24 hour intake through  increased  
foraging  behaviour  during  the grazing  window.  On the basis  of this study,  management  
practice  has been adjusted  to restrict  access  time during inclement  conditions,  while  
providing  no silage to animals  at housing  thereby  ensuring  a greater  compulsion  to 
graze  at the next allocation.
Develop  appropriate  animals  for high productivity  within  this system
The system  as outlined  above  is based  on creating  the ideal environment  within  the farm 
to grow higher  quantities  of higher  energy  pasture  which can in turn feed additional  
animals  and consequently  realise  new levels  of productivity.  This process  will only be 
successful  if animals capable  of high milk solids production,  good reproductive  
performance  and satisfactory  BCS can be identified  for higher  stocking  rate systems.  
Recent  results  at Teagasc  Moorepark  (Coleman  et al., 2008, Table  4) have shown  that 
higher EBI animals  will deliver  increased  milk solids production  within the context  of 
such systems,  while exhibiting  superior  reproductive  performance  to lower EBI animals.  
The results also indicate  that the overall level of reproductive  efficiency  within such 
systems  is sub-optimal  and therefore  continued  genetic  selection  for fertility  traits will be 
required  to achieve  desirable  levels  of reproductive  efficiency.
Ultimately,  excellence  in grassland  management  will reach a certain  energy  production  
capacity  within  the farm gate at which  point further  increases  in productivity  can only be 
realised  through  increases  in feed conversion  efficiency.  While Irish dairy farms are 
many years removed  from reaching  the feed production  capacity  of their farms, the 
selection  of animals  with increased  feed conversion  efficiency  must now begin in
57
earnest  to realise  such animal characteristics  in advance  of this necessity.  On that 
basis,  recent  results  from the New Zealand  Cattle  Database  (LIC, 2007)  show  that within 
the New Zealand  cow population,  high genetic  potential  (EBI/BW)  Jersey  cross-Holstein-  
Friesian  progeny  outperform  the two parent breeds  in terms of lifetime  productivity,  
survival  and feed conversion  efficiency  (Table  5),
Table 4. The impact of genotype  on the milk production  and reproductive  
performance  of Holstein-Friesian  dairy  cows  within  likely  futuristic  pasture-based  
production  systems
Genotype NALow' NAHiqh" NZHigh"
EBI (€) 46 90 84
Milk subindex  (€) 36 41 41
Fertility  subindex  (€) 12 41 50
Calving  date (Day of year) 28- Feb 22-  Feb 18-  Feb
Concentrate  (kg/cow) 215 213 225
Milk solids  (kg/cow) 435 439 437
(kg/ha) 1,121 1,138 1,175
Average  lactation  weight  (kg) 562 566 540
Average  lactation  BCS 2.73 2.77 2.89
24 day submission  rate (%) 73 93 90
Pregnancy  rate in 42 days (%) 51 63 69
Empty  rate (%) 23 19 15
'North  American  Low EBI, ''North  American  Fligh EBI, "New  Zealand  High EBI
Table  5. Productive  performance  and measures  of efficiency  of the major  breed
groups  of dairy cattle in New Zealand  (production  season 2006-07;  Livestock
Improvement,  2007)
Breed  of cow
MeasurementHolstein-  
Friesian  (F)Jersey  (J)Crossbred
(JFX)
Number  of lactating  cows 942,121 344,785 749,713
Lactation  length,  days 220 223 223
Milk solids  yield kg 335 296 334
Live weight,  kg 468 381 442
Pasture  dry matter  required,  kg' 4454 3732 4234
Feed conversion  efficiency^ 75.2 79.3 78.9
'Pasture  dry matter required  for production,  maintenance  and pregnancy  calculated  
according  to AFRC  (1991).
^Feed  conversion  efficiency  calculated  as (kg fat + kg protein)/t  pasture  dry matter.
58
As illustrated  in Table 5, Holstein-Friesian  cows produce  on average  34kg milk solids  
more than Jersey  cows,  but are on average  112kg  heavier  than Jersey  cows. Holstein-  
Friesian/Jersey  crossbreds  are intermediate  for productivity  and liveweight  in 
comparison  with straight  bred Holstein-Friesian  and Jersey  cows. Jersey  cows have the 
highest  feed conversion  (kilograms  of fat plus protein/kg  pasture  DM eaten)  compared  
with the other breed  groups. Consistent  with this finding,  a review  of 11 experiments  by 
Grainger  and Goddard  (2004)  showed  that Jersey  cows had higher  DM intake  per 100kg 
live weight,  and had higher feed conversion  efficiency  (g milk solids per kg of DM 
intake).
Conclusions
Recent  research  results  within Irish grass-based  systems  demonstrate  that considerable  
potential  exists  to increase  pasture  growth  and quality  beyond  historical  levels  through  
improved  management  practice,  in combination  with a reseeding  programme  on poorly  
performing  pastures. When this increase  in sward productivity  is matched  with an 
appropriate  stocking  rate, the performance  and profit potential  per hectare  of Irish dairy  
farms can increase  significantly  in a no milk quota scenario  and on that basis  
management  systems  (animals  and pastures)  should  now be implemented  towards  this 
defining  objective.
(Weekly updates on research herds at Moorepark  are available online at; 
www.aaresearch.teaaasc.ie/mooreDark )
Acknowledgements
Teagasc  Moorepark  wishes  to acknowledge  National  Dairy Levy, NDP and EU Funding  
for this research.
References
Bircham,  J. and Hodgson,  J. (1983). The influence  of sward condition  on rates of 
herbage growth and senescence  in mixed swards under continuous  stocking  
management.  Grass  and Forage  Sci. 38: 323-331.
Coleman,  J., Horan,  B., Berry, D., O’Connor,  P. and Rath, M. (2008). The influence  of 
genetic  selection  and feed system  on the milk production  performance  of spring  calving  
dairy cows. (Pars.  Comm.).
Grainger,  C. and Goddard,  M.E. (2004). A review  of the effect of dairy cow breed on 
feed conversion  efficiency  - an opportunity  lost? Proc. 25* Biennia!  Conference  of Aust.  
Soc. of Animal  Prod. University  of Melbourne,  Victoria  July 4-8.
59
INRA, (2007). Alimentation  des bovines,  ovins et caprins,  Besoins  des animaux  - 
valeurs  des aliments.  ISBN:  978-2-7592-0020-7,  ISSN: 1952-2770.
Kennedy,  E., McEvoy,  M., Murphy,  J.P. and O'Donovan,  M. (2009). Effect  of restricted 
access  time to pasture  on dairy cow milk production,  grazing  behaviour  and dry matter 
intake. J. Dairy  Sci. (In press).
Livestock  Improvement  (2007). Dairy statistics  2006 - 2007. Livestock  Improvement  
Corporation,  Hamilton,  New Zealand.
Lips, M. and Rieder,  P. (2005). Abolition  of raw milk quota in the European  Union:  A 
CGE analysis  at the member  country  level. J. Agric.  Econ. 56:1-17.
Linnane,  M.I., Brereton,  A.J. and Giller, P.S. (2001). Seasonal  changes  in circadian  
grazing  patterns  of Kerry  cows (Bos Taurus)  in semi-feral  conditions  in Kiliarney  National 
Park, Co. Kerry,  Ireland.  Appl. Anim. Behav.  Sci. 71: 277-292.
McCarthy,  S., Horan,  B., Dillon,  P., Berry, D.P., O’Connor,  P., Rath, M. and Shalloo,  L. 
(2007). Economic  comparison  of divergent  strains  of Holstein-Friesian  dairy cows in 
various  pasture-based  production  systems.  J. Dairy  Sci. 90: 1493-1505.
National  Farm  Survey  (NFS)  (2007). Teagasc,  Athenry,  Ireland.
O'Donnell,  S., Shalloo,  L., Horan, B. and Butler, A.M. (2008). A survey  analysis  of 
opportunities,  challenges  and limitations  of Irish dairy farmers.  J. Farm  Management  (In 
press).
Philpott,  B. (1995). New Zealand  aggregate  and sectoral  productivity  growth  1960-95. 
RPEP  Paper  274, Victoria  University,  \A/ellington,  New Zealand.
Rook, A.J., Huckle,  C.A. and Penning.  P.D. (1994). Effects of sward height and 
concentrate  supplementation  on the ingestive  behaviour  of spring-calving  dairy cows 
grazing  grass-clover  swards.  Appl. Anim. Behav.  Sci. 40:101-112.
Shalloo  L., Dillon, P., Rath, M. and Wallace,  E.M. (2004). Description  and validation  of 
fhe Moorepark  Dairy Systems  Model. J. Dairy  Sci. 87: 1945-1959.
Van Berkum  S. and Helming,  J. (2006). European  dairy policy in the years to come: 
impact  of quota  abolition  on the dairy sector. Agricultural  Economic  Research  Institute,  
P.O. Box 29703,  2500 LS The Hague,  The Netherlands.
60
A strategy  for growth
Bill O'Keeffe 
Conna,  Co. Cork
Background
The farming  business  is located  in Conna,  Co Cork. Experience  gained in New 
Zealand  in 1997/98,  suggested  that the farming  business  needed  to be stream  lined.  
The existing  mixture  of winter and spring milk producing  120,000  gals, pedigree 
Limousin  breeding  and pig fattening  was not sustainable.
To be successful  in the future,  it was decided  to focus exclusively  on milk production; 
and the most profitable  simple  way to do this was to have a spring calving  grass  
system. It took two years to exit all the other farming  enterprises  and change  the 
herd to a spring  based  system. In 2001 a further  70ha  was leased  from a neighbour,  
and in 2002, 53,000  gallons  of quota  was leased  from Tipperary.  Subsequently  in 
2005, a milk production  partnership  was entered  into with a neighbouring  farmer,  
bringing  a further  20ha into the production  base, plus an additional  20ha outside 
block. This operation  brought  a further  120,000  gallons  into the system.
Why change  the existing  status  quo?
• The need to be able to stand back from farming  at various  stages  throughout 
year. The desirability  of not being  tied to the farm 24/7.
• The intent to keep pace with the standard  of living of friends and 
acquaintances'.
• A desire  to grow  wealth  and the business  for the future.
The steps needed  to achieve  the vision  - planning  for future  growth
Good staff
• In the initial stages  of expansion  the focus was very much on the cost side of 
staff. As a result of not having  the right staff in place,  business  performance, 
animal performance  and management  performance  suffered  as a result.  
Experience  gained  is that the right people  need to be in place from the start.  
The notion of 100 cows for 1 man, 200 cows for 2 men is fine when the 
system is up and running. When growing  and expanding  extra staff are 
needed  in place. It takes time to bed a system  in and extra help is needed  in 
the initial stages  for aggressively  growing  the business. It is very easy to 
underestimate  the extra time and effort required.
How to access  quota  and land?
• Initially  the land base was split in two blocks  with a milking  platform  of 25ha.  
The opportunity  of leasing a block of land which joined the two blocks  
presented  itself, and was availed  off. This then gave a milking  platform  of 
70ha, and reduced  cost by allowing  more grass be made available  the cows.  
The farm was now relatively  lowly stocked  (120 cows on 70ha). The next 
limiting  factor  was quota. This was successfully  leased  allowing  cow numbers  
increase  to 170. A partnership  deal then presented  itself. This facilitated
61
increasing  the land base further  and growth  in cow numbers,  culminating  in 
the employment  of a second  full time member  of staff in 20056. Cow numbers  
increased  to 300 and land base to tOOha  milking  platform.
How to finance  rapid growth  - cash-flow?
• An aggressive  breeding  policy to organically  grow cow numbers  was put in 
place. As well as the partnerships  introducing  stock to the operation  (which  
contributed  to the breeding  program),  an initial stock purchase  was financed  
by bank debt. Debt levels  had to be increased  on the farm to allow investment  
in the necessary  infrastructure.  Productivity  drops when introducing  new 
animals  and land blocks,  and while the system  beds down (the system  has to 
carry  the cost of keeping  all the stock  to grow  the herd etc.). This has a major  
impact  on cash flow.
Budgets
• It is important  to budget  reaiistically.  They may not always  work, but there  
needs  to be some  fat in the system.  There  must always  be a plan B.
Mentors
• Advice  is critical  - there is a need for clear  thinking.  Pick mentors  carefullyl
Infrastructure
• There is a need to put infrastructure  in place at the start. Whilst  new roads  
were built etc., a 42 unit parlour  did not come until later, and a considerable 
amount  of time was wasted  down through  the years. A large herd demands  
the proper  facilities  for handing  large numbers  of stock.
Introducing  new stock
• It is important  to have the right type of animal  for any given system. When  
amalgamating  two herds  small problems  can quickly  become  big problems.  It 
is easy to underestimated  the next generation  when focused  on looking  after 
cows in the parlour  etc.
System  - core competency!
• The  core business  is to produce  milk as efficiently  as possible,  and day to day 
decisions  should  be focused  around  this principle.
Simplicity
• The  system  should  be easy for staff to understand;  one feed - grass; short  
calving  pattern  - spring;,  not breeding  and calving  together  (focus  on one job);  
simple milking parlour;  simple grazing  system;  small number  of groups  of 
animals  on farm; one man operation  for 6 weeks  a yearl
Cow Type
• Breed cows that have proven  to be the best converters  of grass to milk 
(Jersey  cross). Easy calving  sires.
Staff
• Staff  need to be given responsibility  for making  decisions.  This involves  time 
and money  on education  and one-to-one  training  and mentoring  (discussion  
groups,  courses  etc.). Staff are your eyes on the ground,  and need to be 
capable  of implementing  target  objectives.
Infrastructure
• Infrastructure  needs  to be in place  that makes  life easy for staff and stock.
62
Conclusions
Have  clear goals  
Plan properly
Have the right systems  In place
63
Grass measurement  and budgeting  to drive sustainable  
profits  and better  decision-making
Shane  Phelan
Ballymacarbery,  Co Waterford
Farm Details
The farm is nestled  in the Nire Valley,  part of the Comeragh  Mountains,  and rises in 
altitude  to between  660 -700 feet above  sea level. Land is classified  as a brown  podzol  
(heavy  clay soil). This challenges  growth  rate on the shoulders  of the grazing  year.
• Grazing  block  = 90ha
• Quota  size 468,000  litres (103,000  gallons)
• Farm  supplies  Glanbia  Co-op
• Cow numbers:
2005  = 85
2006  = 90
2007  = 96
2008  =124
2009  =135
• Herd  EBI = €75
• Heifer  calves  0-1 yrs = 53 (EBI €92)
• Weanlings  1 -2 yrs = 35 (EBI €98)
Farm  development  since  2005
Farm infrastructure
The farm is setup for grazing. This means  good roadways  and paddocks.  Paddocks 
were redesigned  in size so that they are big enough  for 200 cows. Each paddock  has 2 
to 3 entrances.  This is vital so that in the spring  and wet weather  the paddocks  can be 
accessed  easily and on / off grazing  practiced  (critical  for the soil type). All paddocks 
have access  to water. New water  troughs  (350 gal tanks)  were installed.
64
Reseeding
Table 1 shows  the amount  of reseeding  completed  since 2006. In 2006, 2.5ha were  
reseeded.  This increased  to 16ha in 2008. In total 30% of fhe farm was reseeded  over 
the last 3 years. The method  of reseeding  has been to use a catch crop such as kale 
and rape, followed  by reseeding  in the spring. Weanlings  are wintered  on the catch  
crops and perform  very well. There  is not sufficient  slurry  storage  for all animals,  as the 
nitrate  directive  requires.  Using the catch crops reduces  wintering  costs and improves  
performance.  Reseeding  costs for 2008 were €310/acre. The intention  for 2009 is to 
reseed  a further  20% of the farm (16ha).
Table  1. Hectares  reseeded  and percentage  of farm reseeded  since  2006
Year 2006 2007 2008 Total
Total hectares 2.47 7.65 16 26.12
% of farm 3 9 18 30
While development  costs on infrastructure  and reseeding  are initially  high, without  this 
investment  the farm could not be run as a viable unit. The intention  is to get a good  
long-term  return  on investment.
System  changes
The cattle enterprise  was phased  out in 2008. Cows  and dairy herd replacements  will 
be the only animals  kept on the farm going  fonward.  This means  concentrating  all efforts  
on full time commercial  dairy farming.  Table  2 below  shows  the herd profile. As can be 
seen a large proportion  of the herd were 1®' lactation  animals  in 2008. This slightly  
reduced  average  herd milk yield volumes  for 2008.
65
Table  2. Herd profile  (cow numbers)
2007 2008
Overall  cows 93 128
1 St lactation 14 42
2nd lactation 14 11
3rd lactation 19 17
4th lactation 10 16
5th lactation  (+) 36 42
07 calves 27 35
Breeding  policy
Prior to 2005 the breeding  policy  was mainly  to use Dairygold  Al sires e.g. GMI, MFX 
and some  Swedish/  Norwegian  Red semen. Since  2005 the policy  has been to use high 
EBI, New Zealand  Friesian  and Jersey  semen.
Getting  started
To become  a top class grassland  dairy farmer,  it is necessary  to be proficient  with 
modern  grass technology.  A new Teagasc/Germlnal  grass budgeting  project  provided  
the learning  environment.  As a host farmer for West Waterford,  there was a 
requirement  to build up a team of support  farmers.  This support  group  was required  to 
attend a farm walk every 3 weeks. Currently  this group extends  to 20 local farmers,  
aptly named  'Deise 1,250 ’. (Why 1,250? The target  for the group then was 1,250kg 
milk solids/ha).
A brief summary  on the Teaaasc/Germinal  project
Basically  there are 20 host farmers  located  from Westmeath  in the northern  half of the 
country,  to West Waterford  in the South,  and from Ennis in the West, to Kildare  in the 
East. Each of these  host farmers  is expected  to measure  and budget  grass  on a weekly  
basis. Around  each of the farmers  is a support  group  that visits the farm every  3 weeks, 
and in conjunction  with the project  leader,  walk the farm. The group  then makes  written  
decisions  based on the data recorded  from the farm walk, and checks  how previous  
management  decisions  were implemented.  In the Intervening  weeks,  the host farmer  
walks the farm, and the resultant  budgets  discussed  with the project leader. The 
information  is also submitted  to the Teagasc  client site and to the Grass  Watch  page in 
the Irish Farmers  Journal. Both these  facilities  display  all the host farmers'  growth  rate 
figures (visit httD:// www.client.teaaasc.ie/  for more information  and weekly details).  
Looking  at all this information  can be useful  as you can see how others  are getting  on.
66
Results  of measurement  for 2008
Milk production
Milk yield per cow tor 2008 was just over 50001/cow  at 3.50%  protein  and 4.29%  fat 
(381kg  of milk solids/cow).  This is the milk-recorded  figure adjusted  up to the end of 
November  (250 days in milk). Milk protein percentage  rose by 0.2% while fat % 
increased  by 0.35%. In 2008  over 30% of the herd comprised  heifers.
In 2007 milk volume  was higher  at 5600kg/cow,  but protein  and fat concentration  was 
lower at 3.29%  protein  and 3.85%  fat respectively.  The end result was that milk solids  
per cow were slightly  higher  in 2007 at 401kg  of milk solids/cow.  When  measured  on a 
per hectare  basis,  milk solids  increased  as stocking  rate increased  slightly. In 2007 milk 
solids was 670kg  of milk solids/hectare  rising to 705kg  of milk solids/hectare  in 2008 as 
stocking  rate increased  from 1.67 to 1.85 cows/ha.
Nitrogen  fertiliser  use in 2008
In 2007, 250kg  N/ha were applied.  In 2008 it was decided  to follow  nitrogen  application  
advice  for lower  stocked  farms. As a result  in 2008, only 190kg  N/ha was used. During 
the main grazing  season,  daily grass demand  is low (35kg/day)  so only relatively  low 
amounts  of nitrogen  are required  to produce  the quantity  and quality  of grass  necessary.  
However,  there are challenges  in the shoulders  of the year to increase  grass supply.  
More reseeding  in 2009 will hopefully  improve  this situation.
Table  3. Fertiliser  use in 2008  (kg N/ha)
Jan 0
Feb 34
Mar 43
April 29
May 18
June 18
July 18
Aug 0
Sept 34
Total 191
67
Meal
In 2008, 437kg  meal per cow was used. From Table  4 below,  it can be seen that the 
bulk of this feed was used in April when grass  supply  was tight. By having  more grass  
at this time of year, it is hoped  to reduce  meal fed by 130kg/cow.  In 2009 the hope is to 
reduce  meal fed/cow  to 350kg.
Table  4. Meal fed per cow/month  2008
Month Kg Meal Fed / cow
Jan 0
Feb 35
March 77
April 130
May 29
June 0
July 33
Aug 32
Sept 36
Oct 40
Nov 24
Total 437
Grass  production
Grass  production/ha  is low relative  to higher  stocked  and fertilised  farms (see Table  5). 
The best paddocks  produced  between  7 and 8t DM/ha. This data can be viewed  in 3 
ways. Firstly,  without  this data for the farm, it is impossible  to set any benchmarks!  
Secondly,  due to a low stocking  rate, there is relatively  low demand  during  the main  
grazing  season  so quantity  of grass  grown  is not of primary  concern.  However,  as more  
quota becomes  available  and cow numbers  are increased,  growing  and utilizing  more  
grass  will become  increasingly  important.  Off more concern  is that the farm is growing  
less than 15% of total grass  production  between  Feb. 1 and April 24. It s hoped  that an 
increase  in reseeding  will produce  more grass in the shoulders  of the year and improve 
soil fertility.
68
Table  5. Grass  grown  in 2008 and % grass  grown  from Feb 1 to April 24
Paddock  No. Average  Tons  grown  2008% Of grass  grown  
from Feb. 1 - April 24
1 6.30 10.2
2 5.40 24.1
3 4.70 23.4
4 8.50 11.8
5 6.10 23.0
6 7.20 10.3
7 6.00 16.7
8 4.00 5.0
9 5.90 3.4
12 5.00 4.2
13 5.00 2.4
14 4.50 2.7
16 7.00 8.6
17 7.10 15.5
18 7.20 1.7
19 5.40 3.7
20 7.00 14.3
25 7.20 8.9
26 5.40 8.3
27 6.70 7.5
28 6.30 9.5
29 5.50 1.8
31 4.10 33.2
32 4.00 11.3
Grass  management
Grass  is grazed  down  to 3.5 - 4.5cm  for the whole  grazing  season,  which  ensures  good  
quality  grass  throughout.  Pre grazing  covers  (the covers  cows are going into) are kept 
below  1,500  kg DM/ha. At this level It’s relatively  easy  to graze  paddocks  out properly.
In 2008, the milking  cows were out day and night from February  7, and remained  at 
grass until November  20. Weanling  heifers  remain  out until December  1. The use of 
‘back fencing ’, good access  and on/off  grazing  worked  well in 2008, and without  these  
tools utilization  would  have been considerably  poorer  than that actually  achieved.
69
A sample  of the grass  that the cows are going into every  week  is sent to the Moorepark  
Grassland  lab to test quality. It can be seen from Table 6 that grass quality  remained  
high during  the whole grazing  season. Grass  dry matter  digestibility  (DMD)  remained  
high even for mid season  grass  production.
Table  6. Grass  quality  results  for 2008
Dry Matter  (%) DMD (units) ME Grass Protein  (%)
Jan 13 78 11 25
Feb 18 81 12 26
Mar 18 78 12 21
April 23 79 12 18
May 20 83 12 23
June 19 81 12 19
July 14 78 11 21
Aug 16 75 11 21
Sept 13 75 11 24
Average 78 11.8 22
Soil testing
The farm was soil tested at the end of 2007. Soil pH was relatively  low, and 
consequently  lime was applied  in 2008,  with more required  in 2009. The P and K levels 
are at index  4 and 2 respectively.
Table  7. Current  soil fertility  of my farm
pH
P index  
K index6.06
4
2
70
Things  done  well in 2008
• meal  use reduced
• milk  solids  increased
• Nitrogen  fertiliser  usage  down
• profit increased
• Improved  grass budgeting  skilis
Lessons  iearned  from 2008
Developed  an understanding  of the true potential  of farm 
land type is not limiting  
recording  is crucial
mindset  is the hardest  thing to change  
support  farmers  important  
reseeding  is crucially  important
Spring  is the best time of year for reseeding  
speed  of reseeding  is important
Good  to get grass  results  - you can see what  grass  quality  is like 
easier  to manage  grass  at higher  stocking  rates
• I need  to increase  my stocking  rate
a post grazing  height  of 3.5 - 4cm is achievable  - it ensures  high quality  grass  for 
the next grazing
it is important  to graze  tight from the start of the year 
keep silage  out of diet as soon as cows go out to grass  
on/off  grazing  is excelient  way to manage  in wet weather  
Mid season
• the farm is currently  under  stocked
• grazing  lower  covers  mid season  is important
• taking  out higher  covers  fast is important  
Autumn
• rationing  grass  is important  in the autumn
• It can be difficult  to reach autumn  targets,  and it may be necessary  to 
introduce  more meals  to achieve  these  targets
• If target covers  are not reached  by mid Sept, then the rest of the year 
becomes  a struggle.  [It is important  to react in time]
• minimise  poaching
71
Explanation  of low stocking  rate
Overal  stocking  rate on the farm is 1.85 cows/ha.  While  cow numbers  have increased,  
the drystock  component  of the business  has decreased.  Stocking  rate, ranges  from 1 
cow/ha  early in the season  as cows calve,  rising  to a maximum  of about  2.6 cows/ha  as 
first cut silage  is closed  off. This means  that the maximum  demand  for any week  of the 
year is less than 40kg/day.  Growing  anymore  than this may result in having  to remove  
surplus  grass  as baled  silage. Thus N rates are relatively  modest,  and high growth  rates  
are not a prime objective  as there is not the stock to utilize  the grass. Long term the 
intention  is to increase  cow numbers  as more  quota  becomes  available.
A secondary  objective  (in the short  term) is to manage  grass  to facilitate  reducing  inputs.  
It is important  to appreciate  that 70% of the farm hasn ’t been reseeded  tor 20+ years,  
and that the farm rises to 700 feet above sea level, which means less growth in 
February  and March (none on the old paddocks  until April). All of these factors  are 
compounded  by low stocking  rate, which means  less nitrogen  in the main season  as 
demand  for grass  is low. Taking  all these  matters  into account,  and following  one of the 
wettest  years  on record,  the results  do not seem  too surprising.
Goals
Increase  grass  grown  from 
6 to 12t/ha  = €600/ha
Increase  stoddriQ  rate from 
1.85 to 2.5 cows/ha
Increase  profit  from 
€1200to€2500/ha
Increase  milk solids  from 
705 to 1250kg  milk solids/haBreedlnore'  R'epTacements   30 to 40% Jersey  X
Personal  Development  
Attend  relevant  maetings & training
Staying  focused  
Meeting  like minded  people
: Mainlining  good  work life balance  
Minimum  2 holidays/year!
72
Summary
Grass  budgeting  is easy! This is not a top performing  farm today,  but it wiil become  one 
in the future. Embracing  the iatest technoiogy  is vitai to improve  the business.  
Measuring  grass  growth  and budgeting  provides  a tool to control  the farm business,  and 
the confidence  to face the next decade.
With the results  from 2008, it is now possible  to benchmark  the farm against  research  
data and the best farms. Data shows  that the farm is under  performing,  but that it has 
considerable  potential.  Putting  in place the correct  infrastructure,  reseeding,  correcting  
soil fertility  and improving  the breed of cow will put this farm in prime position  for the 
future.
‘The greatest  clanger  for most  of us is not that our aim is too high and we miss it but that 
it is too iow and we reach  if (Michaei  Angeio)
73
BVD - How big an issue  is it and what  can we do?
Riona  Sayers
Herd  Health  Research  Officer,  Teagasc,  Moorepark.
Summary
■ Non-regulated  infectious  diseases  such as BVD are resulting  in significant  
economic  iosses  on Irish dairy farms  e.g. a BVD outbreak  in a 100-cow  naTve  
herd can result in losses  of approximately  €30,000  through  reduced  fertility,  
peri-natal  mortality  and culling  of persistentiy  infected  animais.
■ The key to BVD control is identification  and cuiling of persistently  infected  
animais  (Pis).
■ The impact  of BVD on the national  herd can be reduced  by implementation  of 
on-farm  heaith plans, which incorporate  biosecurity,  diagnostic  testing and 
strategic  vaccination.
Introduction
BVD (Bovine  Viral Diarrhoea)  is a highly  contagious  and economically  important  viral 
disease  of cattle. It is a relatively  new disease  in Ireland,  with initial reports  of its 
occurrence  dating  back to the iate 1980’s, early 1990's. The prevalence  of BVD in 
Ireland  is unknown,  although  it is estimated  that approximately  80-90%  of Irish herds  
have been exposed  to BVD virus. The impact  of this disease  in terms  of farm profit  
and animal  welfare  should  not be underestimated,  and on-farm  control  programmes  
must be initiated  in order  to increase  the heaith  status  of the national  herd and to limit 
future  on-farm  losses.
Bovine  Viral Diarrhoea  (BVD)
Two types  of BVD infection  exist;
• Transient  viral infection  (Tl) . This type of infection  occurs  when a previously  
unexposed  healthy  animal  (naive  animal)  becomes  infected  with BVD virus. This 
infection  only lasts for a two-week  period (approximately)  and the majority  of 
these  transient  infections  do not result  in clinical  signs. On occasion,  however,  a 
severe transient  infection  (severe  acute BVD) can prove fatal. Following ’ a 
transient  infection  an animai  develops  long-lasting  immunity.
• Persistent  viral infection  (PI). This type of infection  can only be generated  by 
infection  of an unborn  calf between  months  2 and 4 of gestation  (Figure  f) i.e. 
caives  are born persistently  infected  and wiil carry and shed BVD virus for their 
entire lives. Pis, therefore,  can only be generated  in-utero. It should  be noted  
that Pis cannot  be cured  and will allow BVD virus to persist  in a herd. PI animals  
can look perfectly  healthy  or may look noticeably  below  target  weight.
74
Figure  1. Possible  outcomes  of BVD viral infection
From Figure 1, it can be seen that if the dam becomes  infected  with BVD (transient  
infection)  for the first time during gestation,  there are a number  of possible  calf 
outcomes  depending  on the time of gestation  that the exposure  occurs. If exposure 
and transient  infection  of the dam occurs  during month one of gestation,  embryo  
death  will result  with the dam returning  to heat. If infection  occurs  during  months  two 
to four of gestation,  a persistently  infected  (PI) calf will result. If infection  occurs  
during  months  five to nine of gestation,  a number  of possible  outcomes  are possible  
and include  abortion  and calf deformities.  Infection  of the dam at this time can also 
result in the birth of healthy  off-spring.  BVD is also an immunosuppressive  disease 
in that it reduces  the efficiency  of an infected  animal ’s immune  system,  to the degree 
that other infectious  agents  are allowed  to establish.  On the basis of this range of 
possible  effects,  therefore,  indications  that BVD exists  in a herd include:
• Poor fertility  (conception  rates,  % empty);
• Increased  number  of abortions,  stillbirths,  weak  calves,  and/or  deformities;
• Poor calf health i.e. unprecedented  or undeserved  level of calf scour and/or 
pneumonia;
• Occurrence  of severe  acute  BVD;
• Occurrence  of fatal mucosal  disease. This is only possible  in persistently 
infected  animals  and is characterised  by very severe  diarrhoea  and rapid  
deterioration  of the affected  animal. This can be accompanied  by respiratory
75
illness, lameness  due to inter-digital  ulceration  and reduced  appetite  due to 
ulceration  in the mouth.
How big an issue  is it? A Case  Study
The economic  impact  of non-regulated  infectious  diseases  in Ireland  can be clearly  
demonstrated  by examining  the effects  that Bovine  Viral Diarrhoea  (BVD)  can have 
in a naive herd. A total of 47 heifers  in a case study herd were served  between  
November  16, 2007 and February  23, 2008 (14-week  breeding  season)  to yield 
autumn  calves  in 2008. Poor fertility  was noted  during  the breeding  season  (Table  1) 
with conception  rates to first service  well below target at 49%. Total number  of 
services  over the breeding  period  was 88, yielding  2.1 services  per conception,  again  
below target. A total of six heifers  did not conceive  yielding  an empty  rate of 13% 
(Table 1). A BVD control  programme  was Initiated  in this herd in July 2008. All 
autumn  in-calf heifers (n=41) tested negative  for BVD virus. The heifers  began  
calving  down on August  20, 2008. Of the 40 live calves  submitted  for testing,  18 
tested positive  for BVD virus. On repeat  testing,  only four calves  had cleared  the 
virus and were therefore  classified  as transiently  infected. The remainder  were 
deemed  persistently  infected,  yielding  a PI rate of 35%. The mean  birth weight  (BW)  
of the PI calves  was 5kg lower  than the mean  BW of the non-PI  calves. Outbreaks  of 
both diarrhoea  and respiratory  illness  were recorded  in the autumn  calf population.  
Prior to PI removal,  approximately  50% of the entire calf group was affected  with 
diarrhoea  and/or  respiratory  illness. Based  on the clinical  picture  recorded  in this 
group  of naive animals,  the overall  cost of a BVD outbreak  in a similar  herd of naive  
animals  in terms calf mortality,  calf morbidity  and PI culling alone is estimated  at 
approximately  €9000  per 100 cow herd. Although  it was not possible  to quantify  the 
exact contribution  of BVD to the poor fertility  parameters  recorded  in this group of 
heifers  due to the unknown  BVD status of previous  autumn  calving  groups  on the 
farm, it is worth pointing  out that such a fertility  picture  in a 100-cow  spring  calving  
herd would result losses of €19500 (Table 1). This study demonstrates  the 
productive  and economic  consequences  of BVD infection.
Table  1. Potential  financial  loss due to a BVD outbreak  in a naive  100-cow  herd
Calf-associated  factors Actual Target Cost/1 00 cows
Direct  PI costs
General  calf health €101.25 €11.30 €8995
Fertilitv  oarameters
Conception  rate to 1®’ service 49% >60% €6400
Serves  per conception 2.1 <1.5 €2400
% Empty 13% <5% €10700
Total cost €19500
As well as the direct  on-farm  costs of BVD as outlined  here, it should  be noted that 
many  countries  in Europe,  as well as Australia  and New Zealand,  have implemented  
BVD control  programmes  in order  to reduce  the economic  and animal  welfare  impact
76
of BVD on their national  herds. Ireland  is currently  lagging  behind  its global  trading 
partners  in the implementation  of such a control  programme.  This situation  will have 
to change  in order to maintain  Irish competitiveness  in an increasingly  challenging 
global  market.
What  can we do?
At farm level
Figure  2 outlines  the steps  that should  be taken  to determine  it exposure  to BVD has 
occurred  in a herd, and the necessary  follow  up procedures  should  viral exposure  be 
indicated.  Briefly,  it is first necessary  to determine  if viral exposure  has occurred  by 
testing a bulk milk sample  and blood samples  from a selection  of 9-month-old 
(approximately)  unvaccinated  weanlings  for ANTIBODIES  to BVD virus. If exposure 
is indicated  by a medium  to high level of antibody  in the bulk milk sample,  combined 
with any or all of the weanlings  testing  positive  for ANTIBODIES,  control  measures  
will have to be put in place. Both transient  and persistently  infected  animals  shed 
virus particles  in all bodily  secretions  such as nasal and oral discharges,  tears, milk 
and semen,  but persistently  infected  animals  shed significantly  higher  levels  of virus,  
and as such, pose a greater  threat  to the herd. The key to BVD control,  therefore,  is 
culling of Pis, as these act as the constant  source  of virus in a herd. Following  
diagnostic  testing,  if a PI is found in the herd, IT SHOULD  NOT BE SOLD. As the 
number  of Pis identified  in an adult herd is usually  low (approximately  1 -3 in a 100 
cow herd), immediate  culling of these animals  should be undertaken.  Under no 
circumstances  should  a known PI be kept in contact  with the breeding  herd or the 
cycle of BVD infection  will continue.  Once all Pis have been removed  from a herd,  
biosecurity,  routine  diagnostic  monitoring,  and vaccination  should  be implemented  to 
prevent  re-introduction  of the disease.
Vaccines  play a hugely important  role in the control of many infectious  diseases.  
Their use, however,  without  the supporting  knowledge  provided  by diagnostic  testing  
and the implementation  of a biosecurity  plan, could potentially  undermine  their 
effectiveness  in a disease  control  programme.  It is essential  that they be viewed  as 
a component  of a control  programme  but not the sole means  of disease  prevention  
within a herd. Over-reliance  on vaccination,  without the backup of proper 
management,  biosecurity  and diagnostics  should  be avoided  with vaccine  breakdown  
a potential  consequence.
Biosecuritv
Once complete  PI removal  has been achieved,  biosecurity  is the single most  
important  contributor  to the prevention  of BVD re-introduction  and subsequent  losses  
on a farm. Biosecurity  in its simplest  form means  the implementation  of measures  to 
prevent  the introduction  and spread  of infectious  diseases.  It can be applied  at a 
national  level where  measures  are employed  to prevent  the introduction  of a disease 
into a country. Biosecurity  can also be applied  at farm level, in order  to prevent  the 
introduction  and spread  of an infectious  disease  onto an individual  farm. The higher  
the level of a particular  disease  in a country  (prevalence  of a disease),  the stricter  the 
biosecurity  measures  required  to reduce  the risk of disease  introduction.  With the 
already high prevalence  of BVD in Ireland, biosecurity  must now become  an
77
essential  component  of good  farm management  both on dairy farms  and at a national  
level.
Figure  2. Monitoring  and control  of BVD in a dairy  herd
Implementation  of a strict closed herd policy is a critical component  of biosecure  
disease  control. A closed herd policy (i.e. no cattle movement  onto the farm,  
including  bulls) will optimise  protection  against  the introduction  of BVD onto a farm.  
This critical  risk factor  for disease  introduction  will assume  much greater  importance  
in the future  as dairy farms  expand  their herds  through  cattle  purchases.  The current  
lack of disease  control  measures  for BVD will result in farmers  having  to resort  to 
purchasing  cattle of unknown  disease  status  with the resultant  biosecurity  risks. In 
order to minimise  viral disease risk when purchasing,  therefore,  the following  
biosecurity  measures  can be employed;
♦ Animals  should  be purchased  from a single  source  if possible;
♦ Data on the health history of the source herd, the individual  animals  to be 
purchased  and their  vaccination  status  should  be requested;
» All newly purchased  animals  including  bulls should  be quarantined  correctly,  i.e. 
isolated  for at least 30 days in an area that is at least three metres  from other  
cattle  groups,  with no sharing  of feed or water  troughs  and no mixing  of dung and 
urine. Using an isolated  paddock  is an ideal solution  to avoid problems  with
78
indoor  quarantine.  Animals  from different  source  herds should  be quarantined 
separately.
♦ On day 21 of the quarantine  period,  newly purchased  animals  should  be tested  
for BVD virus.
These  procedures  will minimise  the risk of viral  disease  introduction  and transmission 
in open herds.
As disease  transmission  can also occur  by indirect  contact  with disease  vectors,  e.g. 
farm visitors,  vehicles  etc., the following  procedures  should  be implemented  on all 
farms,  regardless  of cattle  movement,  in order  to minimise  the disease  risk.
♦ Footbaths - the use of well-maintained  (cleaned  and re-filled  regularly)  will reduce  
the disease  risk on farms;
♦ Signage  should  be used to maintain  awareness  of biosecurity  on farm;
» Basic veterinary  equipment  e.g. nose tongs, should  be available  on every farm;  
transfer  of nose tongs from one farm to another  without  sufficient  disinfection 
between  farms  can result  in disease  introduction;
♦ Separate  disposable  needles  should  be used for each animal  when administering 
medications  or taking  samples;
♦ Separate  rectal sleeves should be used for each animal when scanning,  
examining  or treating  cows;
♦ Vehicles  visiting  the farm should  be kept at a safe distance  from animal  areas  e.g. 
housing,  holding  yards, and roadways.  This is particularly  important  in the case 
of knackery  carcass  collection  vehicles,  which should  not be permitted  to enter 
farms  and should  collect  carcasses  from the farm entrance  only.
It is important  to recognise  that biosecurity  measures,  once implemented,  will act as 
an insurance  policy  against  viral infectious  diseases.  It is not a guarantee  that a herd 
will remain  disease  free but it will significantly  reduce  the risk of disease  introduction  
into a herd.
At national  level
Many EU and non-EU  countries  are now implementing  disease  control  programmes 
utilising  bulk-milk  testing  in centralised  laboratories  to routinely  screen  herds,  monitor 
their disease status, and promote implementation  of appropriate  biosecurity 
strategies.  With the increasing  prevalence  of diseases  such as BVD in Ireland,  it is 
necessary  for dairy farmers  to take such practices  on board in order to maintain  
competitiveness.  In this regard,  Teagasc,  Moorepark,  in co-operation  with ICBF, has 
initiated  a new herd health research  initiative  - the ‘Herd Ahead ’ programme.  This 
project  aims to address  the lack of recent  published  disease  prevalence  data for BVD 
and a range  of additional  diseases,  and to then use that data as a basis  for designing 
a dairy herd health strategy. This project  will identify  the non-regulatory  infectious  
diseases  requiring  prioritisation  in Ireland  based  on prevalence  and economic  impact  
data. The baseline  data generated  in this study will act as a benchmark  from which  
the impact  of future  herd health  strategies  and their contribution  towards  sustainable 
dairy farming in Ireland can be measured. Ireland has the advantage  of an 
exceptional  data reporting  system  i.e. the ICBF database  and HerdPlus  reporting  
system,  which  can be adapted  to allow efficient  reporting  of results  and interpretation
79
of data and will pave the way for a health statement  system  for Irish dairy farmers.  
Diagnostics  will play an important  role in disease  monitoring  on dairy farms going  
forward  and economical  methods  of sample  collection  and testing  will be required.  In 
this regard,  the use of bulk milk testing  in a centralized  laboratory  would provide  the 
necessary  vehicle  to carry out economic  and practical  disease  testing,  as well as 
addressing  the logistical  concerns  of running  such a disease  monitoring  programme.  
Should  such a milk-testing  system  be introduced  and combined  with the HerdPlus  
reporting  system,  a practical,  economical  and functional  health  screening  system  for 
Irish dairy herds could be implemented  in order to maintain  competitiveness  in an 
increasingly  challenging  global  market.
Conclusion
Diseased  animals  perform  sub-optimally  and decrease  on-farm  profifabilify  through  
waste feed, labour and veterinary  costs. By using the combined  approach  of 
biosecurity,  diagnostic  testing  and vaccination  on individual  farms, control  of BVD,  
both on-farm  and nationally,  will become  feasible,  will reduce  the economic  impact  of 
this costly  disease  and will improve  Ireland ’s trading  status  in future  years.
Eliminate  BVD from your  herd  by
1. Testing  for and removing  persistently  infected  animals
2. Designing  and implementing  a biosecurity  plan including  diagnostic  
testing
3. Vaccinating
References
Heuer,  C., Healy,  A., and Zerbini,  C. (2007). Economic  effects  of exposure  to bovine  
viral diarrhoea  virus on dairy herds  in New Zealand.  J. Dairy  Sci. 90: 5428-5438.
Hoe, F.G.H. and Ruegg, P.L. (2006). Opinions  and practices  of Wisconsin  dairy 
producers  about  biosecurity  and animal  well-being.  J. Dairy  Sci. 89; 2297-2308.
Maunsell,  F. and Donovan,  G.A. (2008). Biosecurity  and risk management  for dairy 
replacements.  Veterinary  Clinics  of North  America;  Food  Animal  Practice.  24: 155- 
190.
Mee, J.F., Fahey, J. and Crilly, J. (1999). Breeding  the dairy cow of the future - 
today's challenges. Proceedings  of the Nationai Dairy Conference.  
http://www.teagasc.ie/publications/ndc1999/index.asp
More, S. (2007). Shaping  our future:  animal  health in a global  trading  environment.  
Irish Vet. J. 60: 540-545.
More, S. (2008). A case for increased  private  sector  involvement  in Ireland ’s national  
animal  health  services.  Irish Vet. J. 61:92-100.
Payne,  M., Bruhn,  M., Reed, B., Scearce,  A. and O’Donnell.  (1999). On-farm  quality  
assurance  programs:  a survey  of producer  and industry  leader  opinions.  J. Dairy Sci. 
82: 2224-2230.
80
Villarroel,  A. Dargatz,  D.A, Lane, V.A., McCluskey,  B.J. and Salman,  M.D. (2007).  
Food for thought  for food animal  veterinarians:  Suggested  outline  of potential  critical  
control  points  for biosecurity  and biocontainment  on large dairy farms. JAVMA,  230: 
808-819.
81
Sheep  Ireland;  new data, new indexes  & new programs  for 
Irish sheep  farmers
Peter Amer^, Tim Byrne^, Pat Donellan*,  Graham  Potterton  *, Mike Lynch* and 
Andrew  Cromie*
^AbacusBio  Ltd, Dunedin,  New  Zealand,  *ICBF,  Ireland
Background.
ICBF has been very successful  In accelerating  rates of genetic  progress  for farm 
profitability  traits for the dairy and beef industries  in Ireland. A new initiative  for the 
sheep industry  is currently  being rolled out by ICBF under the banner  “Sheep  
Ireland ”. The intention  is to bring state of the art animal  identification,  data capture  
systems,  database  technology,  and genetic evaluation  statistical  methodology  
together,  to support  new recording  and breeding  program  initiatives  in the industry.
This new initiative  in the sheep  breeding  area has been motivated  by the struggling  
competitiveness  of the sheep  industry  in Ireland,  as clearly  evidenced  by the fall in 
sheep numbers  over recent years. As in many other countries,  historic  efforts to 
bring about genetic  improvement  using scientific  means have suffered  from poor 
adoption  rates,  and with some  exceptions,  have tended  to focus  on a restricted  range  
of growth  and carcase  traits. A lack of recognition  of the benefits  of these genetic  
improvement  efforts  by commercial  sheep  farmers  in Ireland  has further  stifled any 
incentives  for sheep  breeders  selling  rams to take part.
A strategy  project  team made up of sheep  breeding  experts  from Ireland  and New 
Zealand  engaged  with stakeholders  in the Irish sheep  industry  in August  2008 (Amer  
et a!., 2008). The strategy  team put together  a set of recommendations  for the 
development  of sheep breeding  in Ireland. This paper provides  an update of 
progress  towards  meeting  many of the objectives  set out by the strategy  project  
team, and also attempts  to put fonward  some practical  reasons  for the changes  
proposed.
A broader  base  of evaluation
From a commercial  farmer ’s perspective,  breeding  decisions  are effected  via the 
choice  of rams that are mated  to breeding  ewes. The ram purchasing  process  must 
encompass  a choice  of one or more breeds,  a choice  of one or more breeders,  and a 
choice  among  rams available  for sale. In the absence  of scientific  data, the choice  
must be based on breed and/or breeder reputation,  and on the physical  
characteristics  of the rams. Breed reputation  is sometimes  influenced  more by 
marketing  than substance,  and breeders  can tend to focus on very Intensive  
management  to put forward,  large, early born, very well fed rams for sale. Physical  
characteristics  of rams provide  some  assistance,  but once rams with obvious  genetic  
faults are removed  from those available  for sale. It Is very difficult  to distinguish  by 
eye the true genetic  differences  between  a genetically  superior  late born twin and a 
genetically  inferior  early born single.
82
The immediate  impact  of the commercial  farmer ’s choice  of rams wiil be on the lamb 
crop that follows  subsequently.  However,  impacts  of individual  rams are commonly 
masked  by seasonal  differences  between  years,  and the difficulty  in identifying  which  
lambs came from which rams. For rams from which repiacement  females  are 
retained,  there are much ionger-term  impacts. For example,  the 70 brothers  of a 
group of 30 young  replacement  breeding  ewes may have attracted  premiums  of €5 
each (i.e. €350 extra profit),  but if the 30 replacement  breeding  ewes wean 0.1 iess 
lambs  each over successive  iambings  (3 lambings  x 30 ewes x €40 margin  per iamb 
X 0.1 less = €360 lost revenue),  require  replacement  at an average  of 4 years  of age 
instead  of 4.2 years of age (7% more repiacements  at €165 per repiacement  x 30 
ewes = €350),  and require  1/4 hour extra iabour  per ewe each year at €17/ hour (3 
iambings  x 30 ewes x €17 x 1/4 = €380, compared  with the current  flock, then the 
farmer  will be substantially  worse off (€350 from brothers  - €360 - €350 - €380 = - 
€740). In this context,  there is cieariy a need for a broad focus in genetic 
improvement  efforts.
Focus  on profit  traits,  with new emphasis  on ‘Easy-care ’.
Sheep Ireland  aims to deveiop  breeding  vaiues  for a wider range of performance 
traits and indexes  with a higher  emphasis  on maternal  performance.  This wiil shift 
the focus of breed seiection  to include  more economically  relevant  traits alongside 
the established  terminal traits of importance. To improve commercial  ewe 
performance,  the emphasis  must be on maternai  traits that will lead to lower  cost and 
easy care sheep. It is acknowledged  that there is a need to consult  with, and inform  
industry  partners  so that real gains in profitabiiity  wiii be made, if such genetic 
improvements  can be achieved.  Achieving  these goals will increase  the uptake  of 
performance  recording  by breeders,  aiiowing  them to utiiise a tooi to make better 
breeding  decisions  but very importantly  will give commerciai  farmers more  
information  to aid in ram purchasing  decisions.
Overail  index  and reievant  sub-indexes.
The new indexes  are based on the same profit principies  as the dairy EBI & beef 
€uro-Star  systems  and will likely include:
• a production  index  taking  in breeding  vaiues  for growth  and meat  traits;
• a lambing  index taking  in performance  in lambing  difficulty  and lamb survival;
• a maternal  index taking in the performance  of the daughters  in lambing  
difficulty,  maternal  lamb live weight,  number  of lambs  born, lamb survival,  and 
ewe mature  weight,
• and a later developed  health index including  breeding  values  for foot health  
and parasite  resistance;
• an overall  index  which identifies  rams suitable  to breed  flock replacements  for 
a typical  sheep  farm In Ireland;
• an overall  index which identifies  rams suitable  for use as a terminal  sire for a 
typical  sheep  farm in Ireland.
83
Capturing  value  from all possible  data sources
As we move into the 21®’ century,  information  capture  is increasingly  part of our 
everyday  lives. For the Irish beef industry,  the capture  of data from the meat plants,  
from animal  registrations,  and as part of the suckler  cow welfare  scheme,  provides  a 
huge quantity  of useful  data that is unmatched  by any other  beef breeding  evaluation  
system  in the world. Industry  data facilitates  comparison  of animals  across  breeds,  
and evaluates  their performance  in the true commercial  environment.  The proof  of 
the pudding  is in the eating!  The same  competitive  advantage  that will rapidly  accrue  
to the beef industry  in Ireland  through  better identification  of superior  breeding  bulls 
must be strived  for by the sheep  industry.  A more structured  approach  is required  for 
sheep,  than is sufficient  for beef, because  of the difficulty  of tracing  sires of lambs  on 
commercial  farms. For this reason,  two new breeding  initiatives  are being put in 
place  for data capture.
The new breeding  scheme
A new breeding  scheme  makes  up part of the new genetic  improvement  strategy.  
This will include  the development  of a national  central  progeny  test (CRT),  supported  
by data collected  from a number  of maternal  lamb producer  (MALP)  groups. The 
CRT flocks  are modelled  on a very successful  system  in New Zealand.  Rams  from a 
diverse  spread  of performance  recording  flocks  are mated  to central  groups  of ewes  
and their progeny  recorded  in some detail for their performance  both as lambs for 
slaughter,  and also as replacement  breeding  females. In time, this structure  will 
provide  strength  and validity  to genetic  evaluations  of rams in performance  recording  
flocks  throughout  Ireland.
MALP  groups  are composed  of commercial  farmers  recording  data to identify  which  
rams deliver  gains in ewe performance  in their flocks  and which ones do not (Byrne,  
et at., 2009, In press). Data will feed back into the central  database  and evaluation  
systems  to help participating  pedigree  breeders  identity  superior  rams. The program  
also requires  participating  farmers  to swap animals  to create  so-called  “genetic  links ” 
that allow genetic comparisons  between rams from different flocks. Lamb  
performance  data will be linked  back to sires using DNA.
The focus of the proposed  breeding  schemes  in the Sheep Ireland genetic  
improvement  program  is to increase  recording  by breeders  to include  additional  
economically  relevant  traits such as lambing  difficulty. The rationale  behind  the 
MALP group scheme  is to, not only provide  valuable  data which will be linked to a 
proposed  CPT, but also provide  a convincing  demonstration  of the range in genetic  
merit among a group of rams. The focus is on the financial  and management  
impacts  of using rams with the appropriate  traits to improve  income  and decrease  
costs.
The MALP scheme  currently  involves  some 23 commercial  farms of sizes ranging  
from 80 to 1020 breeding  ewes, assembled  into five groups,  involving  a total of 224 
rams and 8000 ewes. These commercial  farms are spread over geographically  
diverse locations  running a range of breeds, to provide regional  interest and 
relevance  to a variety  of land types and production  systems. Within each of the 
groups  rams have been swapped  during  the mating  season  to provide  genetic  links 
between  farms and therefore  enable  a comparison  of rams across  the group. A
84
minimum  of 2 rams have been used as links between  participating  farms to ensure  
adequate  genetic  linkage  is obtained.  Hence  of the 224 rams,  70 will provide  genetic 
linkage  between  flocks  and between  groups. Rams  will also be used to link between 
years.
A very important  aspect  of this system  is that the MALP  scheme  aims to assess  the 
commercial  producers'  own rams. This ensures  transparency  in terms  of the results.  
All of these rams are from pedigree  flocks (i.e. they have a pedigree  identity). In 
addition,  rams from each of the major recorded  breeds  (Suffolk,  Texel, Charollais,  
Belclare  and Vendeen)  will be selected  from existing  performance-recorded  flocks  for 
inclusion  in the future  in order  to facilitate  links between  the MALP  and CPT.
This structure  also presents  a great opportunity  for breed societies  to make  
significant  contributions  to the sheep industry through improvement  and 
dissemination  of elite breeding  animals, and encouragement  of performance 
recording  by members.  There  wiii be opportunities  to showcase  the performance  of 
elite rams from their respective  breeds across a wide range of commerciai  
environments.  Genetic  linkages  formed between  the CPT, MALP and pedigree 
fiocks wiil allow valuable  data from relatives  (progeny  of elite sires), whose  
performance  will have been recorded  in commercial  environments,  to feed back to 
predictions  of genetic  merit  in pedigree  animais.
New technologies
The MALP  scheme  also provides  an opportunity  to demonstrate  the use of electronic 
identification  and DNA technology  in sheep  breeding.  In order  to maintain  individual  
animal  identification  in a commercial  farm environment,  all ewes and their progeny 
are to be electronicaliy  tagged  using iow frequency  electronic  identification.  This wiil 
simplify  data coliection  for ali traits and also simplify  animal  management  (drafting,  
feeding  management  and record  keeping).  The real value proposition  iies in the use 
of the data collected  via eiectronic  identification  in the generation  of information  that 
can be applied  on-farm  to increase  efficiency  (e.g. culling  of poor performers),  and 
reduce  costs on farm (cuii for persistent  lameness).
DNA parentage  allows  the producer  to not only minimise  the disturbance  of iambing  
ewes and accurateiy  identify  each iamb to a dam, but aiso provides  the opportunity  to 
store blood samples  that may be potentially  valuable  in the future. DNA parentage  
wiii be used in the MALP  and CPT programs  to ailow commercial  multi-sire  mating,  
ensure accuracy  of parentage  recording,  and reduce the workioad  required  at 
lambing.  This wiii mean  that ail ewes,  rams,  and lambs  will be DNA sampled.
Challenges  remaining
Whiie the majority  of key technicai  hurdies facing Sheep ireiand have been  
overcome,  there  wiii be much  to be learned  from the new data and how best to use it. 
It will take some  time for the new data to buiid up, and it is anticipated  that estimated 
breeding  vaiues  for new traifs, as weil as new sub-indexes  wiii be reieased  over time 
as the necessary  testing  and industry  consuitation  steps  are worked  through.
Another  area requiring  further  thought  over the next few years is that of how Sheep  
ireiand  can build, along with breed societies,  adoption  and dissemination  structures
85
that result in identified  elite breeding  animals  having  their favourable  genes  spread  
into commercial  flocks  as quickly  as possible.
Conclusions
There is much to be gained  by the sheep  breeding  industry  in Ireland  from the new 
data, new indexes  and new breeding  programmes  being rolled out by Sheep  Ireland,  
A huge amount  of work has been going on behind  the scenes  leading  up to the 
launch. A number  of key hurdles  have been overcome,  and it is now time for the 
wider sheep industry  in Ireland to get behind these new initiatives  to drive the 
dissemination  of the genetic  improvements  for the future  good of the industry.
References.
Amer, P.R., Fennessy,  P.F., Rohloff,  M., Byrne, T.J., Hanrahan,  S., Keady, T., 
McHugh,  M., Veerkamp,  R., Cromie,  A. and Wickham,  B. (2008). Breeding  profitable  
sheep in Ireland;  Recommendations  to the interim Sheep Board from the Sheep  
Strategy  Team  (September  2008).
http://www.sheep.ie/publications/flles/ADDendix  1 Strategy  Project  Team Report.D
Byrne, T.J., Amer, P.R., Fennesy,  P.F., Rohloff,  R.M., Cromie,  A., Donnellan,  P., 
Potterton,  G., Hanrahan,  S. and Wickham,  B. (2009). Progress  in the development  
of breeding  schemes  for the Irish sheep industry;  maternal  lamb producer  groups.  
Proc.  fS"’ conference  of association  for the advancement  of animat  breeding  and 
genetics.  Barossa  Valley  South Australia.  Sept  28 to October  1, 2009. (In press).
86
What  do we need from sheep  breeding  in the future?
Crosby  Cleland
21 Greens  Road,  Saintfield,  Ballynahinch,  BT24 7EE
Introduction
Sheep  farming  should  be like any other business,  managed  to make a profit. In this 
instance  the sheep  business  is managed  along side a fencing  business.  Both require  
raw materials,  which  through  hard work are processed  into a final product  and sold to 
generate  income. If the business  is to be successful  the income  generated  must leave  
a margin  over costs. One business  is not allowed  to subsidise  the other.
How are the businesses  assessed?
Agricultural  fencing Sheep  farming
Area Within  100 mile radius  
Labour 0.75 units (owner)
0.25 units (Fence  Yard Manager)  
3 fence  teams70 Hectares  (172 acres)
0.25 units (owner)
0.75 units (farm manager)
1-2 units available  for 5-6 main roundups  
(shearing, showering, weaning,  
scanning,  lambing,  etc.)
Inputs Source  inputs  throughout  Europe  
based  on value  for money.Buying  inputs  through  a Group.
Genetics  are purchased  or reared on 
farm. The latter are performance  
recorded through the Shearwell  
Farmwork  programme  with the pedigree  
Lleyns also genetically  evaluated  
through the Signet Sheepbreeder  
Service.
Outputs The owner  is a price setter  based  
known  input costs  such as labour  
and materials.Owner  was a price taker irrespective  of 
input costs, until recently.  Now involved  
in a new initiative  with a local food 
processor  to supply  a leading  multiple.  
Costs of production  are valuable  in 
building  trust through  this relationship.
87
Key business  data
In today ’s world there is a tendency  to suffer  from information  overload.  Too much data 
often confuses  and leads to too few business  decisions.  Keep it simple  and focus on 
one thing at the time. Currently  the focus is on labour. Having  an excellent  farm 
manager  means  that some staff can be assigned  from fencing  to sheep  duties when 
needed,  but all labour  is paid for and must provide  a return.
> Input  costs  and output  prices
Lamb prices are currently  fairly buoyant. In 2008 each kg of lamb carcase  sold 
averaged  £3.13  (46%  of lambs  sold dead weight,  20% lambs  sold as stores  and 34% 
lambs  sold for breeding).  Live sales are converted  to deadweight  prices  assuming  a 
44% kill-out. Unfortunately  due to rising input prices  it cost £3.18  to produce  each kg 
of lamb. Therefore  it required  money  from the Single  Farm Payment  to cover  these  
losses,  and this cannot  be allowed  to continue.
> Labour
Labour  accounts  for a third of input costs at over £1.00/kg. It is the highest  single  
cost to the business.
Actions  to reduce  labour  costs  on the farm
Farm and flock size
At present  the farm extends  to 70ha of grassland,  supporting  700 lambing  ewes and a 
further 300 hoggets  and shearling  rams as followers. Current  stocking  rate is 
approximately  12 ewes/ha.  A recent  report  presented  to a Nl Task Force  examining  the 
production  and processing  costs associated  with beef and lamb concluded  that full time 
sheep  farmers  would  require  1300 ewes to make  the average  industrial  wage. This will 
create some difficult  as existing  management  policy dictates  that land is only rented 
close to the farm. This is based  on experience  that land more than 2 miles away costs 
an additional  £15 above rental price per acre in labour and transport.  Calculations  
suggest  that if the flock could be expanded  to 1000 ewes, labour  costs would reduce  
from over £1 to £0.70/kg  carcase  weight. There  is no point in wasting  effort  complaining  
about  the price of lamb, this is not under  farmer  control. Better  to re-organise  resources  
so the business  can compete  with flocks  around  the world where  one labour  unit looks  
after up to 5000 ewes.
There  is a need  to maximise  output/ha,  through  stocking  ewes  capabie  of weaning  
their own body  weight  when  iambs  are 14-16  weeks  of age
Efficiently  sell each lamb for maximum  returns
Selling  lambs  through  the local marketing  group  is labour  efficient.  It replaces  the need  
to spend 4 hours each time a batch of lambs is taken to the local live market. Such  
savings  could represent  £1/lamb. Selling direct to the processor  also provides  the
88
business  with valuable  feedback  about  the product  produced.  This information  can then 
be used to make informed  selection  decisions,  on a weekiy  basis. In the future the 
slaughter  profile  of lambs  will be the basis of a supply  contract  agreement  with a food 
processor.  By building  relationships  with the processor  and retaiier,  vital feedback  on 
lambs will be coming directly from the customer,  e.g, eating qualities,  such as 
tenderness  and succulence.
The flock must  consist  of fertile  ewes,  which  all lamb in a short  period  of time and 
are capable  of mothering  and growing  their lambs  quickly.  Terminal  sires must  
produce  lamb  with the desired  eating  qualities
House  stock  during  the winter  to make  feeding  easier
In a typical year, all sheep are removed  from owned land by mid December.  This 
means  there should  be high quality  spring  grass  to offer triplet  bearing  and poorer  ewes  
from February  onwards.  A proportion  of the flock is housed  and the remainder  grazed  
on neighbouring  dairy farms. In 2008, 600 ewes were housed  and offered  silage  at a 
cost of 45p/hd/week.  The remainder  of the flock were grazed  (off farm) at a cost of 
45p/hd/week.  It took 45 minutes  per day to check  the ewes in the house  whilst  it took 2 
hours  to travel  and check  those  grazing  ‘off farm’ . Housing  is much more  labour  efficient  
but has associated  fixed costs. However,  these are offset to some degree by 
subsequent  usage  over winter,  as well as for roofed  handling  facilities  year round. All 
sheep  are housed  by January  10 when scanning  usually  takes place. Triplet  bearing  
ewes are separated,  and in early February  are split into groups  of 15 - 20 depending  on 
breed and condition,  and allowed  out to grass at the far end of the farm. As lambing  
approaches,  the triplet bearing  ewes are grazed  closer  to the lambing  yard and during  
lambing  they are allowed  to lamb outdoor  in paddocks  adjacent  to the lambing  pens. If 
a ewe wants  to produce  3 lambs,  I will let her have them, but it’s important  her nutrition  
is managed  properly.
I can house  more  ewes  if they are of medium  size
Lambing  at grass  outdoors?
Whilst  there are massive  potential  labour  savings  with outdoor  lambing,  in this system  
the majority  of ewes are lambed  indoors.  Lambing  is the most important  time of the 
sheep  year, and hard work for 3 weeks  sets up the farm for profit  for the rest of 
the year. As the farm is on predominantly  heavy  clay soils that do not soak particularly  
well, severe  weather  at lambing  is always  a risk. Lambing  dates  would  also need to be 
moved  back a couple  of weeks  to ensure  sufficient  grass, remembering  also that the 
ram does not go out until later in November,  so grazing  will not be closed of until 
January  and so on. A further  consideration  in trying to establish  a closed  flock, is the 
need to record  birth weights,  lambing  ease, individually  tag lambs,  match up individual  
lamb numbers  with their mothers,  tail and castrate  lambs;  this can be carried  out a lot 
easier  from the house  before  allowing  the stock  out to the young  fresh grass.
89
There is a need for ewes that can lamb without  assistance  and terminal  sires  
capable  of producing  lambs,  which can be born easily. Also need sources  of 
recorded  genetics  bred for easier  lambing
Maximise  production  from orass/clover
Grass is the cheapest  feed to grow, but with unpredictable  weather  it can be very 
difficuit  to utiiise  efficientiy.  Grassland  is typicaliy  reseeded  every  7-10 years  with mid to 
iate heading  ryegrasses  and 1.5kg  of smali and medium  sized  clover  seed in the mix. In 
recent  times  the grass varieties  used have aii been high sugar. In addition  chicory  has 
been added  to the mix in fieids used only for grazing.  This should  help keep lamb worm 
burdens  under  control;  as well as promote  lamb growth  rates as grass  quality  diminishes  
in the autumn.  To maximise  production  from grass,  sheep  need to be selected  to thrive  
and finish when offered grass only. The efficiency  with which lambs convert  
concentrates  to carcase  weight  is very poor (10-14kg  concentrate;  1kg carcase  weight),  
and the labour  to carry the concentrates  makes  it unviable.  In recent  years particular  
interest  has been paid to fat depth Estimated  Breeding  Values  when selecting  rams,  
with rams carrying  very little fat avoided.
Ewes must produce  lambs  which are capable  of being finishing  when offered  
grass  only
In summary
Ewe genetics
> Lamb  unassisted
Display  excellent  maternal  behaviour,  including  milk production  
Mature  weight  65kg  
Wean  their own body  weight  of lamb
Display  resistance  to major  health  threats  such as worms,  footrot  and mastitis  
Able to produce  5 lamb crops>
>
>
>
Ram genetics
> Rapid  growth  from grass  only diets
> Produce  17-20kg  carcase  weight  with acceptable  fat cover
> Produce  lamb  with the desired  eating  quality  traits
> As shearlings  and older  rams be capable  of mating  150+ ewes
In this paper  the focus has been on the genetic  material  needed  for the business  to be 
successful  in the future. However,  what the industry  needs  are breeding  programmes  
and the breeders  willing  to use them,  to deliver  this genetic  material  to commercial  lamb  
producers.
90
Finishing  iambs  in the summer
Michael  Me Hugh 
Teagasc
Introduction
In midseason  lambing  flocks, grass forms the major part of the lamb ’s diet. In well-  
managed  grass based systems,  good quality  grass will supply  sufficient  energy  and 
nutrients  to have lambs  reach  target  slaughter  weight  for age. However,  in recent  years  
on many sheep  farms,  lambs  fed grass only diets are not achieving  growth  or drafting  
targets, and other diets (mainiy concentrates),  are been used to finish lambs to 
slaughter  weight.
The 2008 Teagasc  Sheep  Profit Monitor  shows  that on average,  the total variable  cost 
of producing  a lamb in 2008 was €35.55.  Concentrate  is the single  largest  variable  cost 
amounting  to €13.10/lamb  or 36% of total variable  costs. Even on the top 1/3 farms,  
concentrates  are costing  €11.80/Iamb  or 36% of total variable  costs (€32.30). Many  
farmers  are opting  to feed meals  so as fo finish lambs  earlier  to avoid price falls in the 
market  due to late finishing.
The market price drop in 2008 as shown in Figure 1 was 58c/kg from iate June  
(weaning)  until late July. The price drop for August  and September  was 12 and 13c/kg 
respectively.  Selling  lambs  at a similar  carcass  weight  of 19kg in late June and late 
September  resulted  in a price differential  of €15.77  per lamb in favour  of June sold 
lambs. It is becoming  more and more important  to achieve  high lamb growth  rates so 
that a significant  proportion  of lambs  are drafted  before  the price bottoms  in late August,  
and to ensure  there is sufficient  grass  for ewes  prior to mating.
Grass  finishing
At current  cereal  prices,  concentrates  costing  €200 - €280 per tonne are 230%  - 330%  
more expensive  than grazed grass. Clearly in the current economic  climate  the 
challenge  for sheep  farmers  is to finish lambs  on grass with the minimum  concentrate  
input. Good  grassland  management  can get mid season  born lambs  to weights  that will 
result in the majority  of lambs finishing  off grass without supplementary  feeding.  
Research  at Teagasc  Athenry  has shown  that lambs  can be finished  off grass  only diets  
provided  target  growth  rates and weight  for age is achieved.
Lamb  growth  pre-weaning  is optimised  by grazing  grass at a height  of 6cm in April and 
May, and increasing  to 7 - 8cm for June. In order to maintain  grass quality  in June,  
grass should  be eaten down to a post grazing  height of 4cm in April/May.  On most  
farms,  studies  have found that lamb growth  in the first 10 weeks  of age is at or near 
target but can often fall behind  target in the 4-week  period before weaning. Lamb  
growth rates are generally  better in mixed cattle/sheep  enterprises  compared  to all
91
sheep  grazing,  giving  higher  lamb weaning  weights  of about  2kg (E. Grennan,  Teagasc,  
Athenry,  1999). A similar  weaning  weight  advantage  was found in experiments  from 
grazing  pasture  that was not grazed  by sheep  the previous  year.
Figurel . Lamb  prices  (c/kg)  - excluding  VAT, 2006  -2008
500
—200S
•-2007
*-2006
250 ^ V
06/ 27/ 17/ 10/ 31/ 21/ 12/ 02/ 23/ 14/ 04/ 25/ IS 06/ 27/ 17/ 08/ 29/
01/ 01/ 02/ 03/ 03/ 04/ 05/ 06/ 06/ 07/ 08/ 08/ 09/ 10/ 10/ 11/ 12/ 12/
Source  Bord Bia
Table  1. Pre weaning  targets
Age Singles Twins
0-5 weeks  (gm/day) 386 306
5-10  weeks 367 331
10-14  weeks 245 229
Birth - weaning 337 292
Weaning  weight  (kg) 38.5 33.4
Drafted  at weaning  (%) 53 21
Keady,  T., Athenry  (2008)
Creep  grazing
The challenge  in June is to minimise  the drop in lamb growth  rates that occur  in the four 
weeks  pre-weaning.  This can be achieved  by grazing  at higher  sward heights  whilst  
also maintaining  grass quality  through  eating  down pastures  to a post grazing  height  of 
4 - 5cm. Forward  creep grazing,  where lambs can graze high grass covers  in the 
paddock  in front of the ewes, increases  lamb weaning  weight  by 2kg and facilitates  
grazing  pastures  tight in June without  reducing  lamb thrive. This will maintain  grass  
quality  for post weaning  grazing  in July.
92
Post weaning  lamb thrive
Lamb thrive can vary greatly  post weaning  and reports  of poor growth  are frequent  at 
this time. The target  post weaning  growth  rate on grass  ted iambs  is 150g per day (1kg 
per week),  but this can range  from iess than 100 to over 200 g/day  depending  on sward  
height  and type (Tabie  2). A pasture  height  of 9cm is optimum  for weaned  lambs  and 
should  be grazed  down to 6cm in a rotational  grazing  system. Pasture  grazed  tightly  in 
May/early  June keeps grass leafy and improves  lamb growth post weaning. Clean  
pastures  (such as after-grass  or swards  grazed  by cattle),  were also found  to result in 
additional  weight gain in weaned  lambs. Grass/clover  swards also improve  lamb 
performance.
Table  2. Effect  of pasture  height  and type on growth  rate (g/day)  in weaned  iambs
Pasture  height  (cm)
5 7 9
Old pasture  (g/day) 99 141 159
Ryegrass  pasture  (g/day) 90 139 153
Grass/clover  (g/day) 117 173 222
Grennan,  E., Teagasc  (1994)
Creep  feeding
Experiments  carried  out by Teagasc  Athenry  on creep  feeding  lambs  pre weaning  show:
• response  is better  where  grass  supply  is limiting,
• feeding  meals at 300g/day  on low swards  gave a similar  response  to feeding  no 
meals  on high swards,
• higher  response  from feeding  meals  in set stocking  compared  to rotational  grazing,
• in rotational  grazing  there is an added response  from creep grazing  and creep  
feeding,
• feeding  250g/day  from 5 weeks to weaning  resulted  in lambs consuming  17kg  
concentrates  and being  3 - 4kg heavier  at weaning,
• the carcass  conversion  ratio to feeding  250 - 300g/day  is in the order  of 10: 1 pre 
weaning,
• 20% of lambs  fed creep  drafted  at weaning  compared  to 3% where  no meals  were  
fed.
In further  experiments  concentrate  supplementation  post weaning  increased  daily live 
weight  gain, carcass  weight  and kill out %. Again the response  was greater  if grass  
supply  is limited  i.e. swards  under  9cm, and was better  when 250g concentrate  was fed 
compared  to 500g. Carcass  conversion  ratios  varied  from 7 to 12 on short grass  and 7 
to 20 on long grass.
93
Table  3. Effect  of sward  height  and concentrates  on lamb  performance
Sward  Height
___Concentrates
(g/dayLive weight  
(kg)Carcass  
weight  (kg)Kill - out %
8.6 0 43.4 17.3 39.8
250 45.7 19.1 41.9
500 47.2 20.0 42.4
5.9 0 41.6 17.1 41
250 44.8 19.1 42.6
500 46.6 20.3 43.7
Grennan,  E., Teagasc  Athenry
Economics  of concentrate  feeding
A study  by Massey  and Crosby  (2000)  was carried  in UCD on the performance  of creep  
fed and non-creep  fed lambs  on similar  pastures.  Two groups  of lambs  were compared  
where  one group  was fed grass  only and the other  group  was fed creep  from 5 weeks  of 
age, and limited  when their concentrate  intake  reached  500g/head/day.  Table  4 shows  
the drafting  pattern  and price per kg at 2008 prices  for each group.
Table  4. Drafting  dates  and 2008 price/kg  for grass  and 500g meal and grass  only 
lambs
Drafting  DateMeals  500g/head/dav No Meals
No. sold%
CumulativeNo. Sold%
CumulativePrice (c/kg)
June 7 3 3.3 0 0 450
June 21 16 20.9 2 2.2 460
June 28' 12 34.1 0 2.2 440
July 12' 20 56.1 18 21.5 410
August  9 24 82.5 14 36.6 393
August  21 5 87.9 14 51.6 388
September  6 6 94.5 14 66.7 392
September  20 5 100 12 79.6 383
19 20.4 stores
Approximately  56% of the meal fed group  were drafted  at weaning  on July 12, compared  
to 21% of the grass  only group. At the end of the trial on September  20 all the meal fed 
lambs were drafted for slaughter,  but approximately  20% of the grass fed group  
remained.  The average  age at slaughter  was 98 days and 130days  for the meal fed and 
grass  only group  respectively  (Table  5).
94
Table  5. Performance  of meal  fed and grass  only lambs
Meal Fed No Meals
No of lambs 91 93
Meals  consumed  (kg/lamb) 43 0
Age at slaughter 98 130
Sold at weaning  (%) 56 22
Not finished  by September  20 0 19 (20%)
Av. Live weight  at slaughter 40.9 41.6
Av. Carcass  wt. 19.3 18.2
Kill out % 46.9 44.1
Av. Price c/kg(2008) 416 396
Av. Lamb  price €80.22 €72.10
Include  store price €71.00
Table  6. Cost  analysis  of meal feeding
Meal €/t 280 230 200
Extra  value  of lamb (€) 9.22 9.22 9.22
Meal costs  (€) 12.04 9.89 8.60
Margin  over meals  (4) -2.82 -0.67 0.67
Value  of grass  35 days (€) 1.54 1.54 1.54
Margin  (€) -1.28 0.87 2.21
At 2008 lamb prices  (despite  the extra performance  in terms  of live weight  and carcass  
gains),  the margin  from feeding  meals is small at best and can be a substantial  cost 
unless  meals  are cheap. There  are additional  costs  in providing  creep  feeders  and extra  
labour  requirements  associated  with meal feeding. On many farms with low stocking  
rates the saving  on grass will not be utilized  and may result in over grown low quality  
grass  pastures.
When prices are stable it is difficult  to justify meals. However,  meals may be used 
strategically  to bring forward  drafting  dates when prices are high and likely to fall e.g. 
increasing  the drafting rate at weaning. Performance  from simple loose rations  
containing  predominately  cereals  will equal that of the more expensive  compound  
rations. In the UCD trial, pre weaning  daily weight  gains of 219 and 279g/day  for the 
grass-only  and meal fed lambs  respectively,  was lower than the 292g/day  achieved  on 
grass  only swards  by Keady  at Teagasc  Athenry.
Michael Doyle, Bord Bia Quality Lamb Producer  2008, uses excellent  grassland  
management,  fonward  creep grazing  and the limited use of concentrates  to optimize  
lamb thrive and achieve  a good drafting  pattern  in his mid season  lambing  flock. This 
results  in his sheep  enterprise  returning  a gross  margin  of €900 per hectare.  Lambs  are
95
introduced  to creep  feed at about  6 weeks  of age and are encouraged  to creep graze  
with the use of the creep  feeders.  Meal feeding  is limited  to 20kg per lamb and simple  
rations  comprising  mainly  of homegrown  cereals  costing  €200/t  are used. Total meal 
costs  fed to ewes and lambs  are less than €8 per lamb and under  24% of total variable  
costs.
Table  7. Michael  Doyle  2008  drafting  date and lamb  price
Month Number  drafted Cumulative  % Average  Price (€)
May 4 1 98.88
June 64 22 89.29
July 96 54 78.82
August 66 76 76.81
September 46 91 76.98
October 27 100 72.38
Total 303 80.00
Table 8 compares  the drafting  patterns  in the UCD trial with that of the Doyle and 
Teagasc  flocks. In the UCD trial, concentrates  fed per lamb was 43kg, in the Doyle  flock  
20kg per lamb and in the Teagasc  Athenry  flock all lambs  except  triplets  were finished  
on grass only. The Doyle flock includes  the progeny  of approx.  50 ewe lambs. The 
other 2 flocks have mature  ewes only. With concentrates  costing  €200/t,  the UCD  
lambs  are costing  €8.6/Iamb,  and the Doyle  flock  €4/lamb  extra in meal costs  compared  
to the Athenry  flock.
Table  8. Drafting  %
Date UCD (meals) Doyle  (meals) Teagasc  (no meals)
June 25 34 22 21
July 25 56 54 44
Aug. 25 88 76 44
Sept. 8 94.5 66 69
Oct. 6 100 91 87
Nov. 4 100 100 100
Good grassland  managers  and some  farms  with low stocking  rates are able to finish the 
majority  of their lambs  without  creep  feeding. However  where  target  drafting  dates are 
not being achieved,  it may be necessary  to feed meals to compensate  for poor 
performance.  The target  must be to control  and minimise  the meal input to a maximum 
of 25kg/lamb.  Lamb health and grass quality  are key to reducing  the need for creep  
feeding.  Generally  lamb performance  is adequate  up to the end of May on most farms.
96
Poor thrive is more of an issue from early June as grass  quality  deteriorates.  The best 
response  to creep meals is obtained  at low feeding  levels. Enhance  the response  to 
creep  meals  by using  them  to encourage  lambs  to creep  graze  ahead  of the ewes. Limit 
creep  meals  to a maximum  of 300 to 400g/lamb/day.
Target  drafting  pattern,  when lambing  in early to mid-March,  should  be 20% sold by 
weaning  at the end of June, 45% sold by the end of July, 70% sold by the end of 
August,  90% sold by the end of September  with all lambs  sold by the end of October.  If 
creep meal feeding is required  to achieve the drafting pattern outlined above,  
introducing  meals  from June 1 at 300g/lamb/day  will result in total consumption  of less 
than 25kg/lamb  in the flock. In the present  economic  climate  and at current  lamb prices  
the medium  term target for sheep producers  must be to concentrate  their efforts on 
improving  grass quality and incorporating  clover to minimize  dependence  on meal 
feeding. Strategic  use of concentrates  may be necessary  to finish tail enders  but 
spending  on concentrates  should  be reduced  to 20% of total variable  costs (from the 
current  36%). Achieving  this target  is worth  up to €100 per hectare.
Forage  crops
There has been increasing  interest  recently  in the role of forage  crops as a feed for 
finishing  lambs. Whole  forage  orops like kale or turnips  are more suitable  for winter  
feeding  ewes or store lambs than summer  fattening  mid season  lambs. Tyfon, rape 
sown after cereals  or stubble  turnips,  are the crops most suitable  for lamb fattening.  
Tyfon can be grazed  6 weeks  after sowing  and is capable  of giving yields of 4.5 - 
lOt/ha. It also has the advantage  in that it can be multi grazed  and if rotationally  grazed  
will give 3 grazings.  On tillage/sheep  farms  tyfon has a role as a break  crop that would  
improve  soil fertility  and provide  a cheap  high quality  feed for finishing  lambs. However  
in all grass  farms  the cost of sowing  the crop, the fact that the land is out of grass  for a 
whole year and the cost of reseeding  makes the crop uneconomical.  On farm 
measurements  carried  out by Michael  Gottstein  in Cork and Kerry, and an experiment  
carried  out by Joe Day at Kiidalton  College  in 2008 show a role for tyfon as part of a 
spring  reseeding  programme  on all grass  sheep  farms.
Tyfon sown at the rate of 5 - 6kg/ha (2 - 2.5kg/ac)  with a grass/clover  mix when  
reseeding  in spring  will provide  feed to finish 60 - 75 lambs  per hectare  (25 - 30/acre)  
from about  6 weeks  after sowing. The crop should  be sown 6/7 weeks  before  planned  
weaning  date. The only extra costs associated  with sowing  tyfon in this system  is the 
seed cost of approx  €93 per hectare.  In the above  studies,  growth  rates of 300g/day  (2 
kg/week)  were achieved  with weaned  lambs. When compared  to lambs  finished  on 
grass and 300g concentrates  per day, the tyfon lambs  killed out 0.6% higher  at 47.2%  
and were 0.3kg  heavier  carcass  weight. It was concluded  from the Kiidalton  experiment  
that finishing  lambs  on tyfon reduced  costs by €4 per lamb compared  to lambs  finished  
on grass and 300g concentrates,  and €9.52 per lamb when compared  to lambs fed 
concentrates  ad lib.
Forage  rape or stubble  turnips  can be sown as a catch crop after cereals  and used to 
finish lambs  in the autumn/winter  period. As these crops are sown from July onwards
97
and become  available  for grazing  from October,  they are more suitable  for late born mid 
season  lambs or bought in store lambs. Chicory  and other similar  type crops are 
reported  to be giving good results  in terms of lamb thrive and savings  on anthelmintic  
use. However,  there has been limited research  carried  with these crops on these  
islands  and at this stage  it is difficult  to say with any confidence  if they can play a role in 
finishing  lambs  economically.
98
Increasing  margins  from sheep
Andrew  Kinsella
Ballinaclash,  Rathdrum,  Co. Wicklow
Farm  details
All sheep  'upland  type farm' In mId-Wicklow
Altitude  170m above  sea level
Area 23.52ha
Ewes  to the ram 240-260
Replacements  62-70
Stocking  rate 2.5 Livestock
ewes/ha  Including  replacements)units per unadjusted  ha (around 13.5
This farm went down the intensive  route because  of limited  acreage  and to achieve 
higher margins. Off-farm  employment  meant that there was a requirement  for 
experienced  labour  at lambing  time. Acquiring  good labour  is not cheap  and the only 
way it can be paid for is by maximising  the number  of lambs  born.
Flock  performance  over past 5 years  (lambs/ewe  to ram)
Scanning  results  2.10  - 2.32
Weaning  rate 1.9-2
Sales  plus replacements  1.8-2
Around  40% of the ewes scan for threes  and fours each year. In 2009 there were  
105 ewes  with threes  and fours and 23 with singles.
Breeding  policy
The flock is self-contained,  and with the exception  of rams no stock  are purchased  off 
farm. Belclare rams have been used since 1986 to produce  replacements.  
Currently,  25% of stock are replaced  annually.  Terminal  sires consist  of Charollais 
and Suffolk. The Suffolk  is used to maintain  sufficient  ‘black ewes ’ to cross with the 
Belclares to produce  replacements.  All rams are genotype  ARR/ARR  for scrapie.
Replacements  (hogget  ewes)  are vaccinated  with Toxovax  to prevent  abortion.  This 
practice  commenced  following  a severe  outbreak  of abortion  in the early 1990's,  
when about  25% of the ewes aborted. Vaccination  also appears  to have helped  in 
reducing  the number  of ‘weaker  early born lambs ’ that despite  nursing,  invariably 
died within  a few days.
99
There is nothing  as annoying  as having  a ewe lambing  down with three lambs and 
not having  sufficient  milk - due to poor body condition  or having  no milk in one side 
because  an udder problem  had been overlooked  at ewe selection. Udders  are 
inspected  three times from weaning  to mating  and any ewes that have not regained  
body condition  at mating  are sold.
Housing
Success  with a high lamb crop is dependent  on having  ewes in good condition  at
mating  and maintaining  body condition  right through  until lambing  time.
• Fields  are grazed  off rotationally  from the end of October/early  November.  Once  
the last field has been grazed,  the ewes are housed.  In most years  housing  takes  
place around December  1 (in 2008, despite  the fact that rams went out on 
October  21 (as in all previous  years),  the ewes were housed  on November  15). 
Winter  forage  is generally  hay/haylage  with a small amount  of silage  being fed in 
the last few weeks  before  lambing.
• Ewes are winter  shorn  around  two weeks  after housing.  While  shearing  (i) allows  
for increased  pen density;  (ii) prevents  ewes from going onto their backs during  
April, and (iii) leaves  it easier  to monitor  ewe condition;  its main purpose  (iv) is to 
increase  lamb birth-weight.  The ewes get a small amount  of meals around  
shearing  time, aimed  at preventing  wool slip.
• Ewes are worm-dosed  2-3 weeks  after housing  and for the first time in over 20 
years  were also given a fluke dose this year. The only reason  for the worm dose 
is the higher  proportion  of triplets  and to give these ewes every chance  possible.  
It is considered  a waste  to dose ewes for stomach  worms  where  there are less 
than 20% bearing  triplets.
• Scanning  takes place between  January  5 and 7 each year. This leaves  exactly  
10 weeks  to lambing. Meals are immediately  introduced  to triplet bearing  ewes  
and increased  incrementally  to 1.25kg  for the last 2 weeks  pre-lambing.  Meals  
are introduced  to twin bearing  ewes eight weeks pre-lambing  so that they are 
receiving  1.0kg in the final two weeks  of pregnancy.
• A cheap  ration is used in the first weeks  of feeding  but is replaced  by one based  
on barley (35%), beet-pulp  (35%), soyabean  (25%), together  with molasses,  
minerals  and vitamins  for the month  before  lambing.
• Meal feeding  levels are also tied in with body condition. Should ewe body 
condition  start falling,  meal levels  will be increased  more rapidly. Also, individual  
ewes losing  condition  will be transferred  to a pen receiving  a higher  allocation.
• Ewes are foot-bathed  every 3 weeks using a 10% zinc sulphate  solution. A 
number  of years ago silage was the main winter  forage but as the ewes are 
bedded  on straw it was near impossible  to prevent  lameness.  Hydrated  lime is 
used along  the side fronts  of the pens as a further  aid in the control  of lameness.
100
Lambing
In earlier  years no ewe went out with more than two lambs,  and excess  lambs  were 
artificially  reared. As the number  of triplets  increased,  and after some  trial and error 
it was found to be easier to leave the three lambs on the ewe (provided  she is 
capable  of rearing  them). However,  it does require  planning  and attention  to detail - 
starting  with flock selection.  The importance  of ewe body condition  cannot  be over 
emphasised.  Over the past 10 years the farm has ended up with somewhere 
between  60 - 80 ewes rearing  triplets  at grass  each year.
There  is round  the clock supervision  for about  three weeks  from the commencement 
of lambing. After lambing,  ewes and lambs are moved  to individual  pens, navels  
dipped (50/50 iodine/methylated  spirits), ewes checked  for milk and a simple  
recording  made of tag number,  number  of lambs and any problem(s).  Ewes with 
serious  problems  such as blind teats are ear-punched.
Every  use is made  of ewes  with singles  to cross  foster. In some  cases  ewes  with two 
lambs  may get an additional  lamb. Normally  the lamb to be fostered  is fully dipped  in 
warm water with some salt added and is then placed  on a plastic (fertiliser)  bag 
behind  the lambing  ewe and wet fostered.  The plastic  bag collects  all the lambing  
fluids,  which  would  otherwise  be lost in the straw.
While in the individual  pens, lambs are inspected  every 4-5 hours and any lambs  
found  to be hungry  are stomach-tubed  with cow colostrum  (secured  from a local dairy 
farmer  and freezer  stored  in 2.51 plastic  bottles).  Rubber  rings are used for castration 
and de-tailing,  and female  lambs  sired by Belclare  rams are tagged.
Ewes rearing  triplets  occupy  individual  pens for an extra few days and there is a 
requirement  for additional  pens where  the lambs  are maintained  on the ewes.
At grass
The farm is divided into eight paddocks/fields, 
hay/haylage  in early May.two of which are closed for
Nitrogen  is spread  in early to mid February,  towards  the end March/early  April,  
during  June (on aftermaths),  and in August.
After let-out, triplet ewes and their lambs are treated  as a separate  flock and 
normally  rotate ahead of twins (on the best available  pasture)  until the second  
worm dose is given. Ewes are fed meals (around  Ikg/day)  for five weeks  and 
lambs  have continual  access  to concentrate  creep.
Lambs  are wormed  at 5 weeks,  10 weeks,  at weaning  and about every 8 weeks 
there after.
101
Animals  are foot-bathed  each time they are in the handling  unit for dosing  drafting  
etc.
All lambs  have access  to creep  (about  300g/day)  after the first worm  dose. Creep  
feeders  are placed  in fields with triplets  and lambs have access  through  creep 
gates. (The merits  of forward  creep  grazing,  particularly  during  wet conditions  are 
considered  highly  questionable!).
Replacements  graze  behind  twins and singles.
Weaning  takes  place  during  the first week  of July.
Replacement  ewe lambs  are selected  on weight  at weaning  and the practice  up to 
5-6 years ago was to discontinue  meal feeding  at this stage. However,  this led to 
wide variation  in lamb weight at housing  and in latter years meal feeding  is 
discontinued  when lambs  reach  40kg.
Majority  of cull ewes are sold at weaning.
An increase  in sward clover  content  is desirable,  but options  are limited in the 
absence  of reseeding  which  is not possible  in the current  situation.
Carcass  weights  and classification
Lambs  and cull ewes are sold through  the ‘Rathdrum  Quality  Lamb Producer  Group'.  
A summary  of lamb carcass  classification  and weights  for various  years  since 2000 is 
included  in Table 1 below. The data were compiled  from the summary  kill sheets  for 
each batch of lambs  sold. This exercise  may have underestimated  average  carcass  
weights  a little as the batch ‘total cold weight'  includes  lamb weights  up to the ceiling  
weight  (payment  weight)  only. Between  350 and 400 lambs were classified  each 
year.
Table  1. Summary  of lamb carcass  classification  for 2000-06
U3 R2 R3 Fat score  4 Average  carcass  wt.
(%) {%) (%) (%) (kg)
2000 40 2 51 5 19.65
2001 39 2 55 2 19.53
2002 20 2 71 4 19.53
2003 23 3 67 6 19.71
2004 42 3 45 9 20.34
2005 15 5 65 15 20.63
2006 27 3 65 5 19.88
2007 26 3 56 15 20.65
2008 34 4 51 11 20.52
102
• It is clear  from the results  that Increasing  average  lamb carcass  weight  resulted  In 
an increase  in the proportion  of carcasses  in fat class 4 for which there is a 
28c/kg  price reduction  and the loss of the quality  bonus.
• The most striking  aspect  of the results  is the variation  in the proportion  of U3's. In 
2000 and 2001 there was around  40%. During  2002 and 2003 this figure was 
almost  halved. Conformation  also follows  the rule that applies  to fatness  - that as 
carcass  weight  increases  conformation  scores  improve.  However  for 2000 - 2003  
there was little difference  in average  carcass  weights. In 2004, when average  
carcass  weight  was 20.3kg  over 40% of carcasses  were U3 while in 2005 there  
were only 15% despite  an increase  in carcass  weight.
The flock-breeding  programme  on the farm has remained  unchanged  since the mid 
1980's with all ewe replacements  homebred. The same Individual  rams that 
produced  lambs one year, with a high proportion  of U3 carcasses  produced  a low 
proportion  the following  year. This basically  rules out both ewes and rams as being  
the likely source  of the variation  in conformation.
Fast growing  lambs (such as an early lambing  system)  tend to have a higher  
proportion  of better conformed  carcasses,  while slower  growing  lambs (store lamb 
systems)  tend to have a lower  proportion.  In the case of the this flock, such aspects 
can also be discounted  as ram let-out date has been October  21 each year with 
around  80% of the lambs  finished  by the end of the following  October.
• Carcass  classification  has to be consistent  and transparent  to maintain  farmer 
confidence.  Unfortunately  this does not appear  to be the case, and farmer 
confidence  in conformation  classification  is totally  lacking,  and to many,  having  no 
system  is better  than the current  bad one.
Margins
The margins  as outlined  above make disappointing  reading  for any lamb producer 
(fixed  costs and Income tax  still has to be taken  into account!).
2008 was a particularly  pain-full  year due to high concentrate,  fertiliser  and contractor 
prices. The current  price cost squeeze  has put real pressure  on Intensive  sheep 
systems.
In the situation  as described  below, the high concentrate  usage is more a 
consequence  of high stocking  rate than higher  rearing  rate. The plan for the next few 
years Is to reduce  stocking  rate by 20-30%  and maintain  weaning  rate at near current 
levels. However,  this action  has it’s own dilemma.  When  ewe numbers  fall below  a 
certain  level, the sheep  enterprise  is making  such a small contribution  to income  that 
hobby  farming  with a limited  number  maintaining  the grassland  Is likely to be a more  
attractive  alternative.
103
Table  2. The financial  data for the farm
Costs  and Returns  in 2008
Sales € total € per ewe to ram (243 ewes)
380 lambs  @ €77.06  to factory 29,283 120
44 cull ewes @ €49.51 2,178 9
10 lambs  @ €75 sold live 750 3
Inventory  change  10 lambs 771 3
Total sales 32,982 135
Variable  costs
Purchased  concentrates  (45t) 12,478 51
Fertiliser 3,600 15
Veterinary  -€1400
- winter  dip €212
-Vetrazin  €1032 2,644 11
Contractor  - Hay making 960 4
- Spreading  FYM 520 2
Polythene 84
Levies 463 2
Transport 660 3
Straw 700 3
Sundry  (scanning,  sheep  tags) 302 1
Total variable  costs 22,411 92
Gross  margin 10,571 43
Perhaps^  producers  who maintained  stocking  rate at around nine ewes/ha  down  
through  the years (as signalied  by Teagasc  National  Survey  data), have followed  the 
correct  course.
104
Improving  sheep and flock health: some key pointers  for 
farmers  and industry
Michael  L. Doherty
School  of Agriculture,  Food  Science  and Veterinary  Medicine,  University  College  Dublin
Introduction
Despite  significant  advances  in our understanding  of economically  important  diseases  of 
sheep such as footrot,  the incidence  rate of these diseases  in many flocks remains  
unacceptably  high. The challenges  to be faced in the rapidly  changing  international  
agricultural  industry  of the 21®' century  are to prevent  disease,  enhance  animal  welfare  
and farmer  profitability  while taking  cognisance  of food safety  issues,  the consumer  and 
the environment.
Although  there will always  be more to learn about individual  diseases  of sheep  at the 
molecular  level, a significant  body of knowledge  already  exists  which  should  allow us to 
optimally  manage  and control  these diseases  (Doherty,  2007). However,  significant  
challenges  are faced with translating  ‘knowledge  into practice'. Surveys  of sheep  
farmers  in the UK for example,  have revealed  that there was little consensus  about  
optimal control methods  for footrot, and that few farmers  adopted  the practice  of 
segregation  of infected  sheep and flock entrants;  a fundamental  component  of the 
control  of any infectious,  contagious  disease  (Wassink  et al., 2005). This paper will 
highlight  some  of the flock health  challenges  facing  the sheep  industry  in Ireland.
Biosecurity
Ireland has seen the importation  of many diseases  such as Sheep Pulmonary  
Adenomatosis  (Jaagsiekte)  and Caseous  Lymphadenitis  (O'Doherty  et al., 2000).  
Furthermore,  memories  of the Foot and Mouth outbreak  of 2001 and the ever-present  
threat  of Blue Tongue  infection  underline  the importance  of disease  biosecurity  at both 
national  and individual  flock level. Awareness  of biosecurity  among  sheep farmers  
needs  to be raised,  as it is critical  when purchasing  replacement  or foundation  stock, 
including  rams, that farmers  are cognisant  of the health  status  of the incoming  sheep.  
Some  of the most important  diseases  to be aware  of when introducing  new stock  include  
sheep  scab, resistant  internal  parasites,  footrot,  contagious  ovine digital  dermatitis  and 
orf.
General  guidelines
1. Replacements  should be bought  from flocks of known disease  status (e.g. 
Disease  Accreditation  Schemes  for Maedi  Visna  and Enzootic  Abortion);
2. Purchased  sheep  must be quarantined  and observed  for 21 days;UK
105
3. Provide  stock-proof  fences/hedges  and if possible  avoid  common  grazing  and do not 
borrow  rams;
4. Prevent  access  of birds, rodents  and pets including  cats to stored  feed;
5. When  purchasing  rams,  try and identify  R1 animals  (scrapie  resistant).
The quarantine  period is critical as during  this time the sheep can be observed  and 
treated for the diseases  above as appropriate.  Since anthelmintic  resistance  is 
predominantly  to the white drenches  (benzimidazoles),  all purchased  sheep  should  be 
treated  with a combination  of avermectin  and levamisole  wormers  and yarded  for 24-48 
hours afterwards  to ensure  that no resistant  eggs are passed  onto pasture  by the 
treated  animals.
Foot lameness
Footrot  represents  a particular  flock health  challenge  as it continues  to be a significant  
cause  of economic  loss, and is a major  welfare  concern.  Interestingly,  studies  have cast 
doubt  on the efficacy  of routine  foot trimming  in control  and prevention  of footrot. While  
careful  and judicious  foot trimming  clearly  has a role as part of the treatment  of sheep  
severely  affected  with footrot In high prevalence  flocks, evidence  is emerging  that 
routine  trimming  is detrimental  to foot health In flocks that are trying achieve  a low 
prevalence  status  (Abbot  and Lewis,  2005). Implicit  in these  approaches  is the need for 
basic record keeping  and lameness  scoring  as part of the flock health plan. The 
emergence  of contagious  ovine digital dermatitis  (CODD)  as a significant  cause of 
lameness  in Irish sheep  flocks  underlines  the need for veterinary  diagnostic  input in the 
context  of flock health  surveillance  and planning.  Contagious  ovine  digital  dermatitis  is a 
disease  of the ovine hoof, which results in acute, severe  lameness.  In contrast  to 
virulent  foot rot, which Is characterized  clinically  by lesions  involving  the heel and the 
Interdigital  area, CODD Is characterised  by ulcerative  lesions  of the coronary  band 
which  progress  and result in disruption  of the abaxial  wall lining the hoof and loss of the 
horn case in untreated  cases. Whilst documented  evidence  of CODD in Ireland is 
sparse,  anecdotal  evidence  from shepherds  highlighting  persistent  ‘Incurable ’ footrot  
and Ineffective  vaccine  strategies,  suggest  that CODD may be prevalent  and being 
incorrectly  diagnosed  as virulent  footrot. Recent  research  at University  College  Dublin 
has now identified  the causative  treponeme  bacteria  associated  with this disease  in Irish 
sheep  (Sayers  et al., 2009).
Sustainable  parasite  control
Anthelmintic  resistance  to worms  is of major  concern  to the industry. It is an individual  
farm phenomenon  as the pattern  of resistance  on a given  farm can be totally  different  to 
that on neighbouring  farms, highlighting  the importance  of biosecurity.  Body condition  
score  and faecal  worm  egg counts  should  be monitored  at specific  times. This depends  
on management  practices  on the farm and it may also be useful  to Increase  monitoring  
etc. in times  of management  change. Regular  monitoring  of faecal  worm egg counts  to
106
avoid  overly  frequent  drenching  on the one hand,  and unacceptable  production  losses  or 
welfare  problems  related  to bowel  worms  on the other is important.  Worms  should  be 
tested  for resistance  every  2-3 years,  with each test customised  to one specific  type of 
drench  in order to have an idea which drench  should  form the main player in worm  
control  on that farm. The simultaneous  use of effective  anthelmintics  e.g. combining  
levamisole  with a benzimidazole  or ivermectin  may be a useful  way of limiting  the onset  
of resistance.  There  is also significant  evidence  of resistance  in fluke to the widely  used 
anthelmintic  triclabendazole  and every effort should  be made to address  this problem  
(www.deliver-Droiect.eu f.
The SCOPS  (sustainable  Control  of Parasites  in Sheep)  inititiative  in the UK represents  
a positive  industry  response  to the challenge  to balance  the need to control  worms  
against  a reduction  in the selection  pressure  for resistance  in the worm populations  
(www.nationalsheep.ora f. It is based  on a number  of key messages.
• Resistance  to benzimidazoles  (white  drenches)  is now widespread.
• Resistance  to anthelmintics  is often brought  in with purchased  sheep.
• Mature  sheep  that are healthy  have immunity  to most  worms.
• Underestimation  of the weight  of sheep  results  in under-dosing  and facilitates  
the development  of resistance.
• Farmers  who use Faecal Egg Counts  to monitor  worm burdens  use less 
anthelmintic  without  any loss in flock performance.
• Dosing  sheep  and then putting  them straight  on to clean pasture  increases  the 
risk of anthelmintic  resistance  developing  on your farm.
• Rams  are being bred that have a greater  resistance  to worms. This trait is 
passed  on to their progeny,  reducing  dependence  on anthelmintics  in the 
future.
• Preserve  susceptible  worms. Treat sheep a few days before moving  onto 
clean  pasture  and consider  leaving  a small number  of sheep  untreated.
Clostridial  diseases
These  diseases  are invariably  fatal; they include  pulpy kidney,  lamb dysentery,  braxy  
and tetanus  and worryingly,  recent  evidence  from the veterinary  diagnostic  laboratories  
in both Ireland  and the UK suggest  that there has been an increased  incidence  of 
mortality  from these  diseases  associated  with failure  to use the vaccine  or inappropriate  
use of the vaccine.  There  can be no excuse  for not using these  economioally  effective  
vaccines  on Irish farms, and all purchased  animals  should  receive  a full course  if their 
status  is unknown.
107
Pneumonia
Pasteurellosis  continues  to be a cause  of significant  economic  loss and to illustrate  this, 
a recent  outbreak  of pasteurellosis  in a 200 ewe flock investigated  by the author  was 
associated  with over 10% mortality  in a pregnant  ewes; the flock was unvaccinated,  
highlighting  the importance  of vaccination  in prevention.  Mycoplasma  ovipneumoniae  is 
also being diagnosed  in cases  of acute pneumonia  in Irish sheep  (Sheehan  et al., 2007) 
and infected  sheep  can be detected  by laboratory  testing  of nasal  discharges.
Flock  health  planning
A recently  published  report by the National  Sheep Association  in the UK, which  
examined  attitudes  towards  health  planning  in the English  sheep  sector,  emphasized  the 
following  fundamentally  important  points:
• The desire  for the dissemination  and clear communication  of relevant  Information  
on health  and welfare  issues  amongst  sheep  farmers;
• The need to link sheep health and welfare to the efficient  and profitable  
management  of the business  is a key driver;
• Prevention  on a flock basis  is the optimal  way forward  for sheep  farmers;
• Welfare  is a growing  concern  against  the background  of consumer  confidence;
• Flock  health  plans  need to be as simple  and practical  as possible;
• Any successful  programme  to improve  the health  and welfare  of the sheep  sector  
through  better  planning  and understanding  will require  a cross  industry  delivery.
The flock health plan should  be agreed  between  the farmer  and the veterinarian.  It 
involves  regular,  planned  visits to the flock by the farmer ’s own veterinary  surgeon.  The 
key visit is at the pre-tupping  stage in the autumn. Where  appropriate  this could be 
followed  by visits at mid-pregnancy  and shortly  after lambing.  It would  be preferable  If 
all of the visits were carried  out by the same veterinary  surgeon,  who would also be 
responsible  for drawing  up the health  plan on the first visit as well as an annual  review. 
At a minimum,  flock health  planning  require  records  to be kept of:
1. Number  of ewes  to ram.
2. Scanning  results.
3. Number  of abortions.
4. Number  of ewe deaths.
5. Number  of barren  ewes.
6. Number  of lambs  born alive/dead.
7. Number  of lambs  reared/sold.
8. Medicines  record  book.
9. Movement  book.
Animal  health is critical  to the International  competitiveness  of Irish agricultural  product  
because  of its potential  to affect product  quality,  or consumer  perceptions  thereof,  and 
because  national  animal  health  status is an important  determinant  of Irelands  ability  to
108
access export markets. The creation of Animal Health Ireland (AHI), 
(httD:// www.animalhealthireland.ie ). the initial aim of which is to provide  a coherent  and 
unified approach  to the control of certain bovine diseases  that are not subject  to 
governmental  regulation  offers  an exciting  template  which in time could be applicable  to 
other  sectors.
A major challenge  in the context  of flock health will be to develop  and implement  
practical,  integrated,  flock health plans for the management  and prevention  of the 
economically  significant  diseases  of sheep. These plans would assist farmers  in 
providing  reassurance  regarding  the health status of the farming  enterprise,  thus 
increasing  trust, transparency  and acceptability  on issues  of animal  health  and welfare  
to the sheep  industry,  retailers  and consumers.
Optimal disease prevention  will require the adoption  of a multidisciplinary  team  
approach  involving  the farmer,  the veterinarian  and the farmer ’s advisors,  nutritional  and 
animal  breeding  consultants.  While  strategic  whole-flock  advice  and the implementation  
of appropriate  preventative  measures  are not new concepts,  flock health plans will 
become  increasingly  important  in the sheep  industry  of the 21®' century.
References
Abbot, K.A. and Lewis,  C.J. (2005), Current  approaches  to the management  of ovine  
footrot. The Veterinary  Journal,  169: 28-41.
Doherty,  M.L, (2007). Addressing  the knowledge  bottleneck.  Irish Veterinary  Journal,  
60: 521-521
O'Doherty,  S., Prendergast,  M., Scanlon,  M., Schofield,  W., Doherty,  M.L. Frame,  M. 
and Bassett,  H.F. (2000). Corynebacterium  pseudotuberculosis  infection  in an imported  
ewe. Irish Veterinary  Journal,  53: 632-634.
Sayers,  G., Marques,  P.X., Evans,  N.J., O’Grady, L., Doherty,  M.L., Carter,  S.D. and 
Nally, J.E. (2009). Identification  of Spirochetes  associated  with Contagious  Ovine  
Digital  Dermatitis.  Journal  of Clinical  Microbiology,  47:1199-1201.
Sheehan,  M., Cassidy,  J.P., Brady, J., 
R.A.J. and Markey, B.K. (2007).  
bronchopneumonia  in lambs  in Ireland.Ball, H., Doherty,  M.L., Quinn, P.J., Nicholas,  
An aetiopathological  study of chronic  
Veterinary  Journal,  173: 630-637.
Wassink,  G.J., Moore,  L.J., Grogono-Thomas,  R. and Green,  L.E. (2005). Footrot  and 
interdigital  dermatitis  in sheep:  farmers ’ practices,  opinions  and attitudes. Veterinary  
Record,  157: 761-766.
109
Making  more money  from identifying  the most profitable  
suckler  cows
Ross Evans^  Pat Donnellan^  Andrew  Cromie^  and Peter  Amer*  
t|CBF,  ‘Abacus  Bio, N.Z.
Introduction
The majority  of the commercial  Irish suckler  cow herd consists  of crossbred  cows  
from a range of breed matings.  The use of crossbred  cows has been practised  for 
many years and is relatively  unique in Europe. Breeding  a similar  type of cross  
within the herd can be difficult, hence many herd owners prefer to purchase  
replacements  rather than breed specifically  for replacements  within the herd.  
Traditionally  there are two main purchase  options:  the purchase  of dairy-beef  cross  
heifer calves,  or weanlings  from dairy herds or weanling  heifers  from other suckler  
beef herds. These two genotypes  of suckler  cow have different  strengths  and 
weaknesses.  Beef-dairy  cross females  are favoured  for their milkability  and ease of 
management  traits, while suckler  herd replacements  are favoured  for their weanling  
and carcass  merits. However  the categorisation  of heifers  or cows into various  types  
in order  to decide  on merit for purchase  can have drawbacks  in that it will over value  
certain  cows and undervalue  others. It is likely that there is as much difference  in 
profit potential  between  cows of the same type (e.g. two Limousine  x Simmental  
crosses)  as there is when comparing  two different  breed types (e.g. a Limousine  x 
Simmental  cow versus  a Belgian  Blue x Friesian  cow). The development  of selection  
indexes  offer a better prediction  of profit, whereby  the replacement  heifers  future  
profit potential  is based on the performance  of her relatives. The same principle 
applies  to cows but with higher  reliability,  as her previous  progeny  performance  is 
also taken Into account.  Such a system  of individual  comparison  could offer much  
more to improving  future  farm profits  and overcome  the traditional  characterisation  of 
breed  or crosses.
One of the main priorities  of the ICBF database  is to capture  movements  and 
destinations  of cattle born in Irish beef herds in order to evaluate  all aspects  of a 
cow’s impact  on farm profitability;  - from the birth of fhe cow herself,  evaluation  of her 
progeny,  through  to eventual  slaughter  at the end of her productive  life. There  are 
many links needed  in order to achieve  this goal, such as information  flowing  back 
from the marts,  factories,  farm-to-farm  movements  and information  generated  on the 
farms themselves.  The purpose  of this paper is to determine  a lifetime profit  
measure  on a sample  of commercial  suckler  cows which have complete  information  
throughout  their lifetime,  and examine  the relationship  between  this measure  of profit  
and the replacement  component  of the new €uro-star  Suckler  Beef Value (SBV)  
indexes  which ICBF has commenced  publishing  over the last two years.
Figure 1 shows a diagrammatic  representation  of the costs of production  and 
revenue  generated  from a typical  commercial  suckler  cow and the various  informative  
traits which  ICBF  collect  In order  to predict  the overall  profit  value  of these  cows.
110
Figure  1: Information  used by ICBF  to determine  Suckler  cow profitability
Analysis
All available  calving  data, mart data, factory  data and CMMS  movement  data on 
suckler  herds in the ICBF database  was examined.  The purpose  was to find a group  
of cows that were still alive, and measure  the profit they generated  to date. Age at 
first calving,  calving  interval  and calving  data provide  information  relating  to the cost 
of rearing  the cow to the point of calving,  and her maintenance  cost throughout  her 
lifetime. Mart weight, price per kg, carcass traits and number of daughter 
replacements  provide  profit contribution  through  her progeny. In order to carry out 
this piece of work the number  of progeny  and current  fate of all her progeny  had to 
be available  on the ICBF database.  This limited  the dataset  significantly  as most  
herds only joined  the ICBF database  in 2008 and therefore  would have incomplete  
information  for many  older  cows.
In order  to determine  the lifetime  profitability  of a cow, assumptions  had to be made  
regarding  costs of production  such as calving  costs and feed costs, and also for 
revenue  from progeny  beef output  and production  of replacements.  Monetary  values 
placed  on these traits were taken from the economic  values  used to create  the SBV 
indexes. Table 1 shows  the monetary  values  for a number  of the key traits in the 
analysis. The actual mart sale price/kg  and factory  price information  were used  
where it was available. Certain assumptions  were also made regarding  the dry 
matter  intake (DM) of the progeny.  It was assumed  that where  female  progeny  of
111
cows remained  in the herd and became  replacements,  the cow was credited  with the 
purchase  value  of the replacement.
Table  1. Economic  assumptions  used  to evaluate  lifetime  profit
Trait Economic  Value  assumed
Age at first calving  of the cow herself
Cost of caesarean  (calving  survey  4)
Cost of veterinary  assistance  (calving  survey  3) 
Cost of DM/kg  finishing  diet, steers  and heifers  
Cost of DM/kg  finishing  diet, young  bulls 
Dry Matter  Intake  (kg/day)  bulls, steers,  heifers  
Value  of in-calf  replacement  on point of calving
Cosf of delayed  calving  interval
Other  variable  costs  maintenance  of suckler 
cow such as purchased  feed, fertiliser,  
contractor,  vet etc.€0.96/day  past 2 yo 
(opportunity  cost of no calf) 
€306 (Vet costs plus labour)  
€138 (Vet costs plus labour)  
€0.126 /kg DM 
€0.150 /kg DM 
6kg, 7kg, 8kg 
€1391
€1.37  / day over 365 days,  
lighter weaning  weight
€250 per year
Figure 2 shows the year of first calving,  the bottom  20%, average  and top 20% 
lifetime  profit of the cow for 102,989  cows, which calved  for the first time between  
2002 and 2006  and had full traceability  on their progeny.
As expected  lifetime  profit shows  a strong  relationship  with the year of first calving  of 
the cow, and hence  the number  of progeny  which generated  income  through  mart 
sales, slaughter  in the factory  and generation  of daughters  as replacements.  The
112
results  show  a large deviation  in profit  generated  when comparing  the top 20% to the 
bottom  20% for any individual  year. The difference  is larger as the cows get older 
(have more progeny)  and thus more time to express  their profit potential. Not 
surprisingly  the revenue  from progeny  sales for the bottom  20% is not enough  to pay 
for the cost of keeping  the cow. Sadly this is the case on a lot of Suckler  farms  
today. Most farmers  can readily identify  their most profitable  cows late in life 
themselves.  Identifying  and culling  poor cows is probably  a more important  exercise.  
A more useful tool would be a predictor  of profit while the cow is relatively  young,  
which  would  allow  farmers  to cull poor cows at an earlier  stage  and replace  them  with 
heifers  of better  genetic  merit. This is the aim of the €uro-star  SBV indexes,  and for 
commercial  cows in particular  the two replacement  indexes;  the Milk & Fertility  index  
and the Calf Quality  index. The Milk & Fertility  index contains  the traits; age at first 
calving,  calving difficulty,  maternal  weaning  weight (milkability),  calving interval,  
survival  and cull cow carcass  weight. The Calf Quality  index is a reflection  of the 
quality  of the calf the cow is likely  to produce  and factors  in weaning  weight,  carcass  
traits and feed intake.
Using the dataset  of 102,989  cows from Figure 1, 13,929  cows were identified  as 
having a sire recorded  and hence an SBV index. From this subset  of cows the 
relationship  of lifetime  profit with the Milk & Fertility  index and the Calf Quality  index  
was determined.  Again  there was a requirement  that all cows had full traceability  on 
all their progeny  from birth to final destination  of mart sale, whether  for export,  
subsequent  slaughter  in Ireland, or subsequent  use as a replacement  heifer,  
slaughter  directly  out of the herd or kept as a replacement  in the herd. Of the 13,929  
animals  in the analysis  2%, 6%, 14%, 27% and 52% were born in the years 2002,  
2003, 2004, 2005 and 2006 respectively.  Figure  3 shows  an example  of the €uro-  
star indexes  available  on a cow and the Replacement  Value at the bottom  divided 
into the Milk & Fertility  component  and the Calf Quality  component.  The same  
indexes  are available  for cows  with sires recorded.
Figure  3. An example  of a €uro-star  Index on an eight year old commercial  
suckler  cow
Within  Breed Across  Breed
★★★★★ Suckler  Beef  Value €178 44% ★ ★★★
★★★Beef  Value
Calving  Traits -€4 38% ★ ★★★
★ ★★★★ Weanling  Export €94 50% ★ ★★★★★★ Beef Carcass €106 51% ★ ★
★ ★★★★Replacement  Value
Milk & Fertility €141 24% irirififir
★ ★★★ Calf Quality €298 52% ★★★
113
Table 2 shows  the relationship  between  the estimated  lifetime  profit for the 13,929  
cows with a first calving  in the years 2002-2006  and the two Replacement  indexes.  
The results show a strong relationship  between  the indexes  and the estimated  
lifetime  profit. Cows  that have a strong  combination  of both Milk & Fertility Traits  and 
Calf Quality  traits (overall  replacement  value)  have the best lifetime  profit. In fact two 
of the five groups,  “cows with an average  overall  replacement  value"  and “cows  in the 
bottom  20% for replacement  value" had negative  profit, indicating  that the revenue  
from progeny  sales was not enough  to cover  costs  of production.  Comparing  the Top 
20% to the Bottom  20% on overall  replacement  value, there is a difference  of €820 
over the lifetime  of the cows  to date. Spread  over the average  of 3.5 calves  (average  
of Top and Bottom  20%) this equates  to a difference  of €234  per calf born.
Further  analysis  of the data indicates  that the Top 20% of animals  for Milk & Fertility  
index have slightly  higher  profit than the Top 20% for Calf Quality  index, indicating  
the importance  of this index as a reflection  of lowering  costs of production  and 
increasing  farm profit. The higher profit is coming  from a combination  of lower  
rearing  cost of the cows themselves,  more calves born, lower mortality,  reduced  
calving  intenral  and more replacements  returned  to the herd. Hence  even though  the 
Top 20% of cows  for Calf Quality  index had higher  returns  in the mart and the factory  
per calf born, these cows produced  less calves to offset the production  costs.  
Looking  at the average  performance  of the calves  sold in the mart, the Top 20% of 
cows on overall replacement  value had higher  progeny  mart weights  (379kg)  than 
either  the Top 20% on Milk & Fertility  index (365kg)  or Calf Quality  index (373kg)  at 
roughly  the same  age. This suggests  that the progeny  of these  cows got the benefit  
of better  genes  for growth  rate, and also better  rearing  from their dams - most likely  
due to better  milk yield. Cows in the Top 20% for Calf Quality  index, as expected  
had higher progeny  prices per kg in the marts and better progeny  carcass  
performance,  but less overall  lifetime  profit from both sources  due to poorer  fertility  
traits when compared  to the Top 20% on overall  replacement  value. The cows in the 
Top 20% for Milk & Fertility  have more young-stock  still on the farm compared  to all 
the other categories,  followed  by the Top 20% on overall  replacement  value which  
will in the future widen the revenue  gap between  these two and the rest. The 
category  with the lowest  level of young-stock  still on farm is the Top 20% on Calf 
Quality  category  which has also has the lowest Milk & Fertility  (-€31). The last 
column  in Table  2 shows  the average  number  of daughter  replacements  out of each 
category  of index comparison,  and also the number  of grand-progeny  from these  
daughter  replacements.  One point to note is that this number of daughter 
replacements  includes  those  daughters  sold on which calved  down outside  the herd 
of origin. The average  number  of daughters  which  remained  in the herd of origin for 
replacement  was 0.1 for four of the categories  listed, with the only exception  being  
the Top 20% for Milk & Fertility  category  where  an average  of 0.2 daughters  were  
kept in the herd of origin  for replacement.
114
OO
CM
CMOo
CM
(00>«
i §0)0
> « 
O -o 
m ra
(0 =
x: r.t: 9)S“- 
m "8
5 ^ 
8 i 
S ®
0> 3
a 8
.e
o ®
V o
E “>s 0) 
0) x:o
s r
ra <5 
E “■ ~ o
in in 
0 oB’i
c 3
S 0 S Xifa” 
!c c 
(0 0
11
£ & 
0 *“
CM 0 0£ 
^ *0 0 c 
I— 0Au96ojd puej 6 
jsqiiinu  aBejaAV  / 
}uauiaoB|daj  e aaiaoaq  
sja;q 6nEp ou 'Bav00o
ind
apBjB  ssBOJBO  Bav+
CD
1?
B 00
CD
(sAbp) aBB/(B>|)  
iqBjaAn  SSBOJBO  'Bav05 PCO CO
CO to
(B>| jad
sjuao)  aoud  pbiai Bav05h-
(sAbp) aBB 
/ {B)i) iqBiaM  pBi^ BavCO
rs» in
CO
p|os siBLUjUB  ou BavCM
pJ8L| Uj 8A!|e |||}S
AueBojd  6unoA Bavr«.
(sAbp)
IBAjaiu!  Bu|A|bo Bavo
sAbp 82 IB 
pBap  AuaBojd  ou Bavtood
ujoq saA|E 0 'ou Bavh-
CO
AjiiBnb
)|bo/Aj!|!PB) '8 )(|!Uj/an|BA  
•|daj :san|BA  xapui05
MP 52 yt: 00
CM CMto MP
COw
(sjBaA)  
Bu!A|bo gi. JB aBvTj-
CM
(3) lliOJd 
8iii!;8^!l |o diBUJjis^00
COtow
O
0c0
05
$o
o
o
05 X
B 00 73O .E■&1  
£ +
3 £ 
ss eo £
CM * Q.°®o £
c
« ® ••= 5 £ ra° M 13O > cro
CM 55 m p
CO ^
CQ 7“
Oi^ CM
n ^
CMw
O)
csi
0 = SE„  
« 0 ••= 5 3 W,9 0 3 O > ad
II
0 73|S
CD
CO
O S h- o
CM oO
6 =i
E ® 0 
.£ 0 E
w >5 -5? <0 OO 2 +II
+5“:
0 73|™
CD
^ O
CO to
Tto
to
5 a>
in m;^ m CM °°
c\i
w -c 5 0
o oao
CO
COfi- 05 
CO <£>
r«^ m
CO
'V
CM
O
CM« X3-B "o 
.<= - 
w ^i 3
o o-
115
The differences  shown  in Table  2 between  the Top 20% of cows for the various  
indexes  are likely to have originated  from different  breeds/breed  crosses.  
Figure  4 shows  the breed  type of the top 20% for (a) Overall  Replacement  value 
(Milk & Fertility  + Replacement  Calf Quality),  (b) Milk & Fertility  index, (c) 
Replacement  Calf Quality index for the 15 most frequent  types in each  
category.  In the Top 20% on Overall  Replacement  merit, seven  different  beef 
breeds  are represented  and some first cross dairy beef cows. However  the 
comparison  of the Top 20% for Milk & Fertility  versus  the Top 20% for Calf 
Quality  shows  quite a different  picture  with the traditional  breed  crosses  and the 
dairy-beef  crosses  predominant  in the former  and the continental  breed  crosses  
dominant  in the latter.
However  there is still a large breed mix with 6 beef breeds  and a number  of 
dairy crosses  in the Top 20% for Milk & Fertility,  while there were seven beef 
breeds  represented  in the Top 20% for Calf Quality. The dams of the dairy  
crosses  were a mixture  of Holstein  and Friesian.  Table  3 shows  the percentiles  
for the 23,929  cows in the analysis  compared  with all commercial  crossbred  
cows which have indexes  and which had a calf in the last two years (107,522).  
The comparison  shows  that the cows in the analysis  had a relatively  similar  
average  index and spread  in index,  compared  to all commercial  crossbred  cows  
in the ICBF database  with indexes.  Thus conclusions  drawn  from the analysis  
should  also be relevant  to the commercial  cow population  as a whole.
Figure  4. Breed  type of the top 20% of 23,929  cows  in the anaiysis  for (a) 
overail repiacement  vaiue (Miik & Fertility  + Calf Quality);  (b) Milk & 
Fertility  index;  (c) Calf Quality  index for the 15 most  frequent  types  in each  
category
350(a) Top 20% on Overall  Replacement  Value
0 tHiuiiih
CO£■SsUJ Xs< UJ X (0
K ‘<5_i u X o _l X COX
■o ■o X X X X X XCD ■3ZoX X(0 ViS XssS CQ
ViS oXo
Breed  type of cow
116
(b) Top 20% on Milk & Fertility
(c) Top 20% on Calf Quality
COs X (0s < UJCO COs CD CD X
X oXXXCD CD CO
XoH
XX
ssJX
XX
XCD
OQX
CDX
sX
XX
Xo o u CQ o u
Breed  type of cow
117
Table  3. Comparison  of the indexes  on the 23,929  cows in the analysis  
with all commercial  crossbred  cows  which  have indexes  and which  had a 
calf in the iast two years  (107,522)
Category TraitBottom
20%Bottom
40%AverageTop
40%Top
20%Top
10%
23,929  cows Milk & fertility -€34 €19 €43 €69 €126 €162
in current 
analysisReplacement  
calf quality€97 €166 €190 €220 €282 €330
All (107,522)  
commercial 
cows with 
indexesMilk & fertility
Replacement 
calf quality-€30
€62€26
€147€49
€173€77
€203€133
€272€167
€324
Conclusions
The analysis  of lifetime  profit indicates  that the bottom  50% of commercial  cows  
struggle  to return a profit to suckler  farmers. The cow lifetime  profit measure  
calculated  in this analysis,  showed  a good relationship  with the €uro-star 
indexes  for replacement  merit on these  cows. This is an important  finding  as it 
indicates  the indexes  are heading  in the right direction.  However  the lifetime  
profit measure  calculated  also has some obvious  limitations:  i) the same  
variable  cost structures  apply across  all cows and herds even though  there are 
big management  differences  on farms  for both cows and their progeny;  ii) there  
is no accounting  for farm fixed costs in analysis;  iii) there is no accounting  for 
genetic  merit of sire in the analysis;  iv) the cow has to have a number  of 
progeny  before  profit is known. Not withstanding  all these limitations,  there are 
enough cows in the comparison  to counter  these management  and sire 
differences  and allow a comparison  with the €uro-star  replacement  value 
indexes  on the cows.
Selection  indexes  can allow farmers  to rank cows for culling or selection  of 
replacements  on their own individual  merits  and are independent  of the breed  or 
cross type to which the animal belongs. However,  the indexes  also have  
limitations.  Among  the most obvious  are that they require  a sire to be known  on 
the cow. Currently  only 10% of the -960,000  commercial  cows have a sire 
known. Also low reliability  and inaccurate  indexes  on the cows that do have  
indexes,  are due to unavailability  of quality  performance  data on the cow herself  
or her progeny. Commercial  farmers  should now realise that the level of 
information  provided  by commercial  herds will be the main determinant  to the 
progress  and accuracy  of the new indexes.  In that regard  a small investment  in 
time could yield a large return.
Key recommendations  to improve  the reliability  of the indexes;
1. Record  the sires of calves  born in herds as far back as possible.  Through 
the ICBF website  each farmer  can view his/her  own herd details  and record  
sires on calves  easily, even if the calves  have already  left the herd. This will
118
have a two-fold  effect in that it will increase  the reliability  of the figures  on an 
individuals  stock bull and cows, but it will also allow the purchaser  of female  
progeny  sold for breeding  to assess  the genetic  merit of the stock. The suckler 
scheme  has had a huge impact  on the level of sire recording  with data on >90 
% of calves  born since  January  2008. The impact  on the Milk & Fertility  index  
will only take effect from 2010 onwards  when the 2008 born females  begin to 
calves  down. Hence  a once off drive to collect  and record  missing  sires on the 
current  cow population  could yield enormous  dividends  to the beef industry  as a 
whole,  including  both commercial  and pedigree  farmers.
2. Record  ease of calving,  suckler  welfare  docility  and calf quality  accurately. 
The docility  information  has already  been harnessed  into providing  new docility  
evaluations  on Al sires comparable  across  all breeds. This will eventually  be 
rolled out to stock bulls and cows. In a similar  way the calf quality  data is now 
being  looked  at for inclusion  into the €uro-star  indexes.
3. Weigh calves at weaning  time and record the information  through  the 
website or through animal events. The weight on a weanling  provides 
information  on the genetic  merit of the sire for growth  rate but also on the milk 
yield of the dam of the calf. The age limits for which weaning  data is used is 
from 150-300  days of age.
Using  the indexes  - Careful  selection  of breeding  stock  
4). Use the Herdplus  reports  to focus on weaknesses  in the herd and address  
them. This can be done whether  selecting  Al bulls, natural  service  sires or 
culling  cows and selecting  replacements  for the herd. Decide  the type of sire 
mating  which  will yield the most profit, i.e. cows with strong  Calf Quality  indexes  
will yield superior  quality  progeny  for mart or factory  sales, while cows with a 
good balance  of Milk & Fertility  and Calf Quality  could be considered  for 
breeding  replacements  by mating  with bulls proven  for good maternal  ability.  
The use of a lifetime  profit measure  on cows that have no sire or indexes  could  
also aid in selection  decisions  on older  cows.
119
Grass  budgeting  - what it can do for suckler  beef farmers
David Kirwan
Kilmacthomas,  Co. Waterford
Introduction
The farm is located  6km from the coast in the townland  of Drumlohan,  between  
Kilmacthomas  and Stradbally  in Co. Waterford,  and sits at 200 feet above  sea level.  
Total land area Is 84ha, of which  65ha  comprise  relatively  dry brown  shale  soils. The 
remaining  19ha is reclaimed  ground  that is heavy and of limited use during wet 
periods. A suckler  herd of 100 cows calve from September  to December  (65) and 
from January  to March (35). Some of their progeny  Is brought  through  to beef.  
Approximately  25% of calves  are bred from A. I bulls, the remainder  being produced  
by two Charolais  stock bulls. Some of the male calves  are finished  as heavy bulls 
out of the shed (carcase  weights  are 450+ kg), with the remainder  sold as stores.  
Heifers  are finished  mostly  off grass. All replacement  heifers  are bred within the 
farm. The farm is currently  a demo farm for the new Teagasc-Farmers  Journal  
BETTER  Farm Programme.
Progress  to date
Teagasc  data from eProfIt  Monitor  Is available  since 2002. Over this period  the focus  
has been on improving  breeding,  grassland  management,  stocking  rate, output of 
beef per hectare  and hence  my profit per hectare.  A summary  of the progress  made  
to date is outlined  in Table  1.
Table  1. Improvements  in output  and profitability  since  2002
2002 2004 2006 2008
Stocking  rate (Lu/ha) 1.75 1.85 1.88 2.02
Output  beef (kg LW/ha) 567 662 645 862
Gross  output  (€/ha) 708 966 953 1567
Variable  costs (€/ha) 413 416 500 815
Gross  margin  (€/ha) 295 549 453 752
Farm strengths'  and weaknesses
Most of the farm is relatively  dry, and has been reseeded  over the years. Relatively  
new pasture  combined  with proximity  to the sea means  that the farm can grow 
reasonably  early grass. Hence  cattle  can be put to grass  early In the year. The farm 
is all in one block  (divided  by a secondary  road),  so fragmentation  is not a problem.
Parts of the farm are quite heavy  and in wet periods  this puts a huge stocking  rate 
pressure  on the remainder  of the farm. A restricted  amount  of housing  limits the 
option of rehousing  large numbers  of cattle If fhe weather  is particularly  bad. The
120
split autumn  and spring calving  herd means  there is a iarge number  of grazing  
groups  on the farm.
Grass  budgeting  - the mechanics
A grass  budgeting  course  for a smaii number  of interested  suckier  farmers  in the Co. 
Waterford  was initiated  over four years  ago. Each year the group  visits one particular 
farm at regular  intervals,  measures  the amount  of grass  and calculates  the number  of 
days grazing  available.  The group  then makes  decisions  in conjunction  with the host 
farmer  as to what should  be done over the coming  weeks. From day one it was 
decided  to keep the 'mechanics ’ of grass measurement  simple,  practical  and user 
friendly.
Grass  cutting  shears  and quadrants  are used to train the eye as to how much grass  
dry matter  (DM) there is per hectare  in a field or paddock.  In a short period  of time it 
is then possible  to move to estimating  the grass cover in each paddock. Each  
grazing  division  is categorized  as a 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5. Over 90% will be 1,2 or 3. The 
ranges  are as follows;
• 1 = < 500kg  DM/ha
• 2 = 500 to 1000kg  DM/ha
• 3 = 1000 to 1500kg  DM/ha
• 4 = 1500 to 2000kg  DM/ha
• 5 = > 2000kg  DM/ha
As the farm is walked,  the area of each paddock  is noted. At the end of the farm 
walk the total area within  each category  is known,  and hence  the cover  for the entire 
farm. Demand  per day is based  on the number  of cattle  on the farm and an estimate 
of their weight. It is assumed  that 2% of body-weight  is consumed  (in DM) each day. 
Taking  into account  grass utilization  rate, cover is divided  by demand  to give the 
number  of days grass  ahead  on the farm.
Calculating  how much grass  is on your farm and how long it is likely to last is only the 
start of grass budgeting.  It is what is done with this information  that delivers  the real 
value  from it.
Grassland  objectives
There are three main objectives  when it comes  to grassland  management.  They 
are:-
• To lengthen  the number  of days cattle  are at grass  during  the year,
• To grow more  quality  grass,
• To optimise  the performance  of my cattle  at grass.
To achieve  these  objectives:  -
Start to close up accessible  ground  from early October  onwards.  The aim is to have 
a cover of grass grown in the autumn  for cattle to go out onto early in the spring.  
Grass budgeting  is used to quantify  what grass is on the farm. This gives more  
confidence  fo make informed  decisions  in allocating  this grass. However,  even with 
measuring  grass, it is still necessary  to take into account  other factors  such as the
121
current weather  conditions,  the coming weather,  ground conditions  and soil 
temperatures.
Prioritise  the stock  that are to be turned  out first. The following  is a suggested  order  
of turnout.
Spring  calvers  - these are turned out almost  immediately  after calving  (weather  
permitting).  They are the first group  to go out as this saves  a huge amount  of time 
and labour, and also the calves are much healthier  outside  compared  to staying  
inside.
Autumn  cows  - these are turned  out by day to begin with until covers  start to build 
up from the middle  of February  onwards.  During  the winter  their calves  have access  
from the shed out to grass  every  day. Again  this has huge benefits  in terms  of health  
and labour,  and it also gets them used to eating  a grass  diet.
Store heifers  - some of these will be bred and those that are not bred will be 
finished  off grass.
By mid-March  50% of the entire  farm will be grazed.  This is an important  benchmark  
as it gives this ground  time to rebuild  a cover  of grass  for the second  rotation,  which  
starts  in early April.
Management  changes  as a result  of grass  budgeting
Paddocks  are walked  weekly. This is hugely  important  - especially  over the last 
number  of extremely  difficult  weather  years. The sooner  an impending  problem  is 
identified,  the sooner  a decision  can be made  as to what  to do.
Target  pre-grazing  covers  have been reduced  considerably.  In the past it was a 
common  practice  to graze paddocks  with over 2000kg  DM/ha. Today  the aim is to 
graze  covers  that are less than 1500kg  DM/ha. Grazing  these lower covers  means  
getting  a much  higher  percentage  of high guality  leafy grass  into the animals  diet.
Tighter  grazing,  especially  in the first two rotations  is now the target, e.g. down to 
3.5cm. By achieving  these target heights,  the old dense  mass of dead grass at the 
butt of the sward  that has built up over the winter  is eliminated.  The grass  that grows  
as a result  of these  target  grazing-heights  is green right to the base of the plant, and 
the resultant  sward  is much thicker. In later grazings,  the aim is to graze to 5cm or 
lower,  depending  on the weather  and ground  conditions.
The following  is a suggested  plan of how many days grazing  it is optimum  to have 
ahead  of the cattle  at different  times  of the year.
Feb./March  
April to June 
July/Aug  
Sept.30 days 
12 to 14 days 
16 to 18 days 
25-r days
Non-performing  paddocks  are being identifying  (based  on the amount  of grass  grown  
compared  to other  paddocks),  and targeted  for reseeding.
122
The effects  of taking out paddocks  for silage,  when there is an excess  of grass is 
very evident  - it is hugely  beneficial  and absolutely  vital if control  is to be maintained.
Matching  the supply  of grass to the demands  of different  groups  of stock is critical.  
The autumn  calvers  and their calves  have a significantly  higher  demand  per day than 
the spring  calving  cows and calves.
For consideration
Grazing  big numbers  of suckler  cows together  in wet weather  is very hard to 
manage,  especially  when you go above  50 cows and their calves. When  weather  is 
extremely  wet, cows have to be confined  or housed  altogether.  Severe  poaching  
retards  growth  significantly  for fhe remainder  of the year - thin pastures  just do not 
yield!
Confining  cows  to ‘stand-of  areas ’ and letting  their autumn  born calves  through  creep 
gates to remain  at pasture  works  extremely  well. It also works  with the spring born 
calves,  which  can creep  out under  a raised  electric  wire. It is a last resort  to re-house  
cows  with calves  due to the risk of pneumonia  and injury  with young  calves.
Use of a back fence minimizes  damage  during very wet weather. Infrastructure  is 
vital for both flexibility  and control. This includes  roadways  through  out the farm and 
properly  positioned  water troughs. Wet ground is a big problem  with rotational  
grazing  in wet weather.  It cannot  be grazed  and this increases  the stocking  rate on 
the dry ground  to critically  high levels.
Reseeding  has changed  the seasonal  distribution  of grass growth,  with more early  
and late grass now available.  Late heading  diploid  varieties  with a small amount  of 
white clover  are considered  optimum  in this situation.  The aim is for thick persistent  
swards  that will survive  well in wet weather,  and will put up with a certain  amount  of 
hardship.  For this reason  tetraploid  varieties  are not included  in reseeding  mixtures.
Having  a split herd can generate  a large numbers  of groups  to manage  (e.g. autumn  
cows with bulls, autumn  cows with heifers,  spring calving  cows, dry cows, store  
heifers,  cull cows etc.). Seriously  consideration  should  be given to having  all cows  
calving in the one period. Less groups of stock would simply grassland  
management.  Trying  to budget  with the current  number of groups  is very difficult.
The need for flexibility  cannot  be overstated!
Performance  at grass
Teagasc  have been weighing  cattle  on this farm for a number  of years. In 2008,  from 
the March  23 to December  8, the autumn  bull weanlings  gained  an average  of 1.45kg  
LW/day. As part of the GROW  programme,  autumn  born weanlings  (bulls and 
heifers)  were weighed  on May 28 2009. Liveweight  gain from birth for 52 calves  was 
1.3kg/day.  At 243 days of age they weighed  an average  of 346kg.
123
Summary
In every business,  efficiency  is essential  for profitability  and survival. While many  
factors  that contribute  to viability  are outside  farm-gate  control,  it is important  to focus  
on those  that can be improved  on. Grass  budgeting  is one such tool that is under  the 
farmers  control,  and when properly  implemented  will result in cost savings  at farm 
level. It provides  confidence  to the decision  making  process,  and allows  decisions  to 
be made  earlier  than would  othenwise  be the case. Grass  is the cheapest  feed used 
in beef production,  so anything  that helps to increase  its efficient  use, has to be 
beneficial  in cutting  costs.
124
What feed efficiency  in the suckler  cow has to offer beef 
farmers
Mark McGee
Teagasc,  Grange  Beef  Research  Centre
Introduction
Providing  feed is the largest  variable  cost on beef farms. In suckler  beet systems,  
there is a large maternal  cost to production.  For example,  the cow herd consumes 
approximately  85% and 50% (or greater)  of the annual  feed budget  in suckler  calf-to-  
weanling  and calf-to-beef  systems,  respectively.  As about 70% of the total energy 
consumed  by beef cattle goes towards  maintenance  requirements,  this means  that 
cow maintenance  costs are a considerable  proportion  of the total costs of beef 
production  systems.  Accordingly,  beef breeding  selection  strategies  need to focus  
on improving  feed efficiency  without  negatively  altering  performance  or output  traits.  
Improving  feed efficiency  in this way will result in reduced  input costs and ultimately 
increased  profitability  for producers.  It should also result in reduced  excretion  of 
nutrients  to the environment  and thus, a lower environmental  footprint  for beef 
production.
Feed efficiency  measures
Traditionally,  feed efficiency  was expressed  as the ratio of feed intake  to weight  gain 
(FCR) but selection  for this measure  leads to an increase  in mature size and 
maintenance  requirements  (Crews,  2005). This has negative  ramifications  for the 
efficiency  of both the suckler  cow and their progeny  but it is of much greater 
significance  for the cow component  because  of the proportionately  higher costs  
associated  with it.
An alternative  measure  of feed efficiency,  that is independent  of growth  and body  
size, is residual  feed intake  fRFh (also called  net feed efficiency).  This is defined  as 
the difference  between  an animal ’s actual intake  and its predicted  intake,  calculated 
from its weight and rate of gain, with negative  or lower values desirable. [The 
predicted  intake is based on tabular  values or regression  analysis]. Take for 
example  two steers,  the same age and weight  and both are growing  at the same  
rate. Say, that the predicted  intake  for each of them is 10.0 kg dry matter  (DM)/day.  
Flowever,  one steer is eating 9.5 kg DM/day  and the other one is eating 11.0 kg 
DM/day. In this case, the steer eating  9.5 kg DM has a RFI of -0.5 kg DM and the 
steer eating 11.0 kg DM has a RFI of -hI.O kg DM. Therefore,  efficient  animals  eat 
less than expected  and have a negative  or low RFI value,  whereas  inefficient  animals  
eat more than expected  and have a positive  or high RFI value. In other words,  for 
the growing  animal,  RFI is the variation  in intake  that remains  after accounting  for the 
requirements  for maintenance  and growth. What makes up the variation  in the 
remaining  or residual  portion  is not fully understood.  Through  using RFI, cattle are 
selected  for lower maintenance  and feed intake, without  increasing  body size and 
growth  rate.
125
In order to calculate  RFI, Individual  intake and growth of animals  needs to be 
recorded  over at least 70+ days, following  a period of dietary adaptation.  
Understanding  why one animal  is more efficient  than another  is also important,  in 
order to enhance our rate of progress. Consequently,  many additional  
measurements  are needed.
In beef cattle,  most of the  published  research  is based  on growing  and finishing  cattle  
with the latter often offered  high-concentrate  diets. There is very little information  
published  on RFI in cattle offered  grass-based  diets and even less published  on RFI 
in the suckler  cow herself.
The question  is, what has RFI to offer and is it a trait worth  pursuing?.
Residual  Feed Intake  in pedigree  breeding  bulls
A preliminary  study was carried  out at Teagasc  Grange  using data from pedigree  
breeding  bulls at the National  Bull Performance  Centre,  Tully. It included  the main 
breeds  in Ireland. Results  showed  that when bulls within each breed were divided  
into three groups based on phenotypic  RFI - low (efficient),  medium  and high 
(inefficient)  - those with low and high RFI had similar  growth  rates, live weight  and 
weight  per day of age (an indicator  of mature  size) but high RFI bulls consumed  
approximately  11% more feed per day (Drennan  et al., 2005; 2006). Recent  results  
from a more comprehensive  investigation  of a much larger dataset  from Tully,  
encompassing  both phenotypic  and genetic  analysis,  also demonstrated  that RFI 
was applicable  across  all the main breeds,  and additionally,  that there is significant  
genetic  variance;  heritability  is -0.46  (Crowley  etal., 2009). This heritability  is similar  
to that of growth  rate. Thus,  with sufficient  data,  we can effectively  select  for RFI.
Residual  Feed Intake  in the suckler  cow herd
Similarly,  analysis  of data from a suckler  cow herd at Teagasc  Grange  showed  that 
where  cows were divided  equally  into two groups  based on phenotypic  RFI, those  
with low (efficient)  and high (inefficient)  RFI did not differ in live weight,  daily live 
weight gain and body condition  score but cows with high RFI consumed  
approximately  14% more (Table 1). Furthermore,  there was no effect of cow RFI 
group  on calving  difficulty  score, colostrum  yield and immunoglobulin  concentration,  
calf immune  status or on cow milk yield and calf daily gain. Likewise,  in a 
subsequent  study at Grange, cows with high (inefficient)  RFI consumed  
approximately  10% more than cows with low (efficient)  RFI, but there was no 
difference  between  the RFI groups  in performance  or output  (Table  2).
These  results  indicate  large variation  in feed efficiency  in the suckler  cow herd.
126
Table  1. Productivity  traits in beef suckler  cows  with low and high phenotypic  
residual  feed intake  (RFI)
RFI group
Low Fligh Sig.
(Efficienh (Inefficient)
Expected  silaae  intake  (ka DM/dav)  fn=561 9.7 9.8 NS
Actual  silage  intake  pre-partum  (kg DM/day) 9.1 10.4 ***
RFI (kg DM/day) -0.6 +0.6 ***
Live weight  (kg) 728 724 NS
Daily live weight  gain (kg) 0.49 0.57 NS
Body  condition  score  (0-5) 3.1 3.1 NS
Calving  difficulty  (scale  1-5) 1.5 1.5 NS
Calf birth weight  (kg) 45.3 49.4 *
Cow serum  IgG, (mg/ml)  [n=38] 16 18 NS
Colostrum  yield (ml) 3770 3504 NS
Colostrum  total Ig (mg/ml) 178 177 NS
Calf serum  total Ig @ 48-h (mg/ml) 59 52 NS
Intake  post-partum  (kg DM/day)  [n=301 8.9 9.4 P=0.
Milk yield (kg/day) 7.7 7.9 NS
Calf gain (g/day)  i37-d period) 795 824 NS
Source:  McGee  and Drennan  (2006a  and b) -Grange  Beef Research  Centre
Table 2. Annual  performance  of first-calving  beef suckler  cows  with low and
high phenotypic  residual  feed intake (RFI) and growth of their calves pre-
weaning
RFI group
Low High Sig.
(Efficient) (Inefficient)
Recorded  intake period
Expected  silage  intake  pre-partum  (kg DM/day) 7.5 7.6 NS
Actual  silage  intake  pre-partum  (kg DM/day) 7.1 7.9 ***
RFI (kg DM/day) -0.4 ■^0.3 ***
Live weight  (kg) 503 511 NS
Daily  live weight  gain (kg) 0.22 0.21 NS
Body  condition  score  (0-5) 2.7 2.6 NS
Start of grazing  season
Live weight  (kg) 464 463 NS
Body  condition  score  (0-5) 2.1 2.0 NS
End of grazing  season
Live weight  (kg) 513 509 NS
Body  condition  score  (0-5) 2.0 1.9 NS
Calving  difficulty  (scale  1-5) 1.4 2.2 NS
Calf live weight (kg)
Birth 38.6 39.3 NS
Start of grazing  season 66 69 NS
Weaning 279 276 NS
Source:  McGee  etal., (2007)  - Grange  Beef Research  Centre
127
Current  research  at Teagasc  Grange  on residual  feed intake
Following  the preliminary  results outlined  above, a detailed  study was initiated  at 
Teagasc  Grange  to evaluate  the concept  of RFI as a measure  of identifying  feed 
efficient  suckler  cows and progeny.  This is a collaborative  project  involving  Teagasc,  
UCD, ICBF and Colorado  State University.  The evaluation  encompasses  divergent 
selection  for the trait (i.e. efficient  cows are mated to efficient  bulls and inefficient  
cows are mated to inefficient  bulls) using the Simmental  breed as a model. The 
objectives  of the project  are to, firstly, demonstrate  the magnitude  of the benefit  for 
farmers,  secondly,  to determine  some of the biological  basis underlying  the trait and 
thirdly,  to identify  any associated  changes  and/or  markers  in selecting  for it.
In this study, purchased  weanling  heifers (purebred  Simmental  and Simmental  x 
Friesian)  were individually  offered  grass silage ad libitum  and 2kg of supplementary 
concentrate  daily during  the indoor  winter  period. At the end of the feeding  period,  
RFI was calculated  for each heifer. To better  appreciate  the range in herd variation,  
they were divided into three groups based on phenotypic  RFI - low (efficient),  
medium  and high (inefficient).  The three RFI groups  did not differ in live weight,  live 
weight  gain, body and ultrasound  measurements,  muscularity  score, blood variables  
or lying and standing  time (not presented)  but the high RFI group consumed  19% 
more feed than the low RFI group  (Table  3). These  heifers  were subsequently  bred 
to Simmental  sires with known  estimated  breeding  values  (EBV)  for RFI.
Table 3. Productivity  reiated traits in weaniing  beef heifers differing  in 
phenotypic  residuai  feed intake  (RFi)
Low
(Efficient)RFI group
Medium
(Neutral)High
(Inefficient)Sig.
Actual  Feed intake  (kg DM/day) 5.4 6.0 6.4 ***
RFI (UFL/d) -0.43 0.04 0.41 ***
FCE (g live weight /kg  DM) 114 105 95 *
Live weight  (kg) 324 326 316 NS
Daily live weight  gain (kg) 0.59 0.60 0.57 NS
Body  condition  score  (0-5) 2.8 2.7 2.6 NS
Ultrasonic  rib fat depth 1.9 1.9 1.8 NS
Ultrasonic  lumbar  fat depth 2.0 2.1 2.0 NS
Ultrasonic  lumbar  muscle  depth 49 49 48 NS
Muscularity  score  (1-15) 5.5 5.4 5.2 NS
Withers  height  (cm) 112 112 111 NS
Back length  (cm) 104 103 102 NS
Pelvis  width (cm) 44 43 43 NS
Chest  circumference  (cm) 165 165 164 NS
Chest  depth  (cm) 61 60 60 NS
Source:  McGee  et al., (2008)  - Grange  Beef Research  Centre
128
During  the following  winter  they were individually  offered  grass  silage  only ad libitum  
(plus a mineral  vitamin  supplement)  and RFI was calculated  for each animal  during  
pregnancy  (i.e. as first calvers). Similarly,  they were divided  into low (efficient),  
medium  and high (inefficient)  RFI groups. Intake of grass silage for the high RFI 
group  was 21% greater  than the low RFI group  and yet, the RFI groups  did not differ 
in live weight  or live weight  gain, body condition  score, ultrasonic  fat and muscle  
depth,  withers  height,  back length,  pelvis  width,  chest  depth  or circumference,  calving  
difficulty  or calf birth weight  (Table  4). Time spent lying, standing  or active did not 
differ  either  (not presented).  There  were differences  in muscularity  score  in favour  of 
the low RFI animals.  Analysis  is ongoing  for other measurements  carried  out on the 
cows, which included  intake of grazed grass, blood and rumen variables,  feed 
digestibility,  colostrum  yield and quality,  and milk yield.
Table 4. Productivity  reiated traits in pregnant  beef heifers differing  
phenotypic  residuai  feed intake  (RFI)
Low
(Efficient)RFI Group
Medium
(Neutral)High
(Inefficient)Sig.
Expected  feed intake  (kg DM/day) 7.8 8.1 7.8 NS
Feed intake  pre-partum  (kg DM/day) 7.1 8.1 8.6 ***
RFI (kg DM/day) -0.7 0.0 +0.8 ***
Live weight  (kg) 559 575 565 NS
Daily liveweight  gain (kg) 0.46 0.53 0.46 NS
Body  condition  score  (0-5) 2.9 2.8 2.8 NS
Ultrasonic fat depth (mm) 3.1 3.3 3.0 NS
Ultrasonic  muscle  depth  (mm) 59.9 58.8 57.0 NS
Muscularity  score  (1-15) 5.8 5.6 5.2 *
Withers  height  (cm) 122 126 125 NS
Back length  (cm 116 118 113 NS
Pelvis  width (cm) 52 53 52 NS
Chest  depth  (cm) 71 72 71 NS
Chest  circumference  (cm) 197 196 195 NS
Calf birth weight  (kg) 43.8 46.6 44.7 NS
Calving  difficulty  (scale  1 -5) 2.7 3.0 2.6 NS
Source:  Lawrence  etal., (2009)  - Grange  Beef Research  Centre
The results  of these studies  confirm  that there is large variation  in phenotypic  RFI 
within  a suckler  cow herd.
Another  aspect  of the study is the examination  of the repeatability  of RFI through  the 
various  stages  in the life-cycle  of the suckler  cow (weanling  heifer  to pregnant  heifer  
to mature  cow). In other words,  will a feed-efficient  weanling  heifer  also turn out to 
be a feed-efficient  cow? In this case observing  how weanling  heifers that were  
extreme  in RFI (i.e. Low vs. High RFI groups  in Table 3) subsequently  performed  as 
first-calving  cows, is of interest. Preliminary  analysis  shows that intake was
129
approximately  14% higher for the high than the low RFI group with no obvious  
difference  in animal performance  (Lawrence  et al., unpublished).  This indicates  
repeatability.
Similarly,  detailed  measurements  on the progeny  of these  cows are ongoing.
Summary
The results  to date demonstrate  the large phenotypic  variation  in feed efficiency  (RFI)  
within  the suckler  cow herd (>20%)  and the potential  cost savings  to farmers  if feed 
efficient  animals  can be identified  and selected  for in a breeding  programme.
References
Crews, D.FI., Jr. (2005). Genetics  of efficient  feed utilisation  and national  cattle  
evaluation:  a review. Genetic  and Molecular  Research,  4 (2): 152-165.
Crowley,  J.J., McGee,  M., Kenny,  D.A,, Crews,  Jr, D.FI., Evans  R.D. and Berry, D.P. 
(2009). Phenotypic  and genetic  parameters  for different  measures  of feed efficiency 
in different  breeds  of Irish performance  tested  beef bulls. J. Animal  Sci. (In press).
Drennan,  M.J., McGee,  M. and Grogan  A. (2005). Residual  feed intake, feed 
conversion  ratio, growth and body composition  traits in pedigree  beef bulls.  
Proceedings  of the Agricultural  Research  Forum,  March 14 & 15, p69, Tullamore,  
IRELAND.
Drennan,  M.J., McGee,  M. and Cromie,  A. (2006). Intake,  growth,  body composition  
and feed conversion  efficiency  in pedigree  beef bulls differing  in residual  feed intake.  
Proceedings  of the Agricultural  Research  Forum,  March 15 & 16, pi 02, Tullamore,  
IRELAND.
Lawrence,  P., McGee,  M., Kenny,  D.A., Crews,  Jr. D.FI. and Earley,  B. (2009). Grass  
silage intake, rumen  and blood variables,  ultrasound  and body measurements  and 
behaviour  in pregnant  beef heifers differing  in phenotypic  residual  feed intake.  
Proceedings  of the Agricultural  Research  Forum 2009, March 12 & 13, p50, 
Tullamore,  IRELAND
McGee,  M. and Drennan,  M.J. (2006a). Relationships  between  residual  feed intake  
and maternal  productivity  and metabolic  traits of beef suckler  cows. Proceedings  of 
the Agricultural  Research  Forum,  March  15 & 16, pi 00, Tullamore,  IRELAND.
McGee,  M. and Drennan,  M.J. (2006b). Maternal  productivity  of beef suckier  cows  
with low and high residual  feed intake. Book of abstracts  of the 5/"’ Annual  Meeting  
of the European  Association  for Animal  Production,  Antalya,  Turkey,  September  17- 
20, 2006, (ed. Ynze  Van der Floning),  (Session  C 33, Poster 47), p329.
McGee,  M., Clarke,  A.M. and Drennan,  M.J. (2007). Performance  of beef suckler 
cows with iow and high residual  feed intake on grass-based  systems. Book of 
abstracts,  14"' Symposium  of the European  Grassland  Federation,  Ghent,  Belgium  3- 
5 September  2007 (ed. A. De. Vliegher,  L. Carlier),  Abstract  No. 2136, p40.
130
McGee,  M., Drennan,  M.J., Kenny,  D.A. and Earley,  B. (2008). Body and ultrasound 
measurements,  muscularity  scores,  blood physiology  and behaviour  in growing  beef 
heifers  differing  in phenotypic  residual  feed energy  Intake. J. Animal  Sci., 86, (2), 
284.
131
132
CK
00K
CNK
hv
O
WOO
0)
■gs
o6
&
