Irish Grassland  
Association  Journal
2008  VOLUME  42
Irish Grassland  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 42 2008
Edited  by 
David  McGiiloway
M
ISSN 2009-1478
Printed  by Modern  Printers,  Kilkenny
IRISH  GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  
CORPORATE  MEMBERS  2008
ACCBank
ACORN  Independent  Merchants 
AIB Bank  
AIBP
Barryroe  Co-Operative  Ltd 
Bord Bia 
Dairygold  
Dairymaster 
Dawn  Group  
Delaval  Limited  
Drinagh  Co-Operative 
FBD Insurances
Farrelly  & Mitchell  Business  Consultants 
Germinal  Ireland  Ltd 
Glanbia
Goldcrop  Limited  
Grassland  Fertilizers  Limited  
Goulding  Fertilizers  Limited  
Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation  Society  Limited  
Irish Dairy Board  
Irish Farmers ’ Journal  
IFAC  
Interchem  
IFPMedia  
Kerry  Group  
Lie Ireland  Limited  
McQuinn  Consulting  
Monsanto  Ireland  Limited  
Mullinahone  Co-op 
Novartis
Origin  Enterprises 
Packo  Fullwood  
Richard  Keenan  & Co. Ltd 
Teagasc 
Ulster  Bank
Wexford  Milk Producers  
Zero Grazing  Systems  Limited
F. Buckley,  N. Begley,  R. 
Prendiville,  R. Evans  & A. 
Cromie
M. and S. Bateman
P. Dillon,  L Shalloo  & B. 
Horan
C. & D. James
D. Hennessy,  M. 
O’Donovan  & E. Kennedy
J. Me Namara
K. & M. Twomey
M. Brady
N. Lopez-Villalobos  & D.P. 
Berry
P. Donohoe  
B. Good
K. Hanrahan
L Aylward
J.F.L. Charlton
J. Mackey  & I. Riddell  
A. Culleton  & S. HayesCONTENTS
Crossbreeding  the dairy herd - a real 
alternative
Profit  from grass  - a dairy  farmers 
perspective
Competing  on a world  stage  - lessons  for 
Ireland
Profitable  grass  based  dairy  farming  in 
the UK
Profit  from grass:  a researchers ’ 
perspective
On farm options  for profitable  expansion
Profitable  grass  based  dairy  farming  in 
Ireland
Expansion  and profit: thinking  of 
expansion?  Cost implications  and 
options  for farmers
Where  for dairy  cattle  breeding  in 
Ireland?
Using  the EBI: a farmer’ s perspective
Anthelmintic resistance  - a potential  crisis 
for sheep  producers?
The Irish sheep  sector:  future  prospects 
in a globalising  world
Report  on the future of  the sheep  and 
goat sectors  in Europe
TechnoGrazing™  - a novel approach  to 
sustainable  pastoral  production
Development  of the Scottish  Monitor  
Farms  Programme
Essential  steps  to successfully  investing  
in the stock  marketPAGE
5
18
23
43
51
61
69
73
86
95
104
112
126
134
148
157
COUNCIL  OF IRISH  GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  2008
President  
Vice-President  
Past-President  
General  SecretaryWilliam  Kingston  
Pearse  Kelly  
John Donworth  
Mary-Clare  French
Council  Members
Brendan  Barnes,  Kevin Commins,  Andrew Cromie,  Paul Crosson,  Philip  
Donohue,  Michael  Doran,  John Donworth,  Jim Dwyer,  Edward  Egan, Sean  
Flanagan,  John Fitzgerald,  Jan Fredericks,  Padraig  French,  Deirdre  Hennessy,  
Brendan  Horan,  Tim Keady,  Jack Kennedy,  Andrew  Moloney,  Nicholas  McGill,  
David  McGiiloway,  Eddie  O’Donnell,  Frank  O'Mara,  Tony Pettit  and Robin
Talbot.
Contact  details  
for the
Irish Grassland  Association  Office  
available  on
vvww.irishgrassland.com
Crossbreeding  the dairy herd - a real alternative
Frank  Buckley ’, Noreen  Begley ’, Robert  Prendiville ’, Ross Evans^  and Andrew  
Cromie^
^Moorepark  Dairy  Production  Research  Centre,  Teagasc,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork,  
ireland.
^Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation,  Bandon,  Co. Cork, Ireland
Summary
The cow required  for future  Irish milk production  systems  must be robust  
and 'easy care ’ as well as being capable  of producing  high milk solids,  
the majority  of which  must come  from grazed  grass.
Crossing  the Holstein-Friesian  with an alternative  dairy breed sire can 
provide  farmers  with an alternative  opportunity  to increase  overall  animal  
performance  by increasing  herd health,  fertility  and milk value. This is 
due to the introduction  of favourable  genes from another  breed and 
through  hybrid  vigour.
Genetic  gain must not be neglected  i.e. only the best sires of both 
breeds  should be used when crossbreeding.  That ultimately  means  
using  high EBI.
Two studies are currently  underway  at Moorepark  evaluating  the 
potential  of dairy crossbreeding:  one study is evaluating  the Norwegian  
Red and Norwegian  Red crossbred  cows across  46 commercial  dairy  
herds, and the second trial is evaluating  the Jersey and Jersey  
crossbreds  at Ballydague.  In both studies  the cows have  Just completed  
the 2™* lactation.
Early results  from the Norwegian  Red on-farm  study  show  that Holstein-  
FriesianxNorwegian  Red cows produce  similar  milk yields with similar  
milk protein content  but slightly lower milk fat content  compared  to 
Holstein-Friesian  cows. The yield of milk produced  by the pure 
Norwegian  Reds was slightly  lower, and again with lower fat content.  
Crossbred  cows also displayed  similar live weight to the Holstein-  
Friesian  but had higher  body condition  score at all stages  of lactation.  
Fertility performance  was significantly  better with both the pure 
Norwegian  Reds and the crossbred  cows compared  to the Holstein-  
Friesian. Udder  health was also in favour  of the Norwegian  Red and 
crossbred  cows.
The second  year results  from the Ballydague  Jersey  trial reaffirmed  for 
the most part the findings  of year one. Similar  to year one, milk volume  
was highest  with the Holstein-Friesian  and lowest with the Jersey.  
However,  substantially  higher milk constituents  with the Jersey and 
Jersey  crossbred  compared  to the Holstein-Friesian  resulted  in a similar  
yield of solids  for all 3 breed  groups. Jersey  and Jersey  crossbred  cows  
were lighter than Holstein-Friesian  cows but maintained  higher body 
condition  score at all stages  of lactation. Fertility  performance  was in 
favour of  the Jersey  crossbred  cows.
Both Norwegian  Red and Jersey calves are easily born and early  
maturing  (data not presented  for latter  but research  data available).  
These  preliminary  data suggest  that crossbreeding  with the Norwegian  
Red or Jersey are real options  for Irish dairy farmers  in terms of 
improving  herd profitability.
Reliable  EBI values  are not yet available  on all alternative  breed sires.  
For the most part this is due to a lack of data. When examining  EBI 
values  for these sires it is essential  that reliability  figures  be consulted.  
Conversion  proofs  for Jersey  and Norwegian  Red sires are expected  to 
be available  shortly.
The EBIs published  for alternative  breed sires do not include  hybrid  
vigour. Typically,  approximately  €100 can be added  to the EBI value of 
Jersey  and Norwegian  Red sires to estimate  the EBI value  that might  be 
expected  when  these  sires are mated  to Holstein-Friesian  cows.
Options  currently  available  in terms of breeding  the first cross (Fi) cow 
include;  1) Back crossing  i.e. mating  to a bull of one of the original  two 
breeds,  2) use a sire that is crossbred,  and 3) use a sire of a third breed.  
Regardless  of strategy  only high EBI sires should  be used.
Introduction
Until recently,  in the world  of dairy cattle breeding,  the term "high genetic  merit ” 
was synonymous  with high milk production  potential.  Now it is acknowledged  
that the term 'high genetic  merit' should  reflect  as many  characteristics  as are 
required  to reflect total economic  profitability.  In particular  the greatest  
challenge  is to overcome  the decline  in reproductive  efficiency  that has been  
observed  in the Holstein-Friesian  as a result of past selection  programs  that 
were geared towards maximising  production  potential. Although  many  
countries  have diversified  their breeding  goals to include measures  of 
survivability  or functionality,  it is arguable  that few have weighted  fertility 
sufficiently  to counteract  the decline. Even in Ireland  where  the weighting  on 
'fertility'  is currently  at 37%, change  will take some time (realistically  many  
decades).  Poor fertility  performance  is the primary  constraint  to maximising  
profitability  from our seasonal  grazing  system because  of i) an inability  to 
capitalise  on a long grazing season (due to delayed  calving),  ii) shorter  
lactations  and iii) a limited supply  of replacement  heifers. The potential  to 
expand  in an era post quota is compromised  currently  and exacerbated  even 
more by the fact that profit will be maximised  post-quota  with a slightly  earlier  
mean calving  date than that recommended  here to fore. The “high genetic  
merit ” cow going  forward  must have an innate  ability to deliver  a high volume  of 
milk solids per ha, and a propensity  to do this almost  entirely  from grazed  
grass. She must be robust  and ‘easy care', and given the seasonal  nature  of 
the Irish production  blueprint,  optimal  performance  requires  a 365-day  calving  
interval  and an empty  rate after the breeding  season  (12 to 13 weeks)  of less 
than 10%. Recent research  carried out by Moorepark  suggests  that 
crossbreeding  may offer what is often referred  to as a quick fix solution  
(relatively  speaking).  However,  utilising  the best available  genetics  ultimately
based on the EBI, from appropriate  'alternative'  breeds  is essential  to ensure  
real genetic  improvement.
Fundamentally  a successful  crossbreeding  strategy  aims to; a) introduce  
favourable  genes from another  breed selected  more strongly  for traits of 
interest,  b) remove  the negative  effects  associated  with inbreeding  depression,  
and c) for many traits to capitalise  on what is known as heterosis  or hybrid  
vigour (HV). Hybrid vigour means that crossbred  animals  usually  perform  
better than that expected  based on the average  of their parents  (Figure  1). 
Hybrid  vigour  will generally  be higher  in traits related  to fitness  and health  i.e. 
traits  which  have lower heritabilities.
Figure 1. Heterosis  or hybrid vigour  is defined  as the advantage  in 
performance  of crossbred  animais  above  the mid-parent  mean  of the two 
parent  breeds
IPPP■■■1
I1 1
New Zealand  is probably  the best example  of where  crossbreeding  is used to a 
large extent  to capitalise  on the benefits  of HV. There,  the Black  and White and 
Jersey  breeds  in many respects  are very similar  having  been selected  through  
a common  index for many years. In their scenario  the added performance  
obtained  through HV is seen as a prudent means of achieving  higher  
profitability.  In New Zealand  HV values of up to 5-6% are observed  for 
pro|iuction  traits and values  of up to 18% for reproduction  and health  traits are 
observed.  Put simply,  in New Zealand  20% more crossbred  cows survive  to 
5th lactation  compared  to Holstein-Friesians.  Thus, almost  50% of heifers  
entering  herds in New Zealand  in recent years are crossbred  and this is 
increasing.
Crossbreeding  research  at Moorepark
Since 1996, studies  have been run at Moorepark  evaluating  the merits of a 
number  of alternative  breeds  for crossbreeding  under Irish conditions.  The 
ultimate  aim of the research  is to provide  a greater  insight  into the potential  of 
these breeds  via crossbreeding  and to assist the identification  of a greater  
variety  of top EBI (high profit sires)  for use by Irish dairy farmers.  The breeds  
of particular  interest currently  are the Norwegian  Red (NRF)  and the Jersey  (J). 
The studies underway  will assist the development  of an across breed  
evaluation.  Paramount  is the requirement  to determine  the relative  breed  
effects  (difference  between  alternative  breed and the Holstein-Friesian),  and 
the level of HV observed  in the crossbred.  Two studies  are underway,  1) 
evaluation  of NRF and NRF crossbreds  across  46 commercial  dairy herds,  and 
2) evaluation  of Jersey  and Jersey  crossbreds  at the Moorepark  Ballydague  
research  farm. The animals  in both studies  have just completed  second  
lactation  and results  from both studies  suggest  a favourable  response  from 
crossbreeding.
Evaluation  of Norwegian  Red and Holstein-FriesianxNorwegian  Red
NRF cows have been on trial at the ‘Ballydague ’ research  farm since 2001.  
Interest  in evaluating  the breed  arises  from the fact that since  the 1970 ’s female  
fertility,  resistance  to mastitis,  and other functional  traits have been included  in 
the breeding  program  of the breed. The relative  weighting  for the traits in the 
NRF index currently  stands at 15% for female fertility, 22% for mastitis  
resistance,  and 23% for protein yield. This relatively  low level on milk 
production  is thought  by Nonvegian  geneticists  to be critical in getting  the 
balance  right between  selection  for milk production  and functionality.  Progeny  
testing  for fertility  and health  traits is based  on large daughter  groups  (over  200 
daughters  per sire). Since  2001, the cows at Ballydague  have performed  well. 
The reputed  characteristics  of the breed; ease of calving,  high female  fertility 
and low SCC/mastitis  incidence  have been observed  with the small numbers  on 
trial. Therefore,  in 2004 a large-scale  study  was set up by Moorepark  involving  
the importation  of almost  400 purebred  NRF heifer  calves. These  animals  were  
spread  across  50 dairy farms and along with a similar  number  of crossbreds  
(HFxNRF)  and Holstein-Friesians  (HF), and now form part of one of the most 
unique  research  studies  in the world; a very comprehensive  study aimed at 
conclusively  evaluating  the merits  of the NRF breed  and the potential  benefits  
of crossbreeding  under Irish conditions.  Currently  the study  includes  just over 
1300 cows across  46 herds. The Norwegian  and crossbred  cows are sired by 
10 proven  bulls. The HF group  represent  a mix of HF genetics  from around  the 
world,  having  been sired by a broad  spectrum  of North  American  Holstein,  New 
Zealand  and British  Friesian  type sires. All cows on the trial were born in 2004  
and calved  for the first time in the spring  of 2006.
Milk production  and udder  health
Milk production  data for second  lactation  is shown  in Table 1. The 305 day 
predicted  milk yield of the HF and HFxNRF  was similar  at 6194kg  and 6081kg,  
respectively.  That of the pure NRF was slightly  lower  at 5867kg.  The level of 
HV is indicated  to be around  50kg of milk or about  1 %. Fat content  was highest  
for the HF at 3.95%,  slightly  lower for the pure NRF and crossbred  cows at 
3.90%. Milk protein  content  was not different  across  groups  averaging  3.49%  
for all three groups. SCC was lower  for the pure NRF cows compared  to the 
HF and HFxNRF.  Based  on information  provided  by participating  herds the 
NRF and HFXNRF  also had slightly  better  udder  health  as indicated  by a lower  
proportion  of cows recorded  with mastitis  at least once during  lactation.
Table 1. Effect  of breed group  on 305 day milk production  parameters  
and udder  health.
HF HF X NRF NRF
Milk yield (kg) 6194 6081 5867
Milk yield (gallons) 1323 1299 1253
Fat (%) 3.95 3.89 3.90
Protein  (%) 3.48 3.49 3.49
Fat + protein  yield (kg) 458 447 432
Lactation  average  SCC 186,000 179,000 153,000
Incidence  of mastits  (%) 13 11 10
Body  condition  and live weight
Body condition  score  (BCS)  and live weight were measured  on three occasions  
during  2006; pre-calving,  during  the breeding  season,  and at dry-off. The NRF 
consistently  had the highest  BCS; 3.18 pre-calving,  3.05 at breeding,  and 3.11 
at dry-off  (Figure  2). Comparable  values  for the HF were 2.97, 2.83 and 2.83. 
The BCS of the crossbreds  on the occasions  averaged  3.08, 2.94 and 3.00. 
Averaged  over lactation  HV for BCS is estimated  at less than 1 %.
Figure  2. Body condition  score pre-calving,  during  the breeding  season  
and prior  to dry-off  for the HF, NRFxHF  and NRF
0) 3.3 
§ 3.2 
.9 3.1I 3
8 2.9
o 2.8 m
2.7......HF
-----NRF
-----NRFX
Calving Breeding Dry-off
The NRF consistently  had the lowest  live weight;  (549kg  pre-calving,  501kg  at 
breeding,  and 574kg  at dry-off),  approximately  20kg lighter  than the crossbred  
cows at all stages. Except  at dry-off (585kg  v. 592kg;  in favour  of the HFXNRF)  
the HF and HFxNRF  tended  to have similar  weights. Consistent  with the 
increases  in BCS during  late lactation,  the NRF (73kg) and HFxNRF  (73kg)  
cows gained  more  weight  compared  to the HF cows (65kg)  from mid lactation.  
Hybrid  vigour  estimates  averaged  less than 2% for live weight  over lactation.
Reproductive efficiency
Fertility performance  including  all cows in the 46 herds was as follows:  
pregnancy  rate to first service  was 50%, pregnant  after 6 weeks  was 59%, and 
the in-calf  rate after 16 weeks  breeding  was 85%. A comparison  of the study  
animals  only reveals  a significant  benefit  to crossbreeding.  While,  the calving  
to service  interval  for all groups  was not different  (averaging  73 days) large  
differences  in pregnancy  rates were observed.  The pregnancy  rate to first 
service  was 46% for the HF and 55% and 56% for the NRF and HFxNRF,  
respectively.  The proportion  of cows pregnant  after  6 weeks  was also in favour  
of the NRF and HFxNRF at 68% and 71%, respectively,  compared  to 58% for 
the HF. Empty  rates at the end of breeding  were 16%, 13% and 13% for the 
HF, HFxNRF  and NRF cows, respectively.  However,  had the breeding  season  
on each herd been restricted  to 13 weeks,  the empty  rates of the HF, HFxNRF  
and NRF cows would have increased  by a further 4%, 1% and 2%, 
respectively.  Based  on the data collated,  differences  in calving  to conception  
intervals  between  the breed groups  indicate  a slippage  of 7 days in calving  
interval  for the HF in second  lactation. However,  in total, a difference  of 13 
days has now developed  between  the HF and the crossbred  cows in terms  of 
expected  calving  date in 2008. Both the pure NRF and crossbred  cows are 
expected  to maintain  a 365-day  calving  interval. Survival  from first to third 
lactation  has also been estimated  to be 67% for the HF, 74% for the crossbreds  
and 78% for the pure NRF cows.
Table  2. Effect  of breed  group  on reproductive  efficiency  and survival.
HF HF  X NRF NRF
Mean  calving  date 2007
Calving  to 1^ service  interval  (days)Mar-01 Feb-25 Feb-25
74 72 71
Submission  rate in the 24 days (%) 39 60 55
Pregnancy  rate to 1®* service  (%) 46 56 55
Pregnancy  rate after  6 weeks  breeding  (%) 58 71 68
Empty  rate (%) 16 13 13
Empty  rate (13 weeks)  (%) 20 14 15
Calving  to conception  interval  (days) 92 83 85
Number  of services  per cow 1.82 1.63 1.59
Expected  calving  date 2008 Mar-08 Feb-23 Feb-25
Survival  from 1^ to 3^“ lactation  (%) 67 74 78
10
Evaluation  of Jersey  and JerseyxHolstein-Friesian  at Ballydague
Worldwide,  the Jersey  is one of the most popular  breeds  after the Holstein-  
Friesian.  In Ireland,  many are asking  if the Jersey  (Jersey  cross)  is the cow of 
the future. Interest  is being fuelled  by the breed ’s popularity  in New Zealand.  
There  crossbreeding  with the Jersey  is considered  to leave  the most profit;  high 
solids  production  at high stocking  rates,  coupled  with increased  survival.
At the Moorepark  'Ballydague ’ research  farm. 2006 saw the introduction  of 28 
purebred  Jersey (J) and 29 crossbred  Jersey heifers  (HFxJ). These were  
introduced  along side 30 HF heifers. As with the Norwegian  on-farm  study,  
these animals  have just completed  their second  lactation.  The Jersey  cows at 
Ballydague  are by sires  from both New Zealand  and Denmark.
Table  3 outlines  the milk production  performance  recorded  at Ballydague  during  
2006. Mean calving  date was February  22. A total of 275kg  of concentrates 
per cow were offered  during lactation.  As illustrated,  differences  in both milk 
yield and milk composition  were observed  across  the breeds/crossbreeds.  Milk 
yield ranged  from 5612kg  for the HF cows  to 4329kg  for the J cows. The HFxJ  
cows were intermediate  at 5014kg. Large  differences  in milk fat content  were  
also evident;  3.90%  for the HF, 5.36%  for the J, and 4.73%  for the JxHF. The J 
also had the highest  milk protein  content  at 3.98%,  compared  to 3.41%  for the 
HF and 3.76%  for the JxHF. However,  in terms of milk solids (fat + protein  
yield) no significant  difference  was observed  between  the breed groups,  
although  numerically  a higher  yield was observed  with the HFxj. Udder  health  
as indicated  by somatic  cell count (SCC)  was excellent  for all breed groups.  
For the second  year running,  the incidence  of mastitis  was lowest  with the 
crossbred  cows.
Table  3. Effect  of breed  group  on milk production  parameters  and udder  
health  (second  lactation  cows)
HF HF X J J
Milk yield (kg) 5612 5014 4329
Milk yield (gallons) 1199 1071 925
Fat (%) 3.90 4.73 5.36
Protein  (%) 3.41 3.76 3.98
Fat + protein  yield (kg) 410 427 404
Lactation  average  SCC 79 81 141
Incidence  of Mastitis  (%) 29 11 27
Body  condition  and live weight
Figure  3 shows  the average  BCS of the HF, HFxJ and J cows  at Ballydague  at 
a similar  time period  to that shown  above  for the cows on the Nororegian  Red 
crossbreeding  study. BCS was lowest  at all stages  with the HF, and highest  
with the HFxj. The BCS of the HFxj was higher  than that of either  the HF or 
the J cows throughout  lactation  (Figure  3) and HV was estimated  at 8%, higher 
than that observed  between  the NRF and HF breeds  on the on-farm  study. In
11
terms of live weight,  the HF cows were heaviest,  averaging  525kg  throughout  
lactation,  compared  to 390kg  for the J cows. The HFxJ averaged  478kg. This 
means  a HV estimate  for live weight  of about  20kg or 4.5%, again larger  than 
that observed  with the HFxNRF  cows.
Figure  3. Body condition  score pre-calving,  during  the breeding  season  
and prior to dry-off  for the HF, HFxj and J second  lactation  cows at 
Ballydague.
-HF
-J
HFx
Fertility  Performance
The fertility  performance  for the second  lactation  cows from the Ballydague  
study  is presented  in Table  4. The breeding  season  began  on the last week  of 
April and ran for 13 weeks. All cows were bred by Al only. Tail paint was used 
throughout  the breeding  season  as an aid to heat detection.  Large  differences  
in pregnancy  rates  were observed  between  the crossbred  cows and that of both 
groups  of pure bred cows. The pregnancy  rate to first service  observed  with 
the HFxj cows  was exceptional  at 75%. By comparison  that observed  with the 
HF and J cows was poor at 38% and 39%, respectively.  The six week in-calf  
rate of the crossbred  cows  was again  superior  at 76%, while  that of the HF and 
J cows was 56% and 62%, respectively.  The resultant  empty rate after 13 
weeks  breeding  for the HF, J and HFxj was 9%, 15% and 4%, respectively.  
Overall  the reproductive  performance  of the three groups  was such that the 
expected  calving  date for 2008 is expected  to average  March  15, March  04 and 
February  19 for the HF, J and HFxj, respectively.  The survival  rate from 
lactation  one to lactation  three  for these  cows is 50%, 79% and 90% for the HF, 
J and HFxj,  respectively.
12
Table  4. Effect  of breed  group  on reproductive  efficiency  during  second  
lactation  and survival  from  first to third lactation.
HF HF X J J
Mean  calving  date 2007
Calving  to 1^ service  interval  (days)Feb-25 Feb-18 Feb-24
76 74 73
Submission  rate in the 24 days (%) 80 83 93
Pregnancy  rate to 1 ^ service  (%) 38 75 39
Pregnancy  rate after  6 weeks  breeding  (%) 56 76 62
Empty  rate (13 weeks)  (%) 9 4 15
Calving  to conception  interval  (days) 104 86 94
Number  of services  per cow 2,34 1.42 2.19
Expected  calving  date 2008 Mar-15 Feb-19 Mar-04
Survival  from 1®* to 3™ lactation  (%) 50 90 79
Genetic  evaluations  (EBI and hybrid  vigor)  for Norwegian  Red and Jersey  
sires
The Irish Cattle Breeding  Federation  (ICBF)  is the body responsible  for the 
routine production  and publication  of ail genetic  evaluation  data in Ireland,  
These evaluations  are based on the performance  of animals  on commercial  
Irish dairy farms. A summary  of the number  of records  and average  EBI 
performance  for Holstein,  Friesian,  Jersey  and Norwegian  Red Al sires from the 
ICBF national  genetic evaluations  is given  in Table  5.
Table 5. Summary  of EBI proofs  for Al sires from Holstein,  Friesian,  
Jersey  and Norwegian  Red Breeds. ”
BreedAl
siresRecordsEBIMilk Fertility Calving Beef Health
Holstein 1785 562426 €16 €24 -€8 €11 -€9 -€2
Friesian 208 72607 €51 -€2 €52 €13 -eii -€1
Jersey 36 3318 €58 €30 €80 €11 -€61 -€3
Norwegian  Red 14 1229 €83 €14 €53 €10 -€1 €7
'Based  on sires born  since January  1, 1988 (Nov  07 evaiuations)  with reiiability  above  40%
Currently  reliable  EBI estimates  are not available  on all alternative  breed  sires.  
One of the biggest  problems  facing  ICBF and across  breed evaluations  is the 
lack of data available  for these breeds. For example,  the number  of Al sires 
(and daughters)  evaluated  for the Jersey breed is 36 Al sires and 3318  
progeny,  whilst the number  for the Norwegian  Red breed is 14 Al sires with 
1229 progeny. Therefore  when examining  EBI values for these sires it is 
essential  that reliability  figures  are consulted.  Nevertheless,  even with the 
small  numbers  available,  the breed  differences  observed  from National  data are
13
consistent  with those established  from research  studies. For example,  the 
superior  fertility  performance  of the J and NRF breeds  relative  to the HF is 
readily  observable  from National  data (Table 5). Furthermore,  the positive  
attributes  of the NRF breed for health traits, is also apparent,  reflecting  the 
importance  that that these traits have played in the Norwegian  breeding  
program.
Whilst  the EBI provides  farmers  with factual  information  on the expected  profit  
that an Al sire (or dam) will pass onto its progeny,  it does not include  the 
additional  benefits  of hybrid vigor. These  should  also be taken into account  
when making  a breeding  decision  regarding  choice  of Al sires. Recent  work 
completed  by ICBF has suggested  that the additional  benefits  of HV amounts  to 
a minimum  of €50 per lactation  (see Table  6). Therefore,  the total profit from 
crossing  a Norwegian  Red or Jersey  with an EBI of €100, onto the average  
Holstein-Friesian  cow, is expected  to be €150 per lactation,  i.e. €100 coming  
from the additive  effects  of the genes  from the sire and a further €50 from the 
HV as a result of the cross. Whilst  these initial trends are based on limited  
data, the direction  and magnitude  of the HV benefits  are consistent  with those  
from other studies,  e g. Jersey  and Friesian  crosses  in New Zealand.  It is also 
worth noting  that the Holstein-Friesian  crossbred  will be the largest  influence  
on the estimates  provided  in Table 6. Hence  crosses  between  the Holstein  and 
Jersey  or between  Holstein  and Nonwegian  Red may vary from the estimates  
quoted. The estimate  would very likely be larger. Evidence  of this can be 
found  in New Zealand  where  most studies  show  a higher  HV estimate  between  
Holstein  and Jersey  compared  to Holstein  and Friesian  crosses. There  is no 
data published  reporting  HV estimates  on crosses  of the Norwegian  Red with 
other breeds. ICBF may also have enough  data on crossbreds  for a range  of 
breeds  to be able to evaluate  the specific  crosses  between  any two breeds.  
This would provide  valuable  information  for the sire advice program,  which  
could then factor  HV into the calculation  of overall  merit of choosing  a bull to 
mate  with certain  cows.
Table 6. Estimates  of hybrid  vigor  for EBI traits
TraitEconomic
value0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
Milk (kg) -eo.09 0 -4 57 77 93
F(kg) €1.26 0 0 3 3 4
P(kg) €6.91 0 0 2 3 3
Cl -€11.97 0 -0.6 -0.7 -0.8 -0.8
SURV €11.17 0 -0.04 0.4 1.2 2.2
€ value €0 €4 €24 €38 €51
ICBF are developing  conversion  equations  for a number  of breeds  currently,  
most notably  the Norwegian  Red, Jersey  and Normande  breeds. Conversion  
equations  use the principal  whereby  comparison  is made between  the
14
performance  of existing  sires used in two countries  and the comparison  results  
are then used to predict  performance  of other sires being imported  but having  
no daughters  in the importing  country. It is hoped that this work will be 
completed  by February  2008, although  the success  of achieving  this will once 
again be influenced  by the quantity  and quality  of data connecting  the various  
populations.  This is an interim  measure  until there is enough  performance  data 
on these breeds  to allow Ireland  to enter INTERBULL  evaluations  for these  
breeds. INTERBULL  evaluations  should  be the ultimate  goal as they will allow  
the most accurate  prediction  of genetic  merit of a bull tested  in another  country  
but available  on an Irish scale similar  to what is currently  in place for the 
Holstein-Friesian  (currently  for milk traits, fertility,  survival  and SCC), and the 
Montbeliarde  breeds  (currently  for milk traits).
Latest  EBIs for cows  on Norwegian  Red and Jersey  crossbreeding  studies
The EBI and EBI sub-indices  for the Nonwegian  Red crossbreeding  study and 
Jersey study at Ballydague  are presented  in Tables  7 and 8, respectively.  
These are the most recent estimates  available  from ICBF (August  2007).  
However,  there are a few points  to note: i) as mentioned  above,  the across  
breed  evaluation  is still in its infancy  and therefore  the breeding  values  included  
for the Norwegian  Red, Norwegian  Red crossbreds,  the Jersey  and Jersey  
crossbred  cows have low reliability.  As the amount  of data for these breeds  
and their crosses  increases,  and the across breed evaluation  procedure  is 
developed,  the breeding  values will become  more certain; ii) the breeding  
values  of the crossbred  cows does not include  the effect  of HV. As indicated  
above  this would  be extra; iii) the EBI of the HF cows used as comparisons  in 
both studies  is not low.
Table  7. EBI and sub-indices  for HF, NRFxHF  and NRF cows on the on- 
farm crossbreeding  study
EBI Milk Fert Calv Beef Health
HF 56 29 26 12 -9 -2
NRF X HF 62 18 37 9 -4 2
NRF 74 6 56 5 2 5
Table  8. EBI and sub-indices  for HF, JxHF  and J cows  at Ballydague
EBI Milk Fert Calv Beef Health
HF 56 28 26 10 -8 -0.5
HFxj 82 46 54 14 -30 -1.5
J 62 27 86 10 -60 -1.8
15
Calving  ease
The PTAs  (breeding  values)  available  for the Norwegian  Red (typically  -3 to -5) 
and Jersey  (typically  -5 or less) sires that have been used in Ireland  to date 
indicate  that the Norwegian  Red as well as the Jersey  breed  are easy calving.  
Both breeds  (at Moorepark  and on the Norwegian  Red on-farm  crossbreeding  
study)  have been used successfully  on Holstein-Friesian  heifers.
Where to after  the first cross?
Three  options  exist with regard  to the breeding  strategy  that can be employed  
when  it comes  to breeding  the crossbred  (Fi) cow. These  are as follows;
1) Two-way  crossbreeding.  This entails  mating  the Fi cow to a sire of one 
of the parent  breeds  used initially. In the short term HV will be reduced  
but over  time settles  down  at 66.6%.
Three  way crossing.  Simply  use a high EBI sire of a third breed. When  
the Fi cow is mated  to a sire of a third breed HV is maintained  at close  
to 100%. However,  with the reintroduction  of sires from the same three  
breeds  again  in subsequent  generations  the HV levels  out at 85.7%.  
Synthetic crossing.  This involves  the use of Fi or crossbred  bulls. In the 
long term a new (synthetic)  breed is produced.  HV in this strategy  is 
reduced  to 50% initially  and is reduced  gradually  with time.2)
3)
Whichever  approach  is favored,  it is crucial  that additive  genetic  progress  is not 
neglected  i.e. only the top bulls should  be used.
Sire availability  for 2008
Three Norwegian  Red sires will be available  through  NCBC  (i.e. Progressive  
Genetics/Munster)  during  2008. These  are Lekve (Al code LEV), Lier (no Al 
code yet) and Nattestad  (no Al code yet). These  sires have been hand picked  
to ensure compatibility  with the Irish production  system. The Norwegian  
Breeding  values  of these  three sires indicate  that they are superior  to many  of 
the sires initially  used to establish  the Norwegian  Red on-farm  study. All three  
are recommended  for use and are expected  to be carried in the NCBC  
technician  service  flasks. The price of this semen  is expected  to cost €14 or 
€15 per straw.
A greater  choice of Jersey sires is expected  to be available  during 2008  
compared  to the Norwegian  Red breed. Jersey  semen  will be available  from 
NCBC (Progressive  Genetics/Munster)  and Eurogene/New  Zealand  Genetics.  
The price of the Jersey  semen  available  (non-sexed)  varies  from €14 to €25 
depending  on sire.
Both Norwegian  Red and Jersey  test bulls will be available  this year as part of 
the GENE IRELAND  program. Participation  in the test program  and use of 
these  young  sires is to be encouraged.  The majority  of these  young  test sires 
have been  sourced  from Irish herds  from proven  sires and dams.
16
Conclusion
Data has been presented  from the second  year of two research  studies  being  
carried  out by Moorepark,  the objective  of which  are to evaluate  the potential  of 
dairy crossbreeding  for Irish dairy farmers. Both studies  are expected  to be 
continued  for a further  year. This is essential  to capture  differences  that may 
arise in traits such as milk yield, fertility,  health  and survival  as cows mature.  
The decision  to crossbreed  for many in the Irish context  will likely be borne  out 
of frustration  of poor herd health/fertility  or more recently  due to the introduction  
of A+B-C  payment  schemes  and a resulting  desire  to significantly  increase  milk 
value through  improved  milk composition.  While  an economic  comparison  for 
the studies has not been presented,  considerable  evidence  is being  
accumulated  from both studies to indicate that crossbreeding  with the 
Norwegian  Red or Jersey  are real options  for Irish dairy farmers  in terms of 
improving  herd profitability,  in particular  arising  from improved  reproductive 
efficiency. This is being obtained  from a combination  of additive  genetic  
improvement  and hybrid  vigour. Differences  in production  expressed  as 305d  
predicted  values are likely to be different  to actual yields delivered  as 
differences  arise between  the breed groups  in terms of 1) calving  pattern,  and 
2) the proportion  of cows surviving  to develop  into maturity. No different  to 
straight breeding, only the best sires should be considered  when  
crossbreeding.  It is expected  that in the near  future  accurate  EBI values  will be 
available  for a greater  selection  of ‘alternative  breed ’ sires. This will be aided  
by the development  of conversion  proofs  for new sires in the short  term.
The ultimate  aim for all Irish dairy farmers  must be to generate  cows that will 
maximise  profitability  in our system. Prejudices/mind  set based  on issues  such 
as coat colour  or v\^at the neighbours  might say must be cast aside. Think 
objectively,  think profit!
Acknowledgements
The technical  assistance  of Noel Byrne,  Ann Geoghegan,  Billy Curtin  and Tom 
Condon  at Moorepark,  as well as Sean Coughlan  and Rachel  Wood  at ICBF is 
gratefully  acknowledged.  The commitment  and efforts  of the farmers  involved  
in the Norwegian  Red crossbreeding  study  is to be commended.  Milk recording  
is being provided  free of charge  for the experimental  cows on the Norwegian  
Red crossbreeding  study. This support,  provided  by Progressive  Genetics,  
Dairygold,  South  Western  Services  and ICBF is very much  appreciated.
17
Profit  from grass  - a dairy  farmers  perspective
Michael  and Shirley  Bateman  
Crookstown,  Co Cork
Introduction
This paper deals  with two main areas;
• The  development  of a farm from a green  field site,
• Grass  budgeting  as a management  tool.
Farm development
The home farm (Crookstown  farm) comprised  a total of 51.3ha,  where  the main 
enterprise  was heifer rearing and silage making. In spring of 2005, the 
opportunity  of a long-term  lease (10 years +) of a further 37.6ha became  
available.  This land had been in continuous  tillage  for 50 years.
As milk quota was restricted,  a Milk Production  Partnership  (MPP)  was entered  
into, which provided  access  to quota. Total farm size comprised  89ha, milking  
200+ cows to fill a quota  of 1,135,000  litres. There  was little infrastructure  on the 
farm.
The programme  for farm development  was as follows:
April 2005
• Reseed  40ha
Summer  2005
• Install  low cost 28-unit  parlour  with handling  facilities;
• Fence  and lay out paddocks;
• Put water on the whole farm;
• Lay 3km of roadway.
• Sort  paperwork  for the Milk Production  Partnership  (MPP).
September  2005
• Move  75 cows + 45 replacements  from the home  farm;
• Combine  above  with 81 cows  from the MPP  farm.
2006
Built silage pit for 1500t.
August  2006
• Install three cattle underpasses  (the value of which cannot  be under  
estimated  in terms  of time, labour  and safety).
18
2007
Install  a new bulk tank,
Reseed  16ha,
Built a wintering  pad for 250 cows which had been out wintered  on 
crops  the previous  2 years.
There are positives  and negatives  to developing  a farm. It is a big move into 
unknown  territory,  and requires  intense  focus on the how and why of what is going  
on - in the long term spending  significant  amounts  of money  on development,  and 
in the short  term generating  cash flow which  is equally  important.
The reward  is the evident  farm potential,  still not fully realised.  An added  bonus  
has been milk price,  which  has been very welcome.
Negatives  factors  to consider  was the mixing of the two herds, which led to 
serious  herd health  issues  with an outbreak  of IBR in February  2006 (eight  cows  
were lost and milk yield did not pass 3.5 gallons  for the month). Due to lack of 
organic  matter  because  of 50 years in tillage, the tillage land under performed,  
with an estimated  loss of 17% last year and 30% the previous  year.
Red tape can be a further  obstacle,  e.g. in seeking  planning  permission  for 
underpasses;  delays were encountered  because  one council official was 
concerned  about  the public  not being  able to see cows  on the road!
Grass  budgeting
Grass is the cheapest  form of feed, and to take full advantage  of this resource,  
grass budgeting  is necessary.  This means matching  supply  with demand  to 
maximise  the growth  of high quality  grass. It also means  putting  as much as 
possible  of this high quality  feed through  the cow in the form of grazed  grass.
Grass  budgeting:  - what it is not!
A common  occurrence  at group meetings  where grass budgeting  is being  
discussed,  amounts  to 10 people  standing  in a paddock  hotly debating  whether 
there is 500, 700 or 1000kg  of a cover  in the paddock.  This is not budgeting  - get 
a set of clippers  and scales  and measure  the grass.
The debate  should  be on;
• Overall  farm cover,
• How it compares  to where  you had planned  to be,
• What decisions  need to be made  to keep  the plan on track?
• Is the overall  plan correct  or should  it be reviewed?
The objective  of grass budgeting  is to create  a wedge  of grass so that there is a 
continuous  supply  of top quality  grass  for the cows. This is achieved  by:
• having  a plan for the year, with specific  targets  for different  times  of the 
year.
19
• doing  a weekly  farm cover,
• making grassland  management  decisions  based on the information  
gleaned  (farm cover,  targets  and current  growing  conditions).
It is also important  to act on the decisions,  to review  them, work out why they work 
and why they don’t work. As a member  of the Grazing  Musketeers,  Gary Nolan  is 
on the farm once a fortnight  to help with the grassland  management  decisions.
Targets  and practices
Autumn  - keep to a 21-day  rotation  until August  20-23. This results  in excellent  
grass quality,  with green leaf down to the base of the sward leading  to better  
utilization,  which  in turn leads  to a good  clean  out in the last two rounds.
Rotation  length is boosted  by 2'*’ cut after-grass  (cut around  July 25), which is 
grazed  in early September  with an available  cover  of 2200kg.  This is a high cover  
but of excellent  quality. Utilization  is superb,  which  adds 8-10 days to the round  
and boosts  growth  rates. The farm has a target 'Farm Cover ’ of 925 - 950kg  at 
the start of September,  increasing  to a maximum  of 1150kg of cover on 
September  20. These  targets  are critical  to having  enough  grass  for the autumn.  
Do not allow  covers  to get too high at this stage,  as utilization  will be poor, leading  
to poor quality  and reduced  growth. Closing  from October  10 (when  pre-grazing  is 
below  2000kg)  results  in well-cleaned  swards.  Concentrates  should  be introduced  
mid October  to make  grass  last to early December.  Avoid  damaging  swards  at all 
costs  as this reduces  total grass  grown  on the farm especially over the winter.
The last target  for the autumn  is to close  60% of the farm in the first  30 days, this 
ensures  early grass  for the spring.
Spring  - an opening  cover  of 720kg  DM/ha  is required.  A total of 25% of the farm 
should  be grazed  in February,  with the first round  finished  on April 4. This 25% is 
to be grazed  in the first seven  days of the second  round. The 75% left to graze  is 
allocated  on an area basis in March,  with farm cover not allowed  to drop below  
450kg until the start of April. Graze to 3.5cm. Again, no poaching;  cows will 
graze  for 3 hours and stand off without  silage as necessary  (even If this means  
going  for cows late at night  or letting  them out at 4am in the morning  when  the rain 
has cleared).
Even in tough springs,  stock go full time to grass from February  1, using the 
above  strategies.  Several  paddock  entrances  are used, as is the driest ground  
rather  than the highest  covers  (on one occasion  cows were allowed  access  to a 
15ac paddock  with a cover  of 300kg  just to get the 6 - 7kg of grass).
The fertilizer  programme  for the spring comprises  a blanket  spread  of 50kg of 
CAN spread  in mid January,  and again in mid February  with a bag of CAN after 
the cows  graze. This results  in 85 units spread  by the start of April.
Grass  allocation  in spring  will be 12kg for the first week after calving,  rising by one 
kg a week, for each week to 18 kg after six weeks. A simple computer  
programme  allows  for calculation  of the day’ s allocation  on any given  day.
20
Meal feeding
Meals  fed are 5kg/cow  in February  and 3kg/cow  in early March. Once  the grass  
budget  allows,  meals  are eliminated.  This works  well as it keeps  demand  low in 
February  when grass growth  is low, and when demand  increases,  is in line with 
grass growth. The intention  is that this will improve  peak production  as cows will 
be on a good diet of grass  and ration  in February.  The aim is to feed about  170kg  
in the spring  with a further  150 -180kg  in the autumn.
Another  target  is that the second  rotation  would  take 21 days (the first paddock  in 
the third round  will be grazed  around  April 26). The target  for the main grazing  
season  is to have a pre-grazing  cover of 1500kg. When covers  go over this, 
paddocks  should be taken out quickly. Demand  is set at 72kg mid-season.  
Stocking  rate of 4.25cows/ha  and offering  17kg per cow.
One of the benefits  of a weekly  farm walk is to identify  problems  on the farm, e g. 
if a particular  paddock  is growing  poorly, it might be grazed straight  away,  
fertilized  and got growing  again.
Figures  achieved  on the farm to date
• 95% of the milk produced  in 2007 came  from grazed  grass  with no silage  in 
the diet. Some concentrates  were fed in the spring  to dry cows but the 
milking  cows  ate only 220kg  for the year, stocked  at 2.75 cows/ha.
• Total concentrate  in 2007 was down by 150t or €30,000  on 2006.
• Common  profit  for 2007  - 21 c/I.
• Calculated  grass  grown  = 13.75t,  with tillage ground  still 17% behind.
• Milk  solids  produced  (per hectare)  on the cow ground  = 1052kg.
Targets  set for the farm
• Move to Jersey cross cows, as genetics  on the farm are less than
desirable.
• Improved  paddocks  grew over 16t last year. The aim is to move the farm 
average  to this figure.
• To  graze  80% of the grass  produced  on the farm.
• Produce  1350kg  milk solids per hectare  on the milking  platform  within  five 
years. This will be done with crossbred  cows milking  450kg milk solids,  
stocked  at 3 cows per hectare,  and feeding  less than 350kg  of meal. To 
achieve  these  targets  compact  calving  is essential,  i.e. 90% in 6 weeks.
21
Summary
With regard  to farm development,  it was well worth taking  the risks involved.  As 
regards  grass  budgeting,  it is necessary  to; -
• Set targets  and having  a plan 'specific'  for the farm.
• Walk  the farm on a weekly basis  to determine  farm cover.
• Base grassland  management  decisions  on the information  gathered  - farm 
cover  versus  the plan.
Grass  is the key to profitability.
22
Competing  on a world  stage  - lessons  for Ireland
Pat Dillon,  Laurence  Shalloo  and Brendan  Horan
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Dairy  Production  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co Cork
Summary
• Allowing  for increase  in land and labour productivity,  seasonal  grass  
based dairy farming  in Ireland  can be the most competitive  within the 
ED. Ireland is well placed to increase  its share of European  milk 
production  if EU milk quotas  were abolished.
• The  short to medium  term outlook  for international  dairy product  prices  
are good (however  with much greater volatility)  driven by strong  
international  demand,  continuing  decrease  in EU exports, slower  
expansion  in world  wide production  and historically low stock  levels.
• Significant  potential  exists on Irish dairy farms to increase  technical  
efficiency  as indicated  by financial  performance  being achieved  on the 
average  Irish dairy farm compared  to that on dairy farms applying  good  
technology.
• On the majority  of Irish dairy  farms  considerable  capacity  exits within  the 
milking  platform  to increase  milk production  using existing  resources.  
This will be achieved  by dedicating  the milking  platform  to grazing  dairy  
cows  only and increasing  stocking  rate.
• The  rate of increase  in the scale of milk production  on Irish dairy farms  
has been significantly  slowed  by the application  of the EU milk quota  
regime when compared  to our main competitor ’s worldwide. This 
continues  to reduce  the development  of the Irish dairy industry.
• At farm level significant  increases  in milk output  can be achieved  from 
grazed  grass through  greater  grass utilisation  by increasing  stocking  
rate, applying  modern  grazing  management  technology and using  grass-  
based dairy cow genetics. Similarly  there will be a requirement  for 
increase  supply of high EBI dairy replacements  and earlier more  
compact  calving.
• At processing  level there is a requirement  for increased  efficiency  in the 
production  of commodity  products  while at the same time a shift to 
increase  production  of value  added  type dairy  products.
23
Introduction
‘Change  will occur  whether  or not we plan for it. The question  is whether  
we will have the foresight  to embrace  change  and shape  it to our benefit,  
or whether  we will allow  ourselves  to become  its victims. ’
Agriculture  Task  Force  
Chicago  Council  on Global  Affairs  
September  2006
Over the last fifteen years the Irish economy  has been transformed  from a 
country  of sluggish  economic  growth,  high unemployment  and serious  fiscal  
imbalances  into an economy  which today has the lowest  unemployment  rate, 
sustained  economic  growth  and among  the strongest  fiscal situations  in the EU. 
Between  1990 and 2000 GDP growth  averaged  7,4% per annum,  and 6.2%  per 
annum  since  2000  driven  by EU membership,  historically  low interest  rates and 
considerable  foreign direct investment.  Against  the backdrop  of frenetic 
economic  progress,  agriculture  has remained  an important  indigenous  industry  
making  a high value  add contribution  to economic  activity  (2.5% GDP or 3.5%  
of GNP; CSO, 2006; 9.1% of total merchandise  exports;  Bord Bia) of which  
dairy production  contributes  approximately  35% of total output. Irish agriculture  
currently  employs  approximately  5% of the Irish labour  force (CSO, 2007). In 
2006 farmers  purchased  Inputs and services  worth €3.6 billion and earned  
approximately  €2.4 billion  most of which  is spent  within the  local economy.  The 
Irish dairy industry  makes  a major  contribution  to the Irish economy  employing  
approximately  22,000 dairy farmers, 9.000 employees  in the processing  
industry  and supporting  an additional  4,500  in ancillary  services.  Approximately 
85% of Irish dairy products  (valued  at €2.1 billion),  are exported  annually  which  
represents  a quarter of all food exports.
While economic  growth in the overall economy  has slowed  in recent years  
(estimated  to be 3% in 2008),  due to a relative  loss of cost competitiveness  and 
an over reliance  on construction  and the public sector, the outlook  for dairy 
production  has improved  dramatically.  Recent  analysis  carried  out within EU 
has suggested  that milk quotas  are now constraining  the development  of an 
efficient  European  dairy industry  (van Berkum  and Helming,  2006) and policy  
proposals  have now been initiated  to remove  EU milk quotas  by 2015. In a EU 
context, Ireland has a comparative  advantage  over other countries  in the 
production  of milk because  of our temperate  grass growing  climate  and lower  
costs  of milk production  (Boyle  et al., 2002). A recent  study  by Lips and Rieder  
(2005)  projected  that quota  abolition  would  allow  production  to move  to areas  of 
competitive  advantage  such as Denmark,  Ireland and the Netherlands,  
predicting  that milk production  in Ireland  could  increase  by up to 39%.
In Ireland  pasture  based  dairy farming  is the most profitable  enterprise  when  
based on the efficient  conversion  of grazed grass into milk. Allowing  for 
increases  in land and labour  productivity,  dairy farming  in Ireland  can be the 
most competitive  within the EU. Greater  globalisation  of agriculture  trade will 
create  competitive  challenges  but also create  unprecedented  opportunities  for 
efficient  producers  to increase  production.  In the past European  farmers  were  
unable  to compete  and prosper  against  farmers  in other parts of the world if
24
such changes  in dairy policy were implemented  because  of less favourable 
climatic  conditions,  higher  land and labour  costs and smaller scale  of operation.  
However,  now it could be postulated  that world prices  for dairy products  will be 
much higher  in future  given  that growth  in world  demand  for milk increasing  by 
2% more than supply. In the past this imbalance  was redressed  when  farmers  
brought  uncultivated  land back  into production  however  this may not now occur  
as: (1) world food demand  could double  by 2050 through  a 50% increase  in 
world population  - all in developing  countries  and a 50% increase  from broad-  
based  economic  growth  in low income  countries  (mainly  China and India); (2) 
threats  to oil supply because  of political  instability  and world reserves,  are 
stimulating  investment  in renewable  energy  crops,  which  is diverting  land from 
food production;  (3) there are signs that climatic  change  is having  a significant 
effect  on agricultural  production  in many  parts  of the world  with water  becoming  
the greatest  constraint.
Irish milk production  has been controlled  by milk quotas  since the early 1980 ’s; 
however  the Commissions  preferred  option now is to end quotas  on April 1, 
2015. Similar  agricultural  reforms  have occurred  in many  other  countries.  The 
deregulation  of the Australian  industry  began in 1999 and has resulted  in a 
reduction  in dairy farm numbers  with international  prices  now determining  the 
price received  by farmers  for their milk. In New Zealand,  the subsidy  system  
was removed  in 1984 and stimulated  an expansion  in production  with increases  
in cow numbers  and land conversions  from other enterprises  to dairying,  
reductions  in input costs, increases  in productivity  as farmers reduced  
expenditure  and redistributed  resources  to areas of comparative  advantage  
(Philpott,  1995).
The objective  of this paper  is to i) describe  the current  situation  of the Irish dairy  
industry  via its competitors  as an exporter  of dairy products,  in a scenario  of 
increasing  world  demand  and changing  ED and international  trade  polices;  ii) to 
describe  the necessary  changes  required  to ensure Irelands  competitive  
advantage  can be further  enhanced  in future; and iii) outline  a vision for the 
Irish industry  to 2015.
SWOT  analysis  of the Irish dairy  industry
Ireland  has a long and successful  tradition  as a major  producer  of quality  dairy  
products. The grass-based  production  system has provided  significant 
competitive  advantage  in term of production  costs and the naturalness  of Irish 
dairy produce.  Policy  changes  arising  from CAP reform  and WTO agreements  
will push EU milk prices  close to world market  levels. World  market  prices  for 
dairy products  at present  are at an all time high, but past trends show  
considerable  volatility  in milk price. These  policy changes  should  act as an 
important  stimulus  to the industry  to make the necessary  changes  to develop  
and become  stronger  into the future. To do this we need to carry out a SWOT  
analysis  of the dairy industry  to identify  strengths,  weakness,  opportunities  and 
threats for the industry  going  forward.
25
Strengths
• Ireland  has enjoyed  a competitive  advantage  within the EU due to its low 
cost grass  based  seasonal  calving  system. Grazed  grass  is the lowest  cost 
feed available  and in Ireland  can make  up a large proportion  of the lactating  
cow diet (> 90%) over a 10-month  grazing  season. For climatic  reasons  
most regions  in the EU have a much shorter  grazing  season  (six months)  
which increases  the requirement  for both concentrate  supplementation  and 
conserved  forages  as part of the feeding  systems.
• The  grass-based  system  also provides  a competitive  advantage  in terms  of 
naturalness  of Irish dairy produce. This will allow Irish dairy industry  to 
develop  a product  portfolio  that capitalises  on the values  that are uniquely  
Irish. The increasing  value-added  content  of the infant  formula  sector  which  
is a major  purchaser of dairy products  is of huge strategic  importance  to the 
future.
• Ireland  has developed  a strong  technology  base  for grass-based  systems  in 
terms of grazing management,  grass based genetics, reproductive  
technologies,  labour  efficiency  and low fixed cost structures.  Ireland  has 
strong research,  advisory  and education  structures  that support  these  
technologies.
• Ireland  has a long and successful  tradition  as a major producer  of high 
qualify dairy products. In the Irish dairy industry  at present  there are 
approximately  22,000  dairy farmers  with large potential  to expand  milk 
production  in a no EU milk quota  scenario.
Weaknesses
• The rate of increase  in scale  of milk production  per farm in Ireland  has been 
significantly  lower than that of our main competitors  in both EU (Denmark  
and Holland)  and worldwide  (New  Zealand,  Australia  and US) since EU milk 
quotas were introduced  in 1984 (Figure 1). From 1983 to 2006 milk 
production  per farm (kg) increased  from 150,000  to 864,140  in Demark;  
220,000  to 493,116  in Holland;  423,000  to 1,211,746  in New Zealand,  and 
309,000  to 929,235  in Australia.  This contrasts  with 74,000  to 229,925  in 
Ireland  over the same  period. In terms  of scale  of milk production  Ireland  is 
much  smaller  than our main competitor ’s worldwide.
26
Figure  1. Developments  in milk output  per farm 1983 to 2003
ooo
E
oa
fi-3o
DEN NLD IRE NZ AUS
• Rationalisation  at processor  level is required  to achieve  the scale and cost 
competitiveness  necessary  to successfully  compete  for international  
business.  At present  six companies  process  80% of the Irish milk pool; 
while  the corresponding  number  in Denmark,  Netherlands  and New Zealand 
are 1, 2 and 1 respectively.
• The Irish dairy industry  produces  a high proportion  of its output  in the form 
of commodity  type products  (butter, powder  and bulk cheese). These  
products  attract  lower  margins  and are more sensitive  to world market  price  
fluctuations.  The proportion  of Irish milk utilised  for butter  production  has 
only reduced  by 6% over the last 27 years (70% in 1978 to 64% in 2005);  
compared  to a 35% reduction  in Denmark  and 20% in Holland  over the 
period  1991 to 2001. The only noticeable  change  in the product  portfolio  in 
Ireland  has been an increase  in the production  of cheese  from 13% in 1978  
to 22% in 2006.
Opportunities
• Present  forecasts  are that world  demand  for dairy products  is increasing  by 
approximately  2.8% per year, while  projected  world  growth  rate is 1.75%  per 
year. Since 2004 the growth  in world demand  for milk is 2% above  the 
growth  in supply,  with the vast majority  of additional  demand  occurring  in 
developing  countries. Table 1 outlines  the projected  increase  in milk 
consumption  to the year 2020 (Delgado,  2005). It is estimated  that the 
projected  growth  in consumption  of milk will increase  by 0.6% and 2.9% per 
annum in developed  and developing  countries  respectively.  Over the 
period, milk consumption  in developing  countries  will increase  by 152mt,  
while  in developed  countries  increases  will only be of the order  of 18mt. It is
27
projected  that per capita consumption  of dairy products  will increase  from 
202 to 211 kg in developed  countries,  compared  with increases  from 45 to 
62kg in developing  countries  (over the period  2003 to 2020). China and 
India will contribute  to the greatest  increases. The large increase  in 
developing  countries  is being fuelled by increases  in population  growth,  
urbanization  and income  growth. Asian  markets  accounted  for 50% of the 
total growth in Irish dairy exports  in 2007. Alongside  the increase  in 
demand  for dairy products  there will be a similar  increase  in demand  for 
meat consumption.
Table  1. Projected  world  consumption  of cows  milk
Projected  growth  (1997- 
2020),  (%/annum)Total consumption 
(million  mt)% of world  total 
2020
World 1997 2003 2020
Developing 2.9 194 223 375 62
Developed
Total0.6 251 268 286
445 491 66143
Delgado,  2005
Table 2 shows  world milk production  and consumption  2001 to 2005. Since  
2004 the growth  in world demand  for milk is 2% above  the growth  in supply.  
Present  forecasts  are that world demand  for dairy products  are increasing  by 
approximately  2.8% per year, while projected  world growth  rate is 1.75% per 
year (FAPRI 2007 World Agricultural  Outlook). It is projected  that milk 
production  will increase  by 6%, 2.9%,  3.3%, 2%, 1.2% and -0.2%  per annum  in 
China,  India, Mercusor,  Oceania,  USA and EU respectively  between  2006 and 
2013.
Table  2. World  milk production  and consumption  - balance  sheet  (m.t)
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Production 585.7 602.5 614.3 620.2 634.0 645.0 655
Stock  change +0.5 +3.6 +0.0 -1.7 -2.7 -2.0 -0
Consumption 585.2 598.9 614.3 621.9 636.7 647.0 655
FAPRI-lreland  analysis  has shown  that Irish milk supply  could be increased  
by almost  60% using existing  resources  on dairy farms,  which concur  with 
Teagasc  surveys  carried  out across  Glanbia,  Connacht  Gold, Lakeland  and 
Donegal  showing  that it was possible  to increase  milk output  between  60 
and 70%. Specialist's  dairy farmers  have the highest  family  farm income,  
and with only approximately  20% of the grassland  area of the  country  used 
for dairying  then there is huge potential  for increased  milk production  
nationally.
28
Milk quotas  have controlled  Irish milk production  since the early 1980 ’s. 
However  the Commissions  preferred  option  now is to end quotas  on April 1, 
2015. Presently  it could  be postulated  that EU milk quotas  will be increased  
by 2% in 2008/09  and by a series  of annual  increases  of 3% from 2008/09 
to 2014/15  as part of the ‘Health  Check  (totalling  approximately  20% over 
the period). In this scenario  FAPRI-lreland  analysis  indicate  that overall  EU 
milk production  would  increase  by only 3.7% by 2014 and milk price reduce  
by 7%. In this scenario  Ireland  would  take up its full ~20%  quota  increase.
Ireland  being part of the EU-25  with a population  of 456 million  people  is in 
a strong competitive  position  to increase  its share as a provider  of dairy  
products.  This will be more important  in a freer market  scenario  where  milk 
production  may decrease  in many  areas  in Europe.
Threats
The EU has been loosing  its share of global dairy markets  since EU milk 
quotas were introduced  in 1984 (Figure 2). This has reduced  the 
development  of the Irish dairy industry  since a large proportion  of its dairy  
products  are exported.  If the EU adopts  a conservative  milk reform  quota  
policy between  now and 2015 then the Irish dairy industry  would be most  
affected.
Figure  2. Shifts  in world  export  market  shares  (1995-2005)
Grass-based  systems  of milk production  require  access  to large land blocks  
to permit  expansion  with land fragmentation  likely to inhibit expansion  for 
many Irish milk producers.  Irish land purchase  and rental prices are high 
driven by non-agricultural  demand  and prohibitive  legislation.  In other
29
countries,  land rental  or purchase  prices  are much less restrictive  and more  
financially  feasible.
A series  of Directives  have been introduced  with the objective  of protecting  
the natural  environment,  dealing  with issues  such as water quality,  birds,  
habitats  and the protection  of the natural  environment.  It is important  that 
not all grass based systems  are set a legal limit of 170kg of organic  
nitrogen  as set out in the Nitrate  Directive  and a derogation  of up to 250kg  
of organic  N/ha must be available  to producers.  Under  the Kyoto protocol  
Ireland  is committed  to limit its increase  in GHG emissions  to 13% above  
1990 levels between  2008 and 2012. In 2005, however,  national  GHG  
emissions  were 23% above  the Kyoto target; even though  between  1999  
and 2005 there was a 12% reduction  in GHG emissions  from agriculture 
due primarily  to a decrease  in livestock  numbers.
Irish milk production  efficiency
Milk production  efficiency  in Ireland  is variable  and low. Table 3 shows  the 
evolution  of input costs, gross outputs  and margins  from 1990 to 2006 for 
specialist  dairy farms in Ireland. The results  show that total input costs have 
increased  by 2,4c/l over the 17-year  period (1990 to 2006). Direct costs  
increased  by 1.5c/l and overhead  costs by 0.9c/l over the period. This resulted  
in a reduction  in net margin  over the 17 year period  of 2.2c/l. Similarly  over the 
period the cost/output  ration increased  by 0.08, indicating  a reduction  in 
competitiveness.
Table 3. Itemised  costs, outputs  and net margin  (cent/litre)  of milk 
production  for specialist manufacturing  milk herds  1990-2006
YearDirect
CostsOverhead
CostsTotal
CostsGross
OutputNet
MarginCost / Output  
Ratio
1990 8.34 8.21 16.55 27.72 11.17 0.60
1991 8.09 7.93 16.02 25.60 9.58 0.63
1992 8.27 7.80 16.07 27.43 11.65 0.59
1993 8.87 8.23 17.10 29.80 12.70 0.57
1994 9.36 7.86 17.22 29.63 12.41 0.58
1995 9.87 8.50 18.37 31.02 12.65 0.59
1996 9.84 8.63 18.47 30.00 11.53 0.62
1997 8.62 8.20 16.82 28.50 11.67 0.59
1998 9.12 8.30 17.42 29.30 11.88 0.59
1999 9.08 8.22 17.30 27.85 10.56 0.62
2000 8.83 8.65 17.49 29.49 12.01 0.59
2001 9.11 8.76 17.88 30.73 12.85 0.58
2002 9.63 8.56 18.19 28.47 10.27 0.64
2003 9.16 8.13 17.29 28.05 10.76 0.62
2004 8.89 8.76 17.65 29.37 11.72 0.60
2005 10.18 8.71 18.88 28.19 9.30 0.67
2006 10.71 9.20 19.70 26.70 7.00 0.74
Hource.  Derived  from  National  Farm  Survey  various  years.
30
Table  4 shows  the gross output,  total input costs, and net margin  (c/l) for the 
five cost quintiles  and for the average  specialist  dairy farms in 2006. The total 
cost of production  for the lowest  quintile  (20%)  was 14.7c/l,  compared  to 26.4c/l  
for the highest  quintile,  or a difference  of 11.7c/l;  while the average  cost of 
production  was 19.7c/l. This difference  in cost of production  between  the 
lowest  and highest  quintiles  represents  a difference  of 11.4c/l  (12.2c/l  vs. 0.8c/l)  
in net margin; while the net margin of the average  producer  was 7.0c/l.  
Differences  in feed costs (mainly  concentrate  costs)  were responsible  for 42% 
of the total cost difference.  Of the overhead  cost items - hired labour  (8.4%),  
machinery  operating  and depreciation  charges  (11.8%),  land rental charges  
(6.4%)  and interest  payments  on loans (7.3%)  were the major  contributors  to 
overall  variation  in unit input  costs.
Table  4. Variation  in unit costs  (cent/litre)  by quintile  for specialist  dairy  
farms  in 2006  (population  results)
Quintile Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Average
Gross  Output 26.8 26.6 26.5 26.4 27.2 26.7
Total Costs 14.7 17.5 19.4 21.6 26.4 19.7
Net Margin 12.2 9.1 7.1 4.8 0.8 7.0
Source:  Derived from  National  Farm  Survey  2007.
Table  5 shows  a comparison  of the physical  and financial  performance  from the 
average  specialist  dairy  farmer  in the National  Farm Survey  (NFS),  average  
from Fermoy  DairyMIS  Discussion  Group  (19 spring  calving  dairy herds)  and 
the Moorepark  Target.
Table  5. Comparison  of the average  farm from the National  Farm Survey,  
Fermoy  DairyMIS  Discussion  Group  and the Moorepark  Target  for 2006
NFS DairyMIS Moorepark  Target
Milk yield (I/cow) 4,700 5,500 5,700
Fat (%) 3.75 4.03 4.20
Protein  (%) 3.30 3.46 3.60
Milk solids  (kg/cow) 342 412 445
Milk solids  (kg/ha) 650 990 1,250
Concentrate  (kg/cow) 713 480 300
Stocking  rate (cows/ha) 1.9 2.4 2.80
Profit  per hectare  (€) 650 2,100 2,500
The performance  of the average  farm from the Fermoy  DairyMIS  discussion  
group  was significantly  higher  in terms of milk yield per cow (800 litres), fat % 
(+0.28),  protein  % (+0.16),  milk solids  per cow (+70 kg), milk solids  per hectare
31
(+340 kg), stocking  rate (+0.5 cows/ha)  and profit per hectare (€1,450);  
achieved  with feeding  233kg  less concentrates  per cow. The performance  of 
the farms on the DairyMIS  Discussion  Group  was only €400 per hectare  less 
than the Moorepark  target. Therefore  significant  potential  exists  on the average  
Irish dairy farm to increase  efficiency  as indicated  by that achieved  on dairy 
farms  applying  good technology.
The competitive  advantage  of irish milk production
For the purpose  of examining  costs of production,  costs  were defined  as:
(i) Total  cash costs, which  include  all specific  costs, directly  incurred  in the 
production  of a given  commodity,  for example  fertiliser,  feedstuffs,  seeds  
etc. plus external  costs such as wages, rent and interest  paid, plus 
depreciation  charges.
(ii) Total  economic  costs, which includes  all of the cash costs identified  
above,  except  interest  charges,  plus imputed  resource  costs for family 
labour,  equity  capital  and owned  land.
Figure 3 below shows total costs as % of dairy output for the eight year 
average,  for each of the selected  countries,  for all specialist  dairy farms in the 
European  Commission ’s Farm  Accountancy  Data Network  (FADN)  (Thorne  and 
Fingleton,  2005) sample. The value of dairy output  was calculated  as milk 
receipts  plus dairy calf sales. Cash costs and the imputed  charges  for owned  
resources  are identified. Cash costs as % of output  were relatively  low in 
Ireland  over the period  1996 to 2003. Italy had the lowest  cash costs as % of 
output  at 61 %, but the cost structure  in Ireland  and Belgium  was only slightly  
higher  at 65 and 66% respectively.  The highest  cash costs as % of output  was 
experienced  in Denmark  where cash costs were 88% of total output of the 
enterprise.
The competitive  advantage  experienced  by ‘average ’ Irish producers  worsens  
when all imputed  charges  for owned  resources  are taken into consideration.  
Ireland  had the second  highest  total economic  costs at 118% of output. The 
lowest  total economic  costs were experienced  in Belgium,  where  nearly  1% of 
dairy output  remained  as profit for dairy producers  on average  over the eight 
year period. The main imputed  cost that contributed  to the relatively  high total 
economic  costs experienced  in Ireland  over the period  was that for owned  land. 
This was due to the relatively  high imputed  rental charge  coupled  with high 
levels of land ownership  in Irish dairy production.  The relatively  low stocking  
rates and milk yields  per hectare  on Irish dairy  farms  over the period  also must 
be considered  as a contributing  factor. However,  it is worthwhile  to note that 
when the imputed land charge for owned resources  is not taken into 
consideration  the relative  competitive  position  of Irish dairy farms remains  
strong,  with Irish farms showing  one of the lowest  cost to output  ratios  for the 
period  1996  to 2003.
32
Figure 3. Cash and economic  costs for all specialist  dairy farms in 
selected  EU countries  (1996-2003)
□ Cash costs  □ Owned  land costs I Non land costs
When  total economic  costs  were considered  as % of output  for specialist  dairy 
farms in the 50-99  dairy cow size category,  Irish producers  ranked  as the third 
lowest  total economic  cost producer  relative  to all countries  examined.  When  
the imputed  charge  for owned  land is excluded  from the analysis,  the larger  
Irish producers  appear  as the lowest  cost producer,  with 14% of total output  
remaining  to remunerate  the opportunity  cost of owned  land.
While the cost and return indicators  presented  in Figures  3 above represent  
average  performance  over the period 1996 to 2003, it is also important  to 
determine  whether  or not the competitive  position  of Irish dairy producers  has 
shifted  over this time period. Hence,  a linear  regression  model  was fitted to this 
data to observe  trends  within  the data. For the average  sample  there was no 
apparent  significant  trend over the period, whereas  with the sub sample  of 
larger producers  there was a significant  improvement  in cash and economic 
costs per product  volume  for Irish producers  relative  to the average. Cash  
costs improved  at a rate of 2c/kg of milk solids/year,  and economic  costs at a 
rate of 3c/year  relative  to the average  of all countries.
Exploiting  the competitive  advantage  of Irish production  systems
Future  farm systems  will take the form of above average  farmers  leveraging  
debt to finance expansion  and backing  their ability and farming skills to 
generate  the cash returns necessary  to service the debt and deliver a 
satisfactory  rate of return  on time and capital  investment.  The system  must be 
sustainable  in terms  of staff, animals  and the environment,  allowing  for a quality  
lifestyle  and providing  for sufficient  time-off  for all staff. The system  must 
therefore  be simple  and flexible,  allowing  for increased  operational  scale to be
33
achieved  without  requiring  large amounts  of additional  labour. Future  systems  
will require  new industry  targets  for a non-quota  environment  with targets  set 
with respect  to profitability,  productivity  and labour  efficiency  (Table  6).
Table  6. Key performance  indicators  (KPI)  for the Irish dairy  industry
Indicators Current  average** Target
Milk solids  per ha (kg) 660 1,250
Labour  (cows/LU) 44 100
Labour  cost/ha  (€) 1,700 750
Profit  per ha* (€) 1,030 2,500
Margin  per kg milk solids  (€) 1.56 2.00
"KPI ’s based  on milk price projection  of 26c/l,
2006)'based  on National  farm survey  data (NFS,
In future,  most of the costs of milk production  will be directly  associated  with the 
area of land being  farmed,  the number  of cows in the herd and the number  of 
people employed. Therefore,  consistently  high cash surpluses  will be 
generated  by ensuring  that high levels of milk production  are achieved  per 
hectare,  per cow and per labour unit. Successful  dairy farms will optimise  
output/ha  and the profit margin  per unit of output. Output  per ha will in future  
be measured  in kg milk solids  (MS) i.e. kg of fat and protein,  as that is what is 
required  and paid for by the dairy processor  with 1,250kg  MS/ha a realistic  
target for an efficient  grass  based  milk production  system.
A key economic  principle,  irrelevant  of enterprise,  is to optimise  economic  
performance  by capturing  maximum  profit per unit of the most limiting  factor  of 
production.  In the intermediate  term, land will become  the most limiting  factor 
of production  on most farms, hence profit per ha will be a key performance  
indicator  of a successful  dairy business  with a realistic  target of €2,500/ha  
based on a milk price of 26c/l. The second major variable  determining  
profitability  on a successful  dairy farm will be margin  per kg of milk solid (MS) 
produced.  This is the margin  available  to pay for all of the unpaid  resources  
employed,  i.e. land, labour and capital. As MS yield per ha and per cow 
increase,  initially  there will be an increase  in margin  per kg MS because  of a 
dilution  in fixed costs and benefits  in efficiency  from scale. However,  as MS 
output  per ha approaches  the optimum  the margin  will reduce  due to a reducing  
proportion  of the diet from grazed  grass.  A realistic  target  margin  per kg of MS 
is approximately  €2.00  where  MS per ha is relatively  high (>1,250kg).  A higher  
target  margin  would  be realistic  at milk prices  in excess  of 26c/l or where  input 
costs  can be reduced  further.
Five main areas of technical  innovation  have been identified  which will be 
important  for the sustainability of dairy  farming  in Ireland:
(1) Increase  in scale  and efficiency  at farm level;
(2) Using  high EBI genetics;
34
(3) Maximising  utilisation  and performance  from grazed  grass;
(4) Developing  labour  efficient  systems  of production;
(5) Developing  low fixed costs  systems  that allow dairy  farmers  expand.
Increasing  scale and efficiency  at farm level
Dairy  farmers  have no option  but to increase  efficiency  and scale  of production  
if they are to maintain  incomes  in future  years. Acquiring  and applying  newer  
skills and knowledge  needed  for more efficient  milk production  is essential.  
Through  research,  new technology  can be developed  which will allow dairy  
farmers  to increase  scale while at the same time reduce the unit cost of 
production.  Table  7 shows  the level of expansion  in milk production  across  a 
range of countries  between  1975 and 2005. Prior to the introduction  of milk 
quotas  in the EU, the Irish dairy industry  achieved  an average  annual  increase  
in overall milk productivity  of 7.2% per year between  1975 and 1985. This 
compares  favourably  with the increase  of 2.4, 1.9, -2.1, 1.5 and 1.8% per year 
for the US, New Zealand,  Australia,  South  America  and the World,  respectively  
during  the same period. Such productivity  gain was achieved  through  scaling  
up of herd size, increased  intensification  of Irish dairy farms and technological  
development  in terms  of the production  system  during  this period. In a post EU 
milk production  environment,  Irish dairy farmers must strive for similar  
productivity  gains  as were achieved  during  this pre milk quota  period.
Table  7. Trends  in world  milk production  (000, tonnes)  1975-2005
US NZ AUST SA Ireland World
1975 52,371 6,193 6,803 15,200 3,308 388,908
1980 58,241 6,313 5,394 17,378 4,556 429,849
1985 65,166 7,343 6,217 17,532 5,682 460,331
1990 67,260 7,311 6,448 22,208 5,269 472,110
1995 70,500 9,285 8,460 26,947 5,288 467,992
2000 76,294 12,014 11,183 36,600 5,161 485,595
2005 80,255 14,103 10,451 48,300 5,062 531,300
Using  high EBI genetics
One of the main factors  influencing  farm profit now and into the future is the 
genetic  make-up  of the dairy herd, which  will be critical  to the profitability  of any 
dairy enterprise. Overwhelming  evidence  shows that selection  solely on 
production  traits results in reduced  herd health, fertility  and welfare  with an 
almost 1% reduction  per year in calving rate to first service  in Irish spring  
calving  herds between  1990 and 2001 (Evans  et a!., 2006). Reproductive  
performance  affects  the amount  of milk produced  per cow per day of herd life, 
breeding  costs,  rate of voluntary  and involuntary  culling,  and the rate of genetic 
progress  for traits of importance  and consequently  results  in a reduction  in the 
overall  profitability  of a dairy herd. In Ireland,  the relative  importance  of fertility 
is higher because  milk production  is based to a large extent on seasonal  
pasture  production  systems  and thus profitability  is influenced  by the ability  to 
calve cows rapidly  at the optimum  time. The average  mean calving  date of
35
Irish spring-calving  dairy cows is March  16 based  on CMMS  data (8 days later 
than 2002)  with an average  calving  rate of 53% in 42 days (ICBF,  2006). This 
is considerably  later than the optimum,  which is mid-February  with calving  
commencing  in late January  on a Moorepark  type soil.
The EBI identifies  sires whose progeny  have a long herd life, annually  
producing  a large quantity  of high composition  milk within a 365-day  calving  
interval,  are easy calving  and have progeny  who themselves  calve  easily  in the 
future and exhibit large carcase  weights  of good conformation.  In 2006,  
approximately  35% of replacements  entering Irish dairy herds will have 
originated  from Al sires, with the remainder resulting  from the use of stock  bulls 
(Department  of Agriculture  and Food, 2005). The average  EBI of dairy cows  
and stock  bulls recorded  in Ireland  is €24 and €8, respectively,  with the average  
EBI of the dairy cow population  only increasing  by €1 per annum  (ICBF,  2005).  
Based  on the gains  observed  in research  and the prevailing  EBI in the national  
dairy cow population  (EBI = €24), an increase  in profit of €3,500  per 454,000  
litres (100,000  gallons)  of milk quota per year through  the development  of a 
high EBI herd can be expected  in the coming  years.
Maximising  utilisation  of grazed  grass
One of the major competitive  advantages  that Ireland has over most EU 
countries  is the potential  production  of between  12 to 16t DM/hectare  over a 
long growing  season  from pasture. It is envisaged  that the cost of grass silage  
will continue  to increase  due mainly to increases  in contractor  charges  
associated  with inflation  in labour,  energy and machinery  costs. In recent  years  
grazing management  strategies  have been identified  that increase  the 
proportion  of grazed  grass and reduce  the dependency  on grass silage  in Irish 
systems  of milk production.  Lengthening  the grazing  season  by 27 days has 
been shown  to reduce  the cost of milk production  by 1 c/l. Continued  technical  
innovation  in grazing management  will further reduce the cost of milk 
production  and therefore  ensure  the viability  of the dairy industry  as a whole.  
Figure 3 shows a strong relationship  between  total costs of production  and 
proportion  of grass in the cov/s diet in a number  of countries  (Dillon et al., 
2005). The data also show  that increasing  the proportion  of grazed  grass  in a 
system  that already  entails  a high proportion  of grazed  grass (UK and Ireland)  
will have a greater benefit  in reducing  the cost of milk production  than a country  
that already  has a low proportion  (Denmark  and US). The relationship  shows  
that on average,  the cost of milk production  is reduced  by Ic/I for a 2.5%  
increase  in grazed  grass  in the cow’s diet. The level of grass  utilization  on the 
average  Irish dairy  farms  is relatively  and can be increased  significantly  through  
increased  stocking  rate and applying  modern  grazing  management  technology.
36
Figure  3. Relationship  between  total costs of production  and proportion  
of grazed  grass  in cow’s diet
Developing  labour  efficient  systems  of milk production
Table  8 shows  the relationship  between  herd size and labour  efficiency  in Irish
dairy herds.
Table  8. The relationship  between  herd size and labour efficiency  in Irish 
dairy  herds
Small Medium Large
No. of cows 44 62 147
Milk quota  (litres) 236,000 296,000 745,000
Hours/cow/year 49 42 29
Milking  as a % of total time 35 32 30
Full labour  costs  (c/l) 10.2 9.7 6.4
Labour  as a % of total costs 35 31 24
(O'Donovan  et al., 2006)
In New Zealand  the average  number  of hours labour  per cow per year is less 
than 20, which is much less that that in the larger  size group in Ireland. The 
availability  of skilled labour  capable  of managing  high performing  dairy herds  
will also be a limitation  in future and therefore  dairy farms must adequately 
remunerate  this skilled  labour  to compete  with other  sectors  of the economy  in 
sourcing  and retaining  staff. To achieve  a high level of labour  remuneration,  a 
high output per labour unit is essential. A realistic  target labour efficiency 
should  be 22 hours  per cow per year (O’Donovan  et al., 2007)  thereby  allowing  
one operator  to manage  100 cows. The overall labour cost target should  
therefore  be €900 per hectare  with an average  labour cost  of €15/hr  worked  for
37
both skilled  and unskilled  labour. The realisation  of labour  performance  targets  
will depend  on the simplicity  of the overall  system  and the introduction  of new 
technologies to  reduce  labour  input.
Developing  low fixed costs  systems  that allow  dairy  farmers  expand  
If dairy farmers  are facing  into a situation  where  milk quotas  are liberalised  but 
lower milk prices apply, then low cost expansion  will be the key to the future  
profitability  of dairy farmers  in Ireland. To allow for expansion,  extra housing  
and milking  facilities  will be required  on dairy farms. The capital cost of 
conventional  housing  systems  for a 100 cow herd is estimated  at €250,000  as 
compared  to €60,000  for an out wintering  pad plus an earth bank tank (no 
grants  included)  to contain  all slurry  plus soiled  water. When  both systems  are 
financed  with a 15-year  bank term loan with interest  rate fixed at 7.3% the 
difference  in annual  costs (interest  plus depreciation  costs) is 2c/l. A major  
advantage  of low capital  cost wintering  systems  is that it allows  farmers  with 
limited resources  to put facilities  in place and thereby  gain control  over the 
consolidation  or expansion  of their business.  Therefore  with pressure  to reduce  
costs and the absence  of grant-aid  for larger farms it is opportune  to examine  
alternative  lower  cost systems.  Recent  innovations  in using  out-wintering  pads 
and earth bank tanks have shown huge potential  as alternative  reduced  
housing  and effluent  management  facilities  for dairy  cows.
The potential  for expansion  on Irish dairy  farms
A survey  was carried  on over 1,430  dairy  farmers  supplying  Glanbia,  Connacht  
Gold, Lakeland  and Donegal  throughout  2007. The Glanbia  survey  was carried  
out in January  and February  while Connacht  Gold, Lakeland  and Donegal  
surveys  were carried  out from July to October.  There  were four objectives  to 
the survey;
1. Determine  the potential  for expansion  on dairy farms based on land 
areas  around  the milking  platform  as well as including  other  land parcels;
2. Determine  the current  labour availability  and potential  for a successor;
3. Determine  the current  status  of milking  and winter housing  facilities;
4. Determine  the future  intentions  of respondents.
Table 9 shows  some of the biological  and attitudinal  responses  to the survey.  
Average  milk quota size and area around  the grazing  platform  were larger  for 
the Glanbia  suppliers  when compared  to the combination  of Connacht  Gold,  
Lakeland  Dairies  and Donegal  Co-op suppliers.  Stocking  rates were similar,  
and on average  low for the two groups at 1.78 and 1,79 cows/ha. Milk 
production  per cow and per hectare  was also similar  in the two regions. The 
number  of suppliers  planning  to expand  was similar  at 50% with slightly  more  
stating  that they planned  to exit in the Glanbia  region  (however  this may be due 
to Glanbia  suppliers  being surveyed  earlier  in the year when milk prices  were  
lower). When the total increase  in output from the expanding  farms is 
calculated  and adjusted  for those planning  to exit, total milk supply,  based  on 
the surveyed  farmers ’ intentions  would  increase  by 9% for Glanbia  and 14% for 
Connacht  Gold/Donegal/Lakeland.
38
As indicated  in the survey  and based  on best practice  technologies,  it can be 
anticipated  that significant  increases  in dairy cow numbers  could be 
accommodated  on the existing  land base with further  increases  in productivity 
achievable  through  improved  animal genetics,  compact  calving,  lengthened  
lactations  and the provision  of increased  quantities  of higher quality feed.  
When  the potential  expansion  in production  based  on the current  land areas  of 
surveyed  farms incorporating  an optimum  stocking  rate and level of milk 
production  in a no-quota  scenario  (2.7HJ/ha  and 15,0001/ha,  respectively)  is 
quantified  and accounting  for those planning  to exit milk production,  the 
potential  increase  in milk supply  to these processors  could be up to 60 - 70% 
on the surveyed  farms.
Table  9. Survey  of 1,430 regionally  distributed  dairy  farmers  across  four 
milk processors  carried  out during  2007
Glanbia Connacht  Gold/Donegal/Lakeland
Quota  size (000, litres) 305,503 247,283
Grazing  Platform  Area 
(ha)38.9 30.5
Stocking  Rate (LU/ha) 1.78 1.79
Milking  cows (No.) 64.6 52.7
Dairy  specialisation  (%) 0.63 0.70
Milk production  (kg/cow) 4,808 5,194
(kg/ha) 8,346 9,212
Proportion  expanding  (%) 49 50
Proportion  exiting  (%) 14 9
Potential  expansion  (%) 70 60
Without  successor (%) 25 29
Medium  term outlook  for milk production  in Ireland  (FAPRI  analysis)
FAPRI-lreland  (Donnellan  and Hennessy,  2007) has examined  the effect of 
milk quota expansion  on EU and Ireland  milk production.  Two scenarios  were  
investigated;  the first was a once off increase  of 3% in EU milk quotas in 
2008/09,  and secondly  as well as a once off 3% in 2008/09,  a 3% increase  
each year between  2009/10  and 20014/15. These two scenarios  were  
compared  with quotas remaining  in their present  format between  now and 
2014/15.
A 3% increase  in EU milk quota  in 2008/09
A once off 3% increase  in EU milk quotas  in 2008/09  would result in a 2% 
increase  in milk production  at EU level by 2014/15. This increase  in milk 
production  would  result in a reduction  in milk price of 5% at EU level by 2015.  
Ireland  would  take up the full 3% increase  in milk quota. Additionally  Irish milk 
production  would  expand  by 6% in the two years after milk quota elimination.
39
By 2016 the Irish milk price would  be just under  €25 per 100kg  or 26 cent per 
litre. The price reduction  that takes place in the last couple  of years of the 
projection  period  is due to the expansion  in EU milk production  and reflects  the 
fact that Irish milk production  is still increasing  by the end of the projection  
period. The lower milk price is offset by higher  total production  so that the 
value of the Irish milk sector is increased  by 8% (€1,533m)  relative  to a 
continuation  of the present  quota  system  by 2016. If milk quota  remain  in place  
until 2015, it is projected  that Irish milk price  would  be 12% higher  in 2016.
A 3% increase  in EU milk quota  each year between  2008/09  and 2014/15
An increase  by an additional  3% each year against  the base 2008/09  would
represent  an increase  in milk quotas of about 20% in advance  of quota  
elimination.  Across  the EU only Ireland  takes up the full increase  in quota  
offered  up to 2014/15. Over the projection  period,  the larger milk producing  
countries  in the EU do not increase  production  in line with the quota  increases.  
Overall EU milk production  by 2014 would increases  by just 4% and the 
average  EU milk price would be 7% lower than if milk quotas  remain  in their 
present  format. A key feature  of this scenario  is the negligible  impact  of quota  
removal  in 2015, given  that much of the EU in aggregate  will have achieved  its 
productive  capacity  in the quota  expansion  phase  preceding  the elimination.  In 
other  words,  in this scenario  the soft landing  is achieved.
Little change  in price or production  occurs at aggregate  EU level beyond  
2009/10;  as subsequent  production  increases  in some member  states  tend to 
be offset by production  contractions  in others. As a consequence,  when the 
milk quota is removed,  aggregate  EU milk production  is more or less 
unchanged  on the preceding  couple  of years. Accordingly,  where  quotas  are 
increased  by an annual 3% from 2009/10  to 2014/15,  milk price changes  
relatively  little between  2010 and 2016. Irish milk production  continues  to 
increase  once quotas  are removed,  while milk prices  at this point remain  stable  
at approximately €25 per 100kg. In this scenario  dairy cow numbers  in Ireland  
in 2016, are up 2% on the 2006 level. Yields  grow at a rate close to 2% per 
year, compared  with just 1 % per year presently.  This additional  rate of yield 
increase  represents  an extra 300kg  of milk per cow by 2016 and is achieved  
through  the exploitation  of improved  overall  herd genetics,  a modest  increase  in 
feed grain usage  of the order  of 100kg  per head and a decrease  in the amount  
of milk fed on farms.
Implications  of milk quota  expansion  for dairy  farm profitability  and numbers
In line with milk price projections,  net margins  are projected  to fall more rapidly
in the two quota  expansion  scenarios.  By 2010 net margin  per litre on average  
cost farms  is approximately  7 cent per litre if milk quotas  remain  as present,  or 
just over 5 cent per litre if quotas  are increased  by 3% in 2008/09,  and just less 
than 5 cent per litre if milk quotas  are increased  annually  by 3% each year to 
2015. The potential  benefit  of the quota expansion  scenarios  is the ability  to 
increase  milk production,  albeit at a lower milk price than would be available  
under  the current  milk quota. Whether  the net effect  of producing  more milk at 
lower  prices  is negative  or positive  depends  on expansion  costs.
40
If all existing  creamery  milk suppliers  increase  yields per cow by 10% and 
convert  half of their beef livestock  to dairy cows, then the national  milk supply  
would  increase  by 50%. If we assume  that the poorest  performing  one-third  of 
farmers  exit production,  i.e. the high cost farms, and that the remaining  two 
thirds  follow a 3% expansion  each year from 2008/09  to 2014/15,  i.e. expansion  
within own resources,  then national  production  would increase  by 18%. This 
suggests  that two-thirds  of existing  farmers  may be able to fill the national  
increase  in milk quota between  2008 and 2014 without  any major expansion  
outside  of existing  farm resources.
The number  of dairy farmers  is projected  to be lower in both milk quota  
expansion  scenarios  than if milk quotas  remain  in a 'no change  situation'.  A 
once off 3% increase  in EU milk quota in 2008/09  is not sufficient  to offset  the 
milk price decline,  however  an annual  3% increase  in the national  milk quota  
would be sufficient  to offset the negative  effect on milk price, and farmers  
incomes  would  be higher  than in a ‘no policy  change  scenario ’. Farmers  locked  
into a high cost structure  are worse  under  both milk quota  expansion  situations  
as margins  are squeezed  more than a no policy change  scenario,  profitable  
expansion  is not possible.  The extent  to which  individual  farmers  benefit  under  
a quota  expansion  situation,  depends  on the availability of quota  and its price in 
a no policy  change  situation.
Longer-term  outlook  for milk production  in Ireland
In the longer  term, faming  enterprises  that are most competitive  will compete  
more favourably  for limited  resources  such as land and labour, compared  to 
less competitive  farming  enterprises.  Dairy  farming  should  have a competitive  
advantage  over most other  farming  enterprises  in most scenarios  in Ireland. In 
the short term a significant  proportion  of the expansion  in Irish milk production  
will come from organic  growth  on existing  dairy farms and medium  sized (80- 
120 cows) herds managed  by family labour. Post 2014 the development  of 
new green-field  dairy operations  from alternative  enterprise  conversions  and 
rationalisation  of existing  dairy farms will become  a reality. Teagasc  must 
develop  the technology  for both incremental  expansion  as well as the 
development  of large stand alone green-field  developments  of 300-500  cow 
dairy  operations  incorporating  cutting  edge research  and good  farm practice.
References
Boyle, G.E., Brown,  S. and Reagan,  K. (2002). 'The competitiveness  of Irish 
agriculture'.  Irish Farmers  Journal,  Dublin.
Connolly,  L., Kinsella,  A., Quinlan,  G. and Moran,  B. (2007). National  farm 
survey  2006. Teagasc,  Farm Surveys  Department,  Rural Economy  Research  
Centre,  Athenry,  Galway.
Department  of Agriculture  and Food, (2006). Annual  Review  and Outlook  for 
Agriculture  and Food  2005/2006.
41
Delgado,  C.L. (2005). Rising demand  for meat and milk in developing  
countries:  implication  for grasslands-based  livestock  production. In: D.A. 
McGilloway  (ed ), Grassland:  a global resource. Proceedings  of the XXth  
International Grassland  Congress,  Dublin,  Ireland.
Dillon, P., Roche,  J.R., Shalloo,  L. and Horan,  B. (2005). Optimising  financial  
return  from grazing  in temperate  pastures.  In: J.J. Murphy  (ed ), Utilisation  of 
grazed grass in temperate  animal systems. Proceedings  of a satellite  
workshop  of the XXth International Grassland  Congress,  Cork, Ireland.
Donnellan,  T. and Hennessy,  T. (2007). The effect  of milk quota  'expansion'  on 
EU/lreland  production. Teagasc  National  Dairy Conference  2007. In: 
Exploiting  the freedom to milk. Teagasc  Oak Park Carlow  1 -19.
Evans,  R.D., Dillon, P., Buckley,  F., Berry, D.P., Wallace,  M.. Ducrocq,  V. and 
Garrick,  D.J. (2006). Trends  in milk production,  fertility  and survival  of cows in 
14 Irish dairy herds as a result of the introgression  of Holstein-Friesian  genes.  
Animal  Science  (Submitted).
Irish Cattle Breeding  Federation  (2005). Irish cattle breeding  statistics.  Irish 
Cattle  Breeding  Federation,  Shinagh  House,  Bandon,  Co. Cork.
Lips, M. and Rieder,  P. (2005). Abolition  of raw milk quota in the European  
Union: a CGE analysis  at the member  country  level. Journal  of Agricultural  
Economics,  56: 1-17.
National Farm Survey (Various  Years). National Farm Survey Report.  
Teagasc,  Rural  Economy  Research  Centre,  Galway.
O’Donovan,  K. (2006). Labour  efficiency  on Irish dairy farms. PhD Thesis.  
National  University  of Ireland,  Dublin.
Philpott,  B. (1995). New Zealand  aggregate  and sectoral  productivity  growth  
1960-95.  RPEP  Paper  274, Victoria  University,  Wellington,  New Zealand.
Shalloo,  L, O’Donnell,  S. and Horan, B. (2007). Profitable  dairying  in an 
increased  EU milk quota scenario.  Teagasc  National  Dairy Conference  2007.  
In: Exploiting  the freedom  to milk. Teagasc Oak Park Carlow  20-44.
Thorne,  F. and Fingleton,  B. (2005). Irish dairying  - can we compete?  Teagasc  
National  Dairy  Conference  2005. In: Winning  In changing  times. Teagasc  Oak 
Park Carlow  10-24.
Van Berkum,  S. and Helming,  J. (2006). European  dairy policy  in the years  to 
come: impact  of quota abolition  on the dairy sector. Agricultural  Economic  
Research  Institute,  P.O. Box 29703,  2500  LS The Hague,  The Netherlands.
Veerkamp,  R.F., Dillon, P., Kelly, E., Cromie,  A.R. and Groen, A.F. (2002).  
Dairy cattle breeding  objectives  combining  yield, survival  and calving  interval  
for pasture-based  systems  in Ireland under different  milk quota scenarios.  
Livestock  Production  Science,  76 137-151.
42
Profitable  grass  based  dairy  farming  in the UK
Chris  and Debbie  James
Stackpole  Farm, Castlemartin,  Pembroke,  Wales
Key Messages
Measurement  is driving  success,  
greatly improved  by weighing,  
works  even on large-scale  farms,  
same  basis.
Simplify  the system  - grass  based  only.
Mixing  with grass  focused,  positive  people.  
Improving  personnel  skills (managing  staff)  
expansion  when  farming  on a large scale.Young  stock management  has been  
Grass measurement  and budgeting  
Financial  measurement  works  on the
key to successful
Background
Mission  Statement
To operate  a simple  pasture  based  system,  with self-contained  feed  supply,  but 
allowing  for the strategic  use of purchased  feed. The system  should  focus  on 
simplicity  and low cost structure,  with minimal  capital input, whilst constantly  
improving  the fertility  of the land. This must lead to a highly profitable  farm,  
operated  at all times within the relevant  farm assurance  guidelines  with 
particular  attention  paid to the welfare  of the cow.
Each dairy should be managed  by a team of motivated  people  undergoing  
extensive  on and off farm training, with mutually  favourable  terms of 
employment  to provide  all with personal  fulfillment.
Farm and herd statistics
Formally  the farm was a mixed ‘old English ’ farming  enterprise,  but is now a 
specialist,  seasonal  grass based dairy system  operating  along New Zealand 
principals. Information  was accessed  through  the Grasshopper  discussion  
group,  founded  by Paul Bird. In the UK, yield per cow is the key driver. There  
is little focus on low cost, high solids output,  and grass based  dairying. Irish 
dairy farmers  are lucky to have a good independent  research  body and a 
Journal  that is unbiased  in its reporting.
A big issue for UK dairy farmers  is that the processing  industry  is not farmer 
led, but rather  is market  led, consequently  there is a big emphasis  on producing
43
milk (water)  to meet requirements.  Milk produced  on the farm is sold to Saputo  
to make  mozzarella  cheese.
Land
Farm Size = 480ha  in total, milking  1,100  cows in 2 herds.
Home  Farm = 150ha; Quay Farm = 180ha; outlying  farms  = 150ha  - 4 different  
blocks.
Stock
In May 2008 Home Farm will have 500 cows with a stocking  rate of 3.5 
cows/ha. On Quay Farm (which  joins Home Farm), cow numbers  = 600. 
There will also be 360 weanlings  (0 to 1 year old) and 360 (approx)  heifer  
calves.
Weather  data
Rainfall  is approximately  1100mm. As the farm is on the coast, it is exposed  to 
harsh  winds  but has little exposure  to frost. Salt damage  is not an issue. On 
average  5kg to 10kg of grass is grown over the winter months,  especially 
during mild spells of South Westerly  weather. Soil temperatures  tend not to 
drop below  5 degrees  until early December.  With increasing  day length  after 
Feb 1, grass starts  to grow. The farm is almost  at sea level, with high banks  
rising  to 120m.
The environment
Only 3% of the land in Wales is in a Nitrate  Vulnerable  Zone (NVZ). In 
comparison  Ireland has gone down the 'whole Island ’ policy for the Nitrate  
directive.  There  is a proposal  to change  this policy,  which  wouid  increase  the 
NVZ area in Wales  to 7% of the land area (including  this farm). The UK also 
has a Nitrate  Vulnerable  Zone system,  but 70% of the land in England  is to be 
designated  NVZ.
Background  fertility
The original herd and farming  system  was based on a traditional  autumn  
calving  system,  i.e. cows calved  from Aug to March. Holstein  Friesian,  Dutch  
and American  genetics  were used (based on PIN figures  - similar  to EBI 
system).  When  the decision  was made to change  the production  system,  120 
of the August  calvers  were sold, with the later calvers  being retained  and held 
to calve the following  spring. Shorthorn,  Jersey  and New Zealand  Friesians  
were purchased  when  restocking.
44
Breeding  management
Four weeks  prior to breeding  all cows are tail painted. Cows are observed  
weekly  and any non-cycling  are noted,  and checked  by the vet.
The day before breeding  starts (20 April) the cows are repainted. All 
inseminations  are done from observing  the tail paint. This observation  is done  
only at milking  time. The tail paint is topped  up two to three times per week.  
With a large herd, the experience  is, reading  the tail paint is easier  than going  
to the paddock  with notebooks  etc. The Al is contracted  out at a cost of £3 
(€3.96)  per cow.
Heifers  are synchronised  on the out farm. For ease of management  the 350 
heifers  are divided  into groups  of 120 to 140. The 6 and 11 day PG routine  is 
used. Heifers  are inseminated  with Jersey  bulls only. Once  served,  the heifers  
run with Jersey crossbred  or Jersey stock bulls. Conception  rates to 
synchronisation  are 60%+. Kamar  heat strips  are used rather  than tail paint on 
the heifers.
Initially,  Jersey  semen  was used (for 4 years)  to escalate  the move away  from 
Holsteins. Currently  the policy is to use New Zealand  Black and White  
Friesians.  The reason  for this change  is that there is a greater  market  for 
Friesian  stock. High survivability  black  and white  genetics  like Hugo, Dawsons  
Belvedere,  Koremeko,  Etazon  Bell are used. Dairy Al is used for 6 weeks,  
followed  by beef  Al for 3 weeks. After 9 weeks  of Al, stock  bulls run with cows  
until the end of July. 75% of the cows calve to dairy bulls. The current  non­
pregnant  rate is 14%, after a 14-week  breeding  season  ending  17*' July. The 
hope is to improve  on this. All cows are scanned  in September.  This allows  
identification  of potential  stock for sale. Empty,  lame, high SCC cows are sold 
early.
Calf rearing
All bull calves  are sold for export  depending  on the market.
Changes  made  to colostrum  feeding  have greatly  improved  calf mortality.  The 
first milking  after calving  of mature  cows (3 years  old plus) is collected.  These 
cows have been vaccinated  with rotavirus.  This ‘colostrum ’ is routinely  used to 
feed all newborn  calves. Each calf is stomach  tubed  as a routine. The rest of 
the colostrum  milk is collected  into a separate  bulk tank and yogurtised  to store  
it, and fed to young  calves  (few days old).
Calves  are taken  from calving  pens in mid morning  and cows are milked  in the 
afternoon.  Mortality  rates were high among  heifer  calves  from heifers,  but the 
more effect  use of colostrum  has transformed  mortality  rates.
Cows are calved  on a stand off pad. The intention  going forward  is to use an 
empty  silage  clamp,  filled with wood chip for calving  also. Calves  are sorted  
and brought  to the rearing  farm where  they are stomach  tubed  with colostrum.  
Dehorning  occurs  (few hours  old) at this stage  also. Calves  are reared  in pens
45
of 25 with a band around  their neck. This is not removed  until they are able to 
suck by themselves.  For the first 2 weeks  they are on ad lib milk where  intake  
can be as high as 8 litres per calf. Once this target  is met, milk is restricted  
which  has the effect of increasing  meal consumption  from 1 to 2kg. Calves  are 
fed for 6 weeks  once a day on 4 litres/head.  Meal is fed to calves  until about  
May/June.  Total meal fed is 50kg/calf.  They  get about 1 kg/calf  when at grass.  
They  are grazed  in rotation  with the bulling  heifers.
April heifer calves are sold. 350+ heifer calves are reared. Beef (Angus)  
calves  (mainly  bulls) averaged  £110/head  (€145)  in 2007. Going  forward  Kale 
feeding  of young  stock  will give some  flexibility  to rear 400 plus heifers.
Stock  management
Calves  are vaccinated  for Blackleg  only. Calves  are weighed  to determine  time 
of weaning  and batched  accordingly.  Weighing  continues  throughout  the year. 
Lighter  calves  are batched  for the first winter  and fed a better  ration  indoors.
Coccidiosis  has become  an issue. Typically  Decox  powder  is fed in the meal 
and animals  are dosed  with Vecoxan  in July. The options  of moving  calves  to 
cleaner  pasture  is also being  looked  at.
Originally  when building,  the herd we vaccinated  for Leptospirosis,  BVD and 
IBR. As the herd it now closed,  Leptospirosis  is the only vaccine  used. To 
date, no ill effects  have been observed  from dropping  IBR and BVD vaccines  
from the herd. One third of cows (mature  from this herd -colostrum)  are 
vaccinated  for rotavirus.  There  is a routine  TB test in April  of all stock.
Herd production
Calving  begins at the end of January  and continues  until end of April. On 
Home Farm no meals are fed until August. Feeding  on the Quay farm is 
1 kg/cow/day  in spring. The aim on Home  Farm is to feed 300kg/cow.  On Quay  
Farm drought  can be an issue and meal feeding  can be as high as It/cow  but 
the intention  is still for 300kg/cow.  Each farm has a separate  lame/antibiotic  
milk group. This becomes  a once a day group  before  breeding.
2007 production
Home Farm 4400kg/cow;  Quay Farm 5000kg/cow.  On average  Fat 4.6% and 
Protein  3.6%. For 2007, Quay Farm produced  410kg milk solids per cow, up 
from 360kg  milk solids  in 2006  (dry summer).  Extra meal may be fed in autumn  
depending  on milk price (30ppl  = 40.9c/l)  due to the seasonality  scheme.
Labour
There  are three staff on Quay  Farm, and 2.5 staff on Home  farm, plus a tractor 
driver  who milks every  second  weekend.  There  is also another  half person,  a 
stock person,  a working  mother  who arrives  at 9.30am  and leaves  after 4/5 
hours work in the calf shed. Staff get a day a week off when not on their 
weekend  off (they  get every  other  weekend  off).
46
The business  is run in partnership,  with one partner (a brother)  looking  after the 
financial  administration  (VAT  and accounts),  whilst  the author  is responsible  for 
movement  records  and day-to-day  administration.  The aim is to have 2 self 
managed  dairies  with separate  teams. Staff are difficult  to recruit. This year 2 
Eastern  European  workers  were employed  for Quay Dairy and they rotate  the 
milking.  A nephew  has also joined the business  this year.
Cows are stripped  once a week and 2 cows with clots on average  are picked  
up. To control  mastitis,  teat spray is used with regular  service  of the milking  
machine.
Machinerv/contractor
Silage  making  is contracted  out. Surplus  grass  is removed  every  3 to 4 weeks.  
Silage contractors  charge £40/acre  (€52.9)  with mowing  included. Slurry  
spreading  (via umbilical  hose)  is also contracted  out at a cost of £35/hour (€46).  
Kale is drilled  (one pass) using  a contractor.  Contractors  were also used to lay 
cow roadways.
Contracting  fertiliser  spreading  was not successful,  and as a result  the business  
has invested  in a tractor  labour  unit, who doubles  as a maintenance  man for 
hedges  etc.
A Bobcat  is used to scrape  the yards  and fill feeders.  A small tractor  is used to 
pull the wagon. At Quay Farm a tractor  with front-end  loader  is used. Other  
machinery  includes  a 150 HP tractor (which  works  at fertiliser spreading,  hedge  
trimming),  a dump  trailer  and a post driver.
Winter  feed
The indoor  winter  period  is very short. Cows go out to grass as they calve in 
the spring and young stock go to grass in late January. Grass silage is fed 
indoors. Cows are estimated  to eat 3t fresh weight/year,  so 3000t  of silage  is 
needed  for cows and young  stock. Last year  150 cows  were off wintered.  This 
year the number  is 300, costing  £7/cow/week  (€9.25). They are fed grass  
silage. The farm is 7 miles  away  and the cows  walked  over and back.
This year 12ha of Kale (Maris  Kestrel)  was sown in late May. Currently  there  
are 160 weanling  heifers  and 140 incalf  heifers  on kale since early December.  
The weanlings  will come oft the kale in late January  and go to grass.  
Youngstock  are split on weight. The heavier/bigger  weanlings  are outside  and 
the lighter/smaller  heifers  are in one group  and receiving  3kg of meals,  'Akg of 
straw  and 2kg of silage. Last year maize  gluten  and straw  was fed.
Facilities
There are 300 cubicles  on Home Farm, with another  300 wooden  cubicles 
available  but only used in emergencies!  Silage  is fed in an easy feed system  
on raised feeding  platforms.  These sheds were built in 1963. Yards and 
passageways  are scraped  into an over ground  steel tank. On Quay  Farm  there
47
is a stand off pad (60m x 50m) with concrete  slab and self feed grass silage.  
There  are also 300 wooden  cubicles  with feed facilities  for 150.
Milking  parlour:  A 40-point herringbone  on Home  Farm built in 2002  with a large  
circular  collecting  yard. On Quay Farm there is a 50-point  rotary  built in 2000.  
Both milking  machines  are basic  with no frills.
Typical  day in March/April
Cups on at 5.30 am to 8 am. Two milkers  on Home  Farm and two milkers  on 
Quay  Farm + relief  during  breeding  etc.
Break  8 to 8.30 am then grass measurement.  For grazing  early spring  we use
a 12-hour and then out to 24-hour breaks. Stock  health  issues  etc
Home  for lunch 11.30  and back again  at 2.30pm.  Aim to have staff home  for 5
pm.
It’s a 10 hour day in the spring  but is helped  greatly  by having  all stock out of 
sheds  by March  1.
Typical  day in autumn
Dry Period  - winter  hours. Qne person  at 7 am to scrape  and they work until 
lunch. Another  person  on at 8 to feed and they work until 10 am. After this 
dosing  and branding  etc as required.  Autumn  hours  are 6 hours  per day.
Holidays  - Qne week in summer  and holiday  periods. Qnce bulls go in the 
farm begins  to look after itself.
Ownership  structure
Originally  the farm was a 7000-acre  estate. This block was split up over a 
number  of decades. Stackpole  Home Farm (1100 acres) was owned by a 
pension  fund after  the original  owner got into financial  difficulty.  Eventually  this 
was offered  to lease in 1980. The farm is now owned  privately,  but leased  to 
the business  partnership  until the end of our days, at a cost of £100/acre  (€132)  
rent.
There  are 2 dwelling  houses  and 3 workers  cottages.  The lease  includes  a full 
repair  and tenancy  upkeep,  so the business  is responsible  for all maintenance.  
There  is a 10-year  write off period  on capital  expenditure.
Qutside  blocks  of land are all on 5 and 10 year FBT (Farm  Business  Tenancy  - 
contract  between  tenant  and land owner). This is a recent  development  as it 
was felt that leasing  was too much stacked  in favour  of the tenant,  with the 
owner  not able to change  lease. This has had the result  of making  rental land
48
more fluid. FBT contracts  were brought  in to free up the land rental market,  
and have proved  popular  within  the farming  community.
Expanding  in the UK
The cost of conversion  from a mixed Old English ’ dairy farm to spring  based  
dairy farming  based  on grass is estimated  to be £600/cow  (€792),  (includes  a 
50-point  rotary  milking  600 cows, + roadways,  water  and fencing).
Problems  or issues  related  to expansion
Sourcing  quality stock. Not an issue - large groups of cows have been  
successful  imported  from Scotland  and Ireland.
Quota  - not an issue  since  2001.
Labour. There is a concern  that farming  is not attracting  the ’right ’ young  
people  into the industry.  The blame  has to lie with parents  and elders  who still 
perceive  farming as an unsuitable  way of life, rather than a progressive  
business  with potential.
Availability  of large tracts  of land in the UK. Large 150ha blocks  are available  
in the South  of the UK, but not in Wales. However,  higher grain price is driving  
higher  demand  and price. There  is little demand  for chalky  land, so there may 
be further opportunities  with this type of land. A 300 cowherd  is a good base to 
work  from, and economies  of scale  can easily  be achieved  with a herd this size. 
It is suggested  that a 90ha block could carry such a herd on a profitable  grass  
based  system.
To offset  the cost of conversion  several  measures  were  taken:
• All sheep  stock  sold, 1000 breeding  ewes  at £100 (€132)  each;
• All surplus  machinery  and equipment  sold;
• Ceased  to sow 200ha  of cereals;
• Sold 120 autumn  calvers  plus calves;
• Leased  back the farm quota not filled for 12 p/litre (€0.16c/litre).  The 
shortfall  in milk output  was offset  by the ability  to lease  out the quota.
At the time of converting  the farm, approx.  3 million  litres were sold off farm.  
Last year 4.8 million  litres were sold. A 60% increase  in milk output  has been 
achieved.  Land area has increased  from 420 to 480 hectares.
The future
The challenge  for the business  is to hold costs at a low level. This means  low 
cost housing,  staying  focused  and holding  a vision for the farm. A good  
discussion  group helps. It challenges  all aspects  of farming  and provides  a 
benchmark  against  the best.
A current  area of interest  is ‘Once A Day ’ milking,  even at high milk price.  
When  fertiliser was £100/ton  (€132)  it was not justifiable,  but as price increases
49
to £250/t  (€330)  for 25% nitrogen  compound,  it may offer some opportunities  
especially  where  stocking  rates are tight.
For the last 5 years, common  costs (excluding  rent, drawings  and quota cost) 
have been 12p/litre  (€0.16c/litre).  As pressure  on feed and fertiliser  costs  
increases  it will be a struggle  to keep costs at current  levels. Several  cost 
effective  measures  are being investigated,  e g. like out wintering  stock, off 
wintering  stock, clover  leys and the use of higher  fertility  livestock.  To reduce  
risk exposure  to price increases,  there is a need to maximise  output,  and this 
means  better  fertility  and top class grassland  management.  In the short term 
there  is the possibility of taking  on another  farm.
SWOT analysis  of UK dairy  farming
Strengths
Large  UK population  on doorstep;
High liquid milk consumption  - milk with cornflakes 
Strong  milk fields  in West  of Country  - guarantee  production;
Ready  supply  of industrial  by products  - animal  feeds;
Good  road and rail infrastructure  nationally;
Low political  and currency  risk.
Weaknesses
Little  farmer control  at processing  level;
Very much  price  takers;
Little government  support;
Labour  - limited  supply  of skilled  farm labour;
Pessimism  among  the dairy  farmers;
Limited  support  services  - not focused  on grass;
Cash  flows  are not strong.
Opportunities
Availability of second  grade  arable  land - large blocks;
Quota  not limiting  at farm level;
Tax - 100%  write off on capital  expenditure  (sheds  etc) from April 1 (may have  
a negative  effect  as plenty  will build  for no good reason);
Organic  farming  - offers  possibilities;
Most production  based  around  high cost systems.
Threats
Animal  disease  - Blue tongue  (herd  expansion  issues);
Nitrate  Vulnerable  Zones  (NVZ ’s) - limit stocking  rate and increase  cost; 
Reduced  availability of skilled  labour  in the future;
Milk price volatility;
Long-term  industry  ownership  - not farmer (Co-op)  based ownership  like 
Ireland.
50
Profit  from grass:  a researchers ’ perspective
Deirdre  Hennessy,  Michael  O’Donovan  and Emer  Kennedy
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Dairy  Production  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork
Key Points
1. In relative  cost terms, first cut silage is 2.5 times more expensive  than 
grazed  grass,  second  cut silage  is 2.9 and concentrates  is 4.2. The cost 
difference  between  these  feeds is likely to increase  further  in the years  
ahead.
2. Profitable  milk production  in Ireland  must be based  on the provision  of 
sufficient  quantities  of high quality pasture  to produce  quality milk at 
lowest  cost.
3. Cows should be turned out to grass immediately  post calving to 
maximise  the proportion  of grazed  grass in the diet of the dairy cow and 
maximise  milk production  from this low-cost  feed.
4. Spring  grazing  management  must focus on efficient  use of grass to 
replace  grass  silage  and concentrate  in the lactating  cow’s diet.
5. The first rotation  must last until mid-April,  excessive  pasture  damage  
must be avoided  and post grazing  height  must be maintained  at 4-5 cm 
to ensure  pasture  quality  is high during  subsequent  rotations.
6. 0.8 -1 .Ot grass DM/cow  consumed  from turnout  until the end of the first 
rotation  should  be achievable  on farms practicing  early spring  grazing.  
Grazed  grass  and concentrate  can be the sole feeds  with such a system.
7. Spring  grazing has a large carryover  effect on grass quality in 
subsequent  rotations  through  the conditioning  of the sward.
8. Mid-season  management  must aim to maximise  animal performance 
while maintaining  pasture  quality. High pre-grazing  yields (>1800  kg 
DM/ha)  should  be avoided.  Topping  and silage  conservation  should  be 
used as tools  to correct  poor pasture  quality.
Introduction
Increased  interest  in the production  and utilisation  of grazed  grass on dairy 
farms  has been brought  about  by ongoing  trade liberalisation  and the probable  
phasing  out of milk quotas,  combined  with increased  costs  of silage  production,  
home grown cereal  production  and imported  feedstuffs.  Grazed  grass is and 
will continue  to be the cheapest  feed available  for milk production  systems  in 
Ireland. When compared  to grazed  grass, first cut silage, second  cut silage  
and concentrates  are more expensive  by factors of 2.5, 2.8 and 4.0, 
respectively.  Economic  analysis  (Shalloo  et at., 2004) shows  that maximum  
profitability  within Irish milk production  systems  can only be achieved  through  
the optimum  management  of pasture  both within  the current  quota  regime  and 
within  future scenarios  where  additional  quota may be available  to Irish dairy  
farmers.  Maximising  the performance  of their  herds  from grazed  grass  will be a 
critical factor in deciding  the future business  success  of dairy farmers.
51
Regardless  of cxjuntry  or quota existence,  a 10% increase  in the quantity  of 
grazed  grass in the feeding  system  will reduce  the cost of milk produced  by 
2.5C/I (Dillon et at., 2005). One strategy  to increase  our competitiveness  
irrespective  of milk price is to continue  to increase  the grazed  grass proportion  
of the diet. The main avenues  through  which this can be achieved  are 
increased  uptake  of grassland  management  technologies,  as well as extending  
the grazing  season  in early spring and late autumn. This paper focuses  
primarily  on early  spring  grassland  management.
Current  grassland  management  advice
The grassland  management  practices  in the Moorepark  Blueprint  System  have 
evolved  over the last 23 years (1984-2007),  as shown in Table 1. More  
emphasis  is now placed  on technologies  to extend  the grazing  season  earlier  
into spring and later into autumn,  to reduce  the requirements  for alternative  
higher  cost feeds. Mean  calving  date has been delayed,  and stocking  rate has 
been reduced  to facilitate  the incorporation  of a greater  proportion  of grazed  
grass in the diet of the dairy herd. The current  grazing  season  length is 300 
days, with the main increase  in the number  of grazing  days achieved  through  
early spring turnout. Sward grass growth potential  has increased,  primarily  
through  reseeding  of oider pasture  and through  more efficient  use of artificial  
and organic  fertilizer.  There  has been a consistent  reduction  in the proportion  
of second  cut grass silage taken, as the demand  for grass silage has been  
substantially  reduced  as a result of a longer grazing  season. Early turnout  
(post  calving)  is now normal  practise  on many  farms  with clear benefits  in terms  
of animal production  and sward quality  (Dillon et at., 2002; Kennedy  et at, 
2005).
Table  1. Changes  in the Moorepark  Blueprint  System  for spring  milk 
production  between  1984  and 2007
1984 2007 Difference
Mean  calving  date 2/2 24/2 +22  days
Stocking  rate (LU/ha) 2.91 2.5 -0.41
N input (kg N/ha) 423 255 -168 kg
Grazing  season  length 250 300 +50 days
Tumout  by day 10/3 10/2 +27 days
Turnout full time 1/4 10/2 +49 days
Housing  date 15/11 25/11 +10 days
Silage  area - First cut (%) 43 40 -3%
Silage  area - Second  cut (%) 33 15 -18%
Annual  Dairy  Cow Feed Budget
Grass  (t DM/ cow) 2.8 3.9 +1.1
Silage  (t DM/ cow) 1.5 1.0 -0.5
Concentrate  (t DM/ cow) 0.75 0.35 -0.4
52
Due to the extension  of the grazing  season  the feed budget  of the dairy cow 
has also changed  over the past 23 years  - grass allowance  has increased  by 
40% coupled  with a 30% decrease  in grass silage input along with a 50% 
reduction  in concentrate  offered. In the future  a further  increase  in the quantity  
of grass  in the overall  feed budget  is likely (Table  1).
Provision  of grass  for early  spring  grazing
The date on which swards  are closed in the autumn  and the application  of 
spring  nitrogen  (N) fertilizer  are two of the most important  management  factors 
influencing  the supply  of grass in early spring. The date of initial spring N 
application  depends  largely on location  and soil type. A response  of 16kg 
DM/kg N applied in mid-January  has been measured  in early March at 
Moorepark,  over three years. In the central  part of Ireland  the optimum  date for 
initial spring  N application  is early/mid-February  and in the northern  region  it is 
mid- to late February,  The initial N fertiliser  application  should  be 30kg N/ha,  
followed  by a second application  of 30 to 50kg N/ha. Autumn grass  
management  is critical to ensure  a suitable  closing  cover, which will provide  
sufficient  grass for early spring turnout. Paddocks  should be closed in the 
order in which  they are to be grazed  the following  spring. Post-grazing  sward  
heights  should  be in the region  of 4 - 4.5cm (150 - 200kg DM/ha),  thereby  
encouraging  winter  tillering  and ensuring  a productive  sward  for the following  
spring.
Herbage  allowance  in early lactation
Early spring grass is extremely  digestible  and high in crude protein,  so its 
provision  in the diet of dairy cows is essential  If farms are to be profitable  
businesses.  A series  of experiments  have been undertaken  at Moorepark  to 
establish  the optimum  level of herbage  allowance  and concentrate  feeding  level 
that should be offered  during the first and second  grazing  rotations  (early  
February  to mid-May).  In the course  of these experiments  cows were offered  
varying  grass  allowances  (13 - 19kg DM/cow/day)  in conjunction  with differing  
concentrate  levels  (0 to 6kg DM/cow/day).  From these investigations  it is clear  
that a grass allowance  of 15kg DM/cow/day  should be allocated  to spring  
calving dairy cows during the first grazing rotation. A high response  to 
concentrate  (on average  1.1kg milk/kg  concentrate)  was also achieved  by the 
cows in early lactation.  The positive  effect  on milk yield of supplementing  cows  
with concentrate  in the early lactation  period persisted  into mid-lactation  and 
resulted in higher total lactation  milk yields. Figure 1 synopsises  the 
experiments  undertaken  to determine  optimum  herbage  and concentrate  
allowances  in early spring. From this graph it is clear that if farm cover at 
turnout  is low then cows  offered  a low grass  allowance  (13kg DM/cow/day)  and 
3kg DM of concentrate  will attain the same level of milk production  as those  
offered  17kg DM/cow/day  and no concentrate.
53
Figure  1. Effect  of grass  allowance  level (13 or 17kg DM/cow/day)  and 
concentrate  level on the milk production  of spring  calving  dairy  cows
m■o
8
B)
;g
$
>-
Concentrate  (kg DM/cow/day)
The recommendations  for early spring  are to turnout  cows directly  post calving  
and offer a grass allowance  of 15kg DM/cow/day  and 3kg DM concentrate  
during the first grazing  rotation. By adhering  to these principles  the dual 
objectives  of early spring grazing can be achieved,  i.e. maximising  the 
proportion  of grazed  grass in the diet of the dairy cow while simultaneously  
conditioning  swards  for subsequent  grazing  rotations.  This essentially  means  
obtaining  a balance  where cows are adequately  fed yet paddocks  are well 
grazed  (to a post grazing  height  of approximately  4 - 4.5cm),
Animal  performance  benefits  from an early  turnout
The benefits  of turning  cows out to grass immediately  after calving,  have been  
demonstrated  by Kennedy  et al., (2005). The production  performance  of spring  
calving  cows turned  out to grass full time from calving  in early February  was 
compared  with that of a group  of cows that remained  indoors  until early April.  
The ‘outdoor"  cows  were offered  a daily grass  allowance  of 15kg DM and 3kg of 
concentrate,  while the 'indoor"  cows were offered  a diet containing  40% grass  
silage  (8.6kg  DM/cow/day)  and 60% concentrate  (11.1kg  DM/cow/day).  There  
was no difference  in milk yield (27.3 vs. 28.3 kg/day)  between  the two systems  
but the cows turned  out in early spring  produced  milk of lower  fat content  (3.86  
vs. 4.16%)  and higher  protein  content  (3.36 vs, 3.07%)  compared  to the indoor  
cows (Table  2). Cows  from both feeding  systems  achieved  similar  DM intakes  
of approximately  15.5kg DM/cow/day.  Significantly,  the cows on the early  
spring  grazing  system  continued  to maintain  a higher milk protein  concentration  
and higher grass  DM intake  than their indoor  counterparts  up to July.
54
Table 2. The effect  of system  (Early  Spring  Grazing;  indoor  Feeding)  on 
the milk production  characteristics  of spring-caiving  dairy cows from  
February  to April
Early  spring  grazing Indoor  Feeding
Milk yield (kg/day) 28.3 27.3
Milk fat concentration  (%) 3.86 4.16
Milk protein  concentration  (%) 3.36 3.07
SCM yield (kg/day) 26.6 25.9
Bodyweight  (kg) 499 517
Bodyweight  gain (kg/day) +0.20 +0.03
Body  condition  score
Intake  (kg DM/cow/day)2.87 2.92
Grass 12.9 -
Silage - 5.7
Concentrates 2.8 9.6
Total intake 15.7 15.3
The results of this study highlight  the large benefits  (both nutritional  and 
financial)  of including  grazed  grass in the diet of spring  calving  dairy cows in 
early lartation. When modelled  on a whole farm basis, early grazing  will 
generate  an increased  profitability  of €2.70/cow/day  for each extra day at grass  
through  higher  animal  performance  and lower  feed costs.
Management  guidelines  for early spring  grazing
To capitalise  on the benefits  of grazed  grass  in early spring,  dairy cows should  
be turned out to pasture  directly  post calving,  ground  conditions  permitting.  
The main objectives  of spring  grazing  management  are:
1. to increase  the proportion  of grazed  grass  in the diet of the dairy cow,
2. to condition  swards  for subsequent  grazing  rotations.  This can be 
achieved  by grazing  pastures  to a low post grazing  height  during  the 
first grazing  rotation.
Similar  to autumn  grazing  management,  grassland  budgeting  is essential  if 
these  objectives  are to be achieved.
The following  key points should  be remembered  when managing  early spring  
grazing:
■ Farm cover  at turnout should  be approximately  700kg  DM/ha,  depending 
on mean calving  date and stocking  rate - an earlier  calving  date and/or 
higher stocking  equates  to higher animal demand  and hence the 
requirement  for a higher  opening  cover
• Aim to offer 0.8 -1 .Ot grass  DM/cow  from turnout  until the end of the first 
rotation  - this should  be achievable  on farms where  animals  are turned  
out early.
■ Grazed  grass and concentrate  can be the sole feed with such a system,  
allowing  grass silage to be completely  removed  from the diet post 
calving.
55
The available  grass supply  should  be budgeted  so that the first grazing  
rotation  finishes  around  April 10 (the first rotation  should  be >50 days).  
Post grazing  height must be maintained  at 4-414 cm during the first 
rotation  to ensure  pasture  quality  is high during  subsequent  rotations.  
During  the first grazing  rotation  a low daily herbage  allowance  (15kg  
DM/cow/day  with 3kg DM of concentrate)  should be offered, this 
achieves  the dual objectives  of optimising  dairy cow performance  while  
maintaining  sward  nutritive  value.
From early April onwards  (i.e. second  rotation),  daily herbage  allowance  
must be increased  in line with herd requirement  to achieve  high animal  
production  performance  throughout  the lactation.
Early grazed swards (February/March)  have a similar grass growth  
potential  compared  to later grazed  swards  (April), but are capable  of 
sustaining  higher  milk yields and grass intake in subsequent  grazing  
rotations due to higher sward  quality.
Excessive  pasture  damage  must be avoided.
Benefit  of early  turnout  on grass  quality  in subsequent  rotations
Swards  grazed to low post-grazing  residuals  (4 - 4.5cm) in early spring  
(February  and March) produce  herbage  of higher quality and higher milk 
production  potential  in the mid-April  to early July period  than swards  which  are 
initially  grazed in mid-April. An experiment  was undertaken  at Moorepark  
looking  at the effect  of initial grazing  date on milk production.  Two swards  were  
established,  one was grazed  once between  February  and mid April; the other  
remained  ungrazed  from the previous  October/November.  This study  
commenced  in mid-April  and continued  for four 21-day rotations.  Each of the 
swards  was grazed  at two stocking  rates (grazing  intensities),  5.5 and 4.5 
cows/ha  on the early grazed  swards,  and 5.9 and 5.5 cows/ha  on the late 
grazed  swards. The cows on the early grazed  swards  at a stocking  rate of 4.5 
cows/ha  achieved  the highest  yield of milk, fat and protein;  highest  protein  
content  and grass  dry matter  intake  (GDMI)  (Table  3). There  was no difference  
in animal performance  between  the cows grazing  the early and late grazed  
swards  stocked  at 5.5 cows/ha,  even though  the early grazed swards  had 
already  been grazed  once that spring. The production  benefits  of swards  
grazed  in early spring  are due to a higher  leaf proportion  in the sward  resulting  
in greater digestibility  than later grazed  swards  during  the main grazing  season.  
Leaf proportion  is directly  related  to grass digestibility;  a 5.5% change  in leaf 
content  is equal  to a 1-unit  change  in digestibility.  For each 1-unit  increase  in 
organic  matter  digestibility  (OMD)  GDMI is increased  by 0.20kg  and milk yield 
is increased  by 0.24kg  milk/cow/day.
56
Table  3. Effect  of initial  grazing  date and stocking  rate on milk yield and 
composition  from  mid-April  to early  July
Early  grazed  swards  
(grazed  in February  &Late grazed  swards  
(closed  since  previous
Stocking  rate (cows/ha) 5.5 4.5 5.9 5.5
Grass  intake  (kg DM/cow/day)
Milk production16.3 17.5 15.2 16.7
Milk yield (kg/day) 22.7 24.5 20.9 22.4
Fat (%) 3.89 3.78 4.00 3.78
Protein  (%) 3.29 3.41 3.21 3.27
Restricted  access  to pasture  during  periods  of wet weather
During  the early spring period (and late autumn)  weather  conditions  can be 
inclement  thus restricting  grazing  opportunities.  Management  strategies  such 
as on/off  grazing  can be used  to ensure  that cows have access  to grazed  grass  
without  causing  detrimental  damage  to sward  surfaces  and subsequent  sward  
quality. Several  strategies  exist such as turning  cows out for 3 - 4 hours after 
milking  or allowing  cows graze by day and then house by night. Recent  
research  carried  out in Moorepark  has shown  that animals  adjust  their grazing  
behaviour  to compensate  for reduced  access  to pasture  thus milk production  is 
not compromised.
Achieving  high cow performance  in mid season
During the main grazing season the objective  is to achieve high cow 
performance  from an all grass diet. This will be achieved  by allocating  an 
adequate  quantity  of high quality  pasture. With good grassland  management  
the nutritive  value of grass can be sustained  at a high level during this time 
(Table  4).
Table  4. Chemical  composition  of well-managed  grass  (>4cm)  from  
March  to November
(g/kg) Mar Apr May June July Aug SeptOct/
Nov
Dry matter 179 182 184 182 177 191 165 137
Crude  Protein 223 222 166 176 169 189 203 228
OM Digestibility 838 830 832 816 799 763 794 793
N/ha/yr.  March  pasture  received  60kg  N/ha  in mid January;  October  pasture  received  iast N in 
mid September.
Mid season  grazing  rotations  Aprii  - July (18-22  days);  August-  Sept (24-30  days); Oct/Nov  
(30days+)
57
A study was undertaken  at Moorepark  in 2007 comparing  two different  pre­
grazing  yields  (1600  and 2200kg  DM/ha)  grazed  at two herbage  allowances  (16 
and 20kg DM/cow/day)  by dairy cows during  the April to October  period  (Table  
5). Cows grazing  daily herbage  allowances  of 16 and 20kg DM/cow/day  (> 
4cm) had resulting  post grazing  sward  surface  heights  of 4.2 and 5.0cm  on the 
low mass treatment  and 4.2 and 5.4cm on the high mass treatment,  
respectively.  Highest  milk production  per cow and milk protein  content  was 
achieved  with cows grazing  the low pre grazing  yield sward  at the high grass  
allowance.  Grazing  swards  with lower pre grazing  yields resulted  in higher  
grass utilisation,  better sward quality  and higher  leaf content  throughout  the 
grazing  season,  which  is reflected  in higher  overall  production.
Previous  research  at Moorepark  has shown  that pastures  with high grazing  
pressure  (high stocking  rate, low post-grazing  height)  in spring/early  summer  
produced  swards  of lower herbage  mass, lower post-grazing  height, higher  
green leaf proportion  and lower proportions  of grass stem and dead material  
compared  to swards  with low grazing  pressure  (low stocking  rate, high post­
grazing  height). Increasing  post grazing  sward  surface  height  above  5 to 6cm 
results  in a deterioration  of sward  quality  in mid and late grazing  season. Milk 
production  results  showed  that pastures  grazed  to a post-grazing  sward  surface  
height of 5.5 to 6.5cm in the May to June period compared  to 8 to 8.5cm  
achieved  a higher DM intake (+0.8kg  per day) and higher milk production  
(+1.2kg  per day) in the July to September  period. Additionally,  in the May to 
June period there was no difference  in milk production  per cow from both 
swards,  with the lower post-grazing  swards  achieving  greater  grass utilisation  
through  higher  stocking  rates. Pasture  topping  can also be used to attain  leafy 
swards  and maximise  animal  performance.  On average  one round  of topping,  
to a height  of 4 to 4.5cm (to remove  the tall grass around  dung pads), should  
suffice  from mid-May  to late June. Swards  mechanically  topped  to 4 - 5cm will 
support higher  milk yields  (up to 2kg/cow/day).
58
Table  5. The effect of pre grazing  yield mass  and daily herbage  allowance  
on the performance  of spring  calving  dairy  cows  (April  to October)
Pre grazing  yield  (kg DM/ha) 1600 2200
Grass  allowance  (kg DM/cow) 16 20 16 20
Milk yield (kg/cow) 20.0 21.0 20.1 20.8
Milk fat (%) 4.04 3.94 4.01 3.85
Milk protein  (%) 3.37 3.44 3.37 3.41
Milk solids  (kg cow) 1.46 1.57 1.50 1.50
Grazing  stocking  rate (cows/ha) 4.84 4.5 4.55 4.01
Pre grazing  height  (cm) 12.5 13.0 15.2 15.7
Post grazing  height  (cm) 4.2 5.0 4.2 5.4
Conclusions
There  is considerable  scope  for dairy  farmers  to improve  the profitability  of their 
business  by increasing  the proportion  of grazed  grass in the diet of their dairy  
herd and hence animal performance  from grass based systems. Efficient  
exploitation  of grass by grazing  requires  the development  of grazing  systems  
designed  to maximise  daily herbage  intake per cow while simultaneously 
maintaining  a large quantity  of high quality  pasture  over the grazing  season.  
Grassland  management  and grass budgeting  are the critical  tools required  to 
ensure  an adequate  supply  of high quality  grass  over the entire  grazing  season.  
Daily grass  intake  can be maximised  by maintaining  a high proportion  of green  
leaf within the grazing  horizon and allocating  an adequate  daily herbage  
allowance. The challenge  for the future is to develop  swards through  
management  and grass  breeding  that will maintain  high DM intake  while  at the 
same time result in low residual  sward height. Likewise  in the future  the cow 
genotype  must be compatible  with the milk production  system. The 
development  of reliable easy to use decision  support  tools that facilitate 
increased  reliance  on grazed grass to be used by farmers  and extension  
services  will contribute  to optimising  grazed grass based systems  of milk 
production.
References
Dillon,  P., Crosse,  S., O’Brien, B. and Mayes,  R.W. (2002). The effect  of forage 
type and level of concentrate  supplementation  on the performance  of spring­
calving  dairy cows in early lactation.  Grass  and Forage  Science,  57, 212-224.
Dillon, P., Roche,  J.R., Shalloo,  L. and Horan,  B. (2005). Optimising  financial  
return  from grazing  in temperate  pastures.  In: J.J. Murphy  (ed.). Utilisation  of 
grazed  grass  in temperate  animal  systems.  Proceedings  of a satellite  workshop  
of the XXth International  Grassland  Congress,  July, Cork, Ireland.
Kennedy,  E., O’Donovan,  M., Murphy,  J.P., Delaby,  L. and O’Mara, F.P. (2005).  
Effects  of grass pasture  and concentrate  based feeding  systems  for spring
59
calving  dairy cows in early spring  on lactation  performance.  Grass  and Forage  
Science,  60, 310-318.
Shalloo,  L., Kennedy,  J., Wallace,  M., Rath, M. and Dillon, P. (2004). The 
economic  impact  of cow genetic  potential  for milk production  and concentrate  
supplementation  level on the profitability  of pasture  based systems  under  
different  ED milk quota scenarios.  Journal  of Agricultural  Science,  142, 357- 
369.
60
On farm options  for profitable  expansion
John Me Namara  
Teagasc/Carbery
Milk  quota  and nitrates  directive
In considering  options  for expansion,  it is important  not to ignore  issues  relating  
to both milk quota and the nitrates  directive.  The former  has not gone away  
yet, whilst  the latter  is here to stay. The best information  to hand indicates  that 
the EU will free up quota. No farmer  can begin to expand  without  taking  quota  
into account. This article is based on planning  for expansion  irrespective  of 
whether  extra quota is purchased,  or if action is taken only when quota is no 
longer  relevant.
The derogation  under the nitrates  directive  allows a farm to stock to 250kg  
organic  N per hectare  (just short  of 3 cows  per hectare  on the whole  farm).
Taking  account  of both these  realities,  options  will be presented  of what a farm 
should  do to profitably  expand  within  the farm first, before  considering  options  
outside  the farm gate.
Changing  cattle  for cows
This is a no brainer. It is well documented  that cattle leave significantly  lower  
margins  compared  to dairy cows. However,  until the quota  is there to increase  
cow numbers,  it would  be unwise  to reduce  the cattle  enterprise.  The transition  
should  be a smooth  process.  Fixed costs will not be significantly  reduced  if by 
eliminating  a cattle enterprise  the dairy business  ends up paying  all the fixed 
costs, therefore  leaving  less end profit. Over  the years  it has been easy to say 
that cattle leave no money,  so therefore  get rid of them, but in practice  unless  
the farm is able to increase  milk production,  profits  are reduced.  Therefore  only 
swap cattle for cows on a livestock  unit basis, as quota becomes  available.  
This swap is not without  costs in either housing  or infrastructure  but it does  
make sense  to do it.
Increasing  the cow grazing  platform
The cow grazing  platform  is the land that is available  to the milking  cows. On 
most farms there is a ‘traditional ’ area or block of land devoted  to do this. 
However,  there is scope  to extend  the area grazed  by cows, by walking  them  
further. Ideally  try to minimize  the number  of public roads that have to be 
traveled  or crossed.  If we are imaginative  there is scope  on some  farms  to get 
access  to more grazing  ground  for milking  cows, by pushing  the boundaries  
beyond  the comfort  zone.
61
it is important  to breed the right type of cow for future needs. Cows of the 
future  will have to walk further  to get grass,  so they need to have good  feet and 
legs.
Increasing  the stocking  rate
There  is plenty  opportunity  on most farms to increase  the stocking  rate on the 
grazing  platform. While there is no reliable  national  data on the level of 
fragmentation  of dairy farms, average  stocking  rate is less than 2 cows per 
hectare. It is suggested  stocking  rate could be profitably  lifted to 3 cows per 
hectare  on the dairy platform. This will ensure  the whole  farm still complies  
with the nitrate  directive.  Under  the Nitrates  Directive  the maximium  stocking  
rate allowed  is equivalent  to 2.94 cows per hectare. The land outside  the 
grazing  platform  used for silage and young  stock will dilute the overall  farm­
stocking  rate down enough  to comply  with the nitrate directive. Increasing  
stocking  rate is also going to have a positive  effect in increasing  grass  
utilization.  In simple  terms if you are carrying  more cows per hectare  there  will 
be less wastage  of grass. Living  without  quotas  will allow increases  in farm 
stocking  rate to the most profitable  levels. Where  these levels lie are not 
known precisely  as very few farmers  are stocked  above 3 cows/ha  on the 
milking  block. The nitrates  directive  will not in practice  be an obstacle  to 
achieving  this target.
Milk solids  not white  water
This is not the time to continue  the debate  about  milk payment  systems,  and in 
any case for most of the country  it is now academic.  Most milk purchasers  
have signaled  when they will be paying  for milk based on milk solids with a 
deduction  for volume  (the water element  of the milk). Knowing  this, it is 
important  to breed  the type of cow that will produce  this milk in the future. The 
EBI system  is identifying  the bulls that will produce  daughters  that will be more  
profitable with  this milk payment  system.  It has to be asked  what is the industry  
waiting  for, or what is it afraid of in its reluctance  to implement  a milk solids  
payment  system  immediately?
The amount  of milk solids  producing  can be increased  by breeding  for high milk 
solids,  remembering  all the time that it is not the cow with the highest  potential  
for milk production  that gives the highest  yield of milk solids, but the cow that 
calves  in time. The cow calving  in time gets enough  days of lactation  to allow  
her to express  her potential  for solids production.  The late calving  cow just 
does not have enough  time to produce,  no matter  how high yielding  a potential  
she has.
Calving  date
Thirty percent  of the national  cow herd calves  after April 1. These  cows will 
have a reduced  lactation  length  of at least 60 days. This is a lot of milk solids  
lost. The first issue for any farm expanding  is to work on getting  the calving  
pattern  right for their  farm. The optimum  start of calving  will vary with different  
parts of the country. In West Cork cows should  start to calve  from January  20.
62
This fits with getting  cows to grass from February  1. Depending  on the cow 
platform  ‘stocking  rate’, this may be cows getting  all their intake  in the form of 
grass and meals,  or It may still be grass silage  and meals. The objective  is to 
maximize  the grass intake  into cows until the farm is bare and ready  to go on 
magic  day sometime  in the first two weeks  of April.
Calving  pattern
By getting  the calving  pattern  right once, it is a lot easier  to keep it right rather  
than always  fighting  an uphill battle against  late calving  cows. It is possible  to 
have a submission  rate of 90% of all cows in the herd in the first 3 weeks  of the 
breeding  season,  but this requires  all cows  to be calved  at least 3 weeks  before  
the start of breeding.  Even with a conception  rate of 50%, this still has 45% of 
the cows calving  in the first 3 weeks  next year. Throw  in a replacement  rate of 
20% with 75% of the heifers  in calf to first service  and that’s another  15% of the 
herd calving  in 3 weeks. So 45% and 15% is 60% of the herd calving  in the 
first 3 weeks. Continuing  this on for the next 3 weeks  will pick up the remaining  
5% of the heifers  and another  20% of the cows giving  85% calved  in 6 weeks.  
Whilst  some  are doing  this, it can be achieved  by all.
The only way to fast track this process  and get some satisfaction  and profit out 
of a calving  pattern  is to decide  one year you are going to sell all the late 
calvers  and buy in heifers  at the start of your calving. I agree  there  are disease  
risks doing this, especially  for those with closed  herds, but who really has a 
closed  herd anyway?  How many  buy in stock  bulls? The interesting  feedback 
from farms that have done this, is that there is always  a good market  for late 
calving  cows (after the quota  year is over!)  and the cost of replacing  late calving  
animals  with early calving  ones is not as expensive  as you would  think. Once  
you do this you are getting  the benefits  of the early  calving  immediately.
Research  and farm data has shown  that the cow with plenty  of time between  
calving  and breeding  has a much higher  chance  of going in calf than the cow 
with only a short  time. A rule of thumb  is that the chances  a cow  will stay in calf 
are the same as the number  of days from calving  (up to day 50). So a cow 
calved  30 days has a 30% chance  of going in calf. Compact  calving  makes  
compact  calving  easier!
Heifers  calve  at the start of calving  season
Fairly  obvious  but not everyone  is doing this yet. Feed whatever  is necessary  
to get heifers  heavy  and mature  enough  to be bred as yearlings  in time to calve  
early. Once  you have  all the heifers  calving  early  then you can look at reducing  
the costs of getting  them to the right stage for breeding.  Plenty  are able to 
have heifers  ready  for breeding  with no meals  except  some  calf starter. To get 
there it takes good calf rearing,  excellent  grassland  management,  and good  
silage  the first winter.
The first objective  is to give the heifer  an easy calving,  so if that means  putting  
her in calf to a greyhound  so what! With the shortage  and cost of replacement  
heifers  it is tempting  to breed replacement  heifers  to Friesian  Al. If the heifers
63
are big enough  by all means  do that, but do not get into a situation  of heifers  
having  difficult  calvings  or a long gestation  length. In the bigger  picture  this is 
the wrong  way, chasing  short-term  gain. Get the big picture  right first, give the 
heifer  an easy calving,  Jersey  Al fits this perfectly  and you still have valuable  
heifer calves.
Synchronising  heifers
This offers a number  of advantages;  it gets more heifers  calving  early, and it 
allows  for them to be moved  off the home block sooner. The one shot PG 
program  is attractive  because  there is less veterinary  intervention,  and it can 
give 75% of the heifers  calving  at the start of the first  3 weeks  of calving,  and it 
is cost effective.  The remaining  heifers  will also breed  sooner  on second  cycle  
and thus calf earlier too. With this program  the heifers  are at home  for 10 days 
or they are observed  for 10 days, and then an easy calving  stock  bull is let off 
with them.
Cow type
EBI is delivering  the cow we need for the future. The biggest  factor  reducing  
milk solids  production  per farm is calving  pattern. Breeding  for fertility  in spring  
calving  herds increases  farm profit. Choose  bulls based on fertility  until the 
calving  pattern  and fertility  are those  required.  Then start looking  at milk solids  
production.  It is interesting  to note that in New Zealand  where herd size is 
much bigger,  way less attention  is given  to breeding  yet they still achieve  good  
fertility. In Ireland,  some  farmers  have very good submission  rates and calving  
patterns  with black  and white cows from relatively  small herds. They are very 
good operators  who put a lot of effort into the breeding  season. However,  as 
herd size increases  and the attention  given  to breeding  inevitably  declines,  will 
our existing  black  and white  cows be right for larger  herds?
Having  the stock  to expand
Anyone  producing  in-calf  heifers  for sale is facing  a rising market. There  are 
not enough  heifer calves on the ground in 2007 to allow for expansion.  
Hopefully  this figure will improve  in 2008, but a lot of the increase  will 
unfortunately  come  from stock  bulls. Even the top 25 discussion  groups  in the 
country  (at the recent  EBI ‘groups  day’) only had enough  heifers  to expand  by 
9%. All talk about  expansion  is only so much hot air unless  there is a plan in 
place  to either produce  or source  in-calf  heifers.
It generally  takes at least 5 Al straws  to produce  a PWO (Perfect  Working  
Order)  heifer  in the herd. This means  that to have enough  heifers  to expand,  
there is a requirement  to use at least 1.5 Al straws  per cow in the herd. Using  
Al dairy sires on bulling  heifers  increase  the heifers  you produce.  However  see 
previous  comments.
64
Contract  rearing  of replacements
There  are some very good people  exiting  the dairy industry  that would  still like 
to be involved. They are great stockmen,  and are interested  in rearing  
replacement  heifers  for other farmers. This is progressing  slowly  and quietly.  
‘Seek and ye shall find'. Yes there is need for some sort of a standard  
agreement  that could be modified  for each particular  situation. This is 
widespread  practice  in New Zealand. The disease  implications  where the 
rearer  has just one dairy farm ’s heifers  can be overcome.  In the event of a 
disease  breakdown,  provided  the dairy  farm agrees  to get locked  up the in-calf 
heifers can be transferred  to the milking farm. Contract  rearing heifers  
especially  from an early age has a lot of advantages  to the milking  farm. It 
saves  on labour  at a very labour  intensive  time of the year, and it frees up more  
land for milking  cows if the drystock  are on the home  block. It is important  that 
the breeding  of these  replacements  (the future  herd) is done to a high standard  
or else all the advantages  could  be lost quickly.
Farm infrastructure
Investing  in better farm roadways,  paddock  layout and water supply all 
contribute  to increasing  milk solids  production  off the existing  farm. Make  sure 
you can access the entire farm with milking cows. Land that has been  
traditionally  grazed  with drystock  because  it was inconvenient  for cows will 
have  to be looked  at with fresh eyes  when  expanding.
Maximising  grass  production
Drainage
Wet land on farms  may not have been limiting  milk production  to date because  
there was not enough  quota  to require  this land. This is valuable  land. It will 
pay to improve  the drainage  of land like this to allow more access  to it for 
longer  in the year, and also because  drained  land will produce  more grass.
Soil fertility
It was always  good farm practice  to soil sample  every  four years. Today  there  
is no choice  but to act on the soil results  and get the lime status  correct. Then  
work within  the limitations  of the Nitrate  Directive  with regards  to soil P status.  
More and better  use must be made of slurry  to improve  soil fertility. Slurry  is 
not a waste  but a valuable  fertilizer.
Reseeding
Over the years many people  have been discouraged  from reseeding,  because  
they considered  that the production  from the field was not limiting  farm output.  
In general  (except  for silage  ground)  you can improve  the grass  quality  of most 
grazing  land by intensive  grazing. However,  it is difficult  to get a window  of 
opportunity  to reseed  when highly  stocked  (>2.5cows/Ha).  Taking  a field out 
for reseeding  compromises  (and therefore  costs)  the grazing  plan. So that for
65
those  farms planning  to expand  it is better  to have the reseeding  done before  
the extra production  is needed.
Grass  varieties
Farmers  need to actively  consult  the DAFF recommended  lists of grass and 
clover,  which  are published  each year. Information  is now available  on spring  
and autumn growth, date of maturity,  ground cover score and quality  
parameters  such as digestibility  and WSC (sugar) content. Further  
developments  can be expected. Late heading  varieties  are delivering  the 
goods on farm, but don’t forget the difference  between  a late and an 
intermediate  variety could be only one day. Late heading  is classified  as 
heading  after June 1, intermediate  is before June 1 so don’t reject all 
intermediate  grasses  out of hand. There  is also a need to see how overseas  
varieties  perform  in Ireland (in Department  of Agriculture  Evaluation  trials)  
before  they are set on farm. From experience,  the current  “buzz ” New Zealand  
grass Bealey  appeared  very disappointed  when seen in its own country  last 
November  - don’t jump in with grass  unproven  in Irish conditions.  Reseeding  is 
an expensive  business,  once is enough  to do it!
Increasing  grass  quality  and utilization
Unless  farmers  are grass budgeting,  they cannot  be serious  about profit and 
maximizing  production.  Grass budgeting  increases  milk solids output and 
profit, by ensuring  optimal  use of bought  in feed supplementation,  maximizing  
production  from grass  and keeping  grass  quality  high. Loads  of people  can reel 
off these  advantages,  but how many  are just “talking  the talk” and not “walking  
the walk”. Budgeting  involves  walking  the farm at least once per week. If time 
cannot  be made available  for this exercise  it means  less profitable  tasks are 
given priority,  and a reappraisal  is needed. Look at the things  that influence  
profit  the most and concentrate  on those. Fit other  non-essential  things  in later 
if at all.
Increasing  stocking  rate above  3 cows/hectare
Depending  on the yield and pattern  of grass  production  on the farm, it may be 
possible  to stock at higher  than 3 cows per hectare  on the grazing  block.  
However,  there is a point beyond  which it is not possible  to go without 
supplementary  feed at the shoulders  of the year (Feb - April and Sept - Nov),  
which may in turn lead to a higher cost farm structure  chasing  the extra  
production  from brought  in feed. Note that 'brought  in feed ’ includes  home  
produced  maize  silage  etc. Increased  production  may not result  in extra profit.  
Extra production  from brought  in feed may be profitable  when the milk to feed 
cost ratio is in the farmers  favor, but if such systems  are put in place  to feed at 
times of high milk price, it is not so easy to stop the habit when the equation  
turns  the other  way.
In lots of situations,  bought  in ration  fed in the parlor  is the most cost effective  
way to provide supplementary  feeding. There are no “hidden ” costs of 
supplement  storage  and feed out costs. These “hidden costs ” are easily
66
disguised  in farm accounts  or “sure we needed  the tractor  anyway"  stories.  
However  for most people,  once they are maximizing  grass production  and 
utilization,  it will not pay to increase  stocking  rate by bringing  in supplementary 
feed. It will be more profitable  to devote  money  and time to other  activities  that 
will give higher  returns,  e g. having  more  family time or time to think.
67
Profitable  grass  based  dairy  farming  in Ireland
Kevin  and Margaret  Twomey 
Renny,  Ballyhooley,  Co Cork
Key Messages
Produce  a plan and implement  it.
The advantages  of a relatively  low cost system  are;
• More profitable  - less capital  in machinery/labour,
• Easier  managed  - cows turned  out as they calved  to grass,
• Easier  to grow/expand  - basic  fixed costs  maintained.
Measurement drives  success.
Labour  efficiency  is the key; implement  as many  new technologies  as possible.
Mission  Statement
Strive  to be excellent  in the business  of dairy  farming,  and to manage  a highly  
profitable,  simple  system  that is benchmarked  against the best, and to embrace  
and implement  the best knowledge  available.  Also to balance  the workload  to 
maintain  an enjoyable  lifestyle  where  business  and relaxation  intermingle  and 
are richly  rewarded.
Introduction
As a new entrant  in 1994/95  on a farm of 50 adjusted  hectares,  the business  
today (2007)  milks 196 cows selling  over 1,000,000  litres of milk to Dairygold.  
The 5-year  plan in 1994 was to milk 70 cows in 1999 based  on a spring  calving  
system. The farm had to be efficient  as most of the quota  was leased,  and it 
had to be operated  as a one-man  unit with some spring  help. Therefore  from 
the outset  the objective  was ‘profit ’ not ‘milk yield’. Why? To make money  out 
of leased  quota  on a new expanding  farm, the business  had to be efficient.  As 
the herd was expanding,  the aim was to breed highly  reproductive  cows rather  
than high milk production.  This has been  the key to the business.
A relative  low cost system  was developed  because:
• More profitable  - less capital  in machinery/labour;
• Easier  to manage  - cows  turned  out as they calved  to grass;
• Easier  to grow  - basic  fixed costs  were maintained.
The cow to grass system  is the ‘Blue Chip Dairy Farm ’ every owner/investor 
should  aspire  to. Why? It has the ability to keep good cost control,  offers  
excellent  efficiencies,  and will stand  the test of  time through  the lows and highs.
68
As expansion  in the last few years has slowed  due to quota restraints,  options  
for selling  surplus  heifers  continue  to boost  farm profits.
Work  routine
A typical  day around  March  10.
• Start at 6am. Bring in milkers  and set up next paddock  for milking.  
Cups  on for 6.30am.  Finish  milking  and wash up at 8.30am.
• At 7.30am farm staff (x1) start work by putting fresh calvers into 
collecting  yard and feeding  calves.
• After milking  and breakfast,  settle  down  to administration  work.
• Return  to farm from 11 am to 1pm to do farm covers,  sort cows calving,  
move  cows/heifers  on crops.
• Start again at 3.30pm. Put cups on at 4pm, finished  at 6pm. One-  
person  milks while another  sorts feeding  dry cows, calves  and cows for 
calving.
Stock  management-  sphng  routine
Calf Rearing:  - calves  0 to 5 days old are fed milk twice a day; from 5 to 6 days 
old they get milk once a day. Calves  are turned  out at 3 weeks  old. Each calf 
gets 5 litres of milk and no meals. Calving  problems  are rare. Cows are 
generally  left to calve on their own. Cows are checked  at 10.30pm  and only 
during  the night if it is considered  that something  is amiss. Dry cows get a high 
spec pre calving  mineral. On average  there is one case of milk fever a year, 
but no cases  of grass  tetany. Vet calls are approximately  2 per year. Stock  are 
vaccinated  for Leptospirosis  and BVD as a precaution.  There are nearly  
always  some  cases  of scour  in housed  calves  around  the last week  of March;  in 
the main calves  that are outside  escape  this. Any individual  calf that gets scour  
outside  is kept outside  with their batch  and just given  a tablet.
A typical  day in early  June
• Morning  milking  - cups on at 6.30am;  finish  at 8.30am.
• Evening  milking -4.00  - 5.30pm.
• There  is always  one person  on and the other  one off.
• There  Is about  1 hour a day spent  on replacement  stock.
A specific day will be set aside  for different  jobs:
• Fertiliser  is spread  one day a week;
• Farm  cover  is measured  one day a week;
• Fencing  is repaired  - one day a month;
• Topping  (every  field is cut once either  for silage or topped  during  the 
year);
• In general  either the farm worker  or manager  are free 4/5 hours in the 
middle  of the day unless  one of the designated  jobs above  have to be 
done.
Why take time off the farm after breakfast?  This ‘FREE ’ time after breakfast  or 
in the middle  of the day is without  doubt the most valuable.  It allows  time to
69
sort administration  - buy/ordering  inputs  etc., as you are fresh and alert and all 
businesses  are open etc. In addition  this time is used to manage  the business,  
plan for what is next, next for tomorrow,  next week, next year. Planning  is 
crucial  to success  in any business.
Why Plan?
• Where  are you now?
• Where  do you want  to be in 5 years?
• Where  do you want  the business  to be in 5 years?
• Why  do you want it?
• What  are you going  to do to get there?
Discussion  groups
A lot of time is given to Discussion  groups  etc. As a member  of 4 (Blackwater  
Group,  Grazing  Musketeers,  Ballyhooley/Fermoy  Teagasc,  Dairygold/Teagasc  
Monitor  Farm), attendance  is considered  a priority in advancing  the farm 
business.  This is because  acquiring  knowledge  from ones peers is hugely  
beneficial  to successful  planning  and staying  at the cutting  edge of technology.  
Research  being done in Moorepark  has made a significant  contribution  to the 
farm business,  generating  farm efficiencies  and allowing  the business  to 
continue to grow  and prosper.
Recent  farm developments
The business  has developed  over the years as a profitable  growing  business,  
with systems  in place that have evolved  to handle large numbers  of cows  
efficiently.  'Efficient  expansion ’ is the key. The ability  to change  and adapt  is 
very important,  and as such the following  areas  are typical  of this;
• Grassland  Management  - From having an idea of farm cover to 
understanding  the enormous  benefits  of utilising  it;
• From spring turnout of 3 hours/day  to full time at turnout unless  
inclement  weather  where the cows are then on/off;
• From feeding  grass/silage  and meals  to feeding  grazed  grass and %kg 
of meals;
• From maximum  performance  to optimum  performance.
• Calf  Rearing  - Moving  from twice  a day feeding  to once  a day;
• Moving  from straw  bedding  to bedding  with wood  chips;
• Moving  calf turn out from 2 months  of age to 2 weeks.
• Wintering  - Moving  from a strict silage and concentrates  winter  diet to 
crops,  silage  and flexibility.
• Infrastructure  - Cows  walking  across  a very busy main road to installing  
a farm underpass;
• From one entrance  per paddock  to multiple  entrances  per paddock;
70
Moving  from a 10-unit  parlour  to 20-unit  parlour 
Simple  drafting  gate and side-by-side  crush.
Discussion  Groups
Participation  in discussion  groups  - especially  the Blackwater  Discussion  Group  
and more recently  the Grazing  Musketeers  Group  with Gary Nolan  is essential  
to opening  the mind to change,  and change  is good. Having  participated  in the 
local discussion  group  led by John Maher  and Paddy  Crowley  since 1994, it is 
great to see how these groups  have evolved. Teagasc  Advisory  under the 
guidance  of Matt Ryan can now deliver  new technologies  from research  for 
farmers  to adopt. Going  from 40 to 200 cows over the last decade  affords  a 
huge advantage  over most, and it’s not the 200 cow factor,  it is the mindset.  By 
listening, learning,  and understanding  knowledge  from top farmers, top 
researchers  and top farm advisors  both nationally  and internationally;  strategies  
can be implemented  that suit not only farm goals, but also family  life and non­
farm activities.  The decision  in 2006 to take on a full time person  may be 
viewed  by some as a decrease  in efficiency.  Prior to that date the farm was 
managed  at just over 16 hours/cow/year.  In 2007 with the additional  labour  unit 
this increased  to 24 hours/cow/year  because  the owner's  labour is under ­
utilised.  Why become  more inefficient?  The reason  is that time devoted  now to 
strategic  planning  and better management  practices,  will again reduce  time 
back to 16 hours/cow  when in the future  the number  of cows milked  climbs  to 
300. As the business  grows, time is more productively  spent outside  the 
parlour!
Table  1. Progress  in the Twomey  farming  system
Year 1995 1998 2001 2003 2005 2007
ha 50 55 61 83 83 106
Cows 40 84 123 145 155 196
Variable  costs  (c/I) 6.4 5.4 5.2 7.39 6.7 6.84
Fixed  costs (c/I) 11.6 10.4 11.7 9.18 8.5 8.23
Key points  to growing  a business
1. Identify  the system  that can deliver high profit  growth;
2. Implementation  of system - set the farm up for spring grass  
production;
3. Breed  for compact  calving;
4. Simplify  work routines  - e g. calf rearing;
5. Get  milking/drafting  right;
6. Good  infrastructure;
7. Benchmark/measure  performance/Discussion  Groups  - research  and 
compare  with peers;
71
8. Plan  forward;
9. Positive  Mental  Attitude  (P.M.A.)  - Quest  for Knowledge  - constant  
reviewing  and continuous  evolvement.
Objectives  on Twomev  farm
• To grow  farm profit  by 5%/year;
• To deliver  more milk solids. Aim for 450kg  milk solids/cow  in 2 years  
and 475kg  in 5 years;
• Variable costs  to be reduced  and maintained  below  7c/l;
• Increase  stocking  rate to 3cows/ha  on the milking  platform;
• Compact calving  - have  over 90% calved  in 6 weeks.
Future  issues
Is it EU policy to have death by 1000 cuts within the Dairy Industry?  The 
uncertainty  of Milk Quota  2008 - 2014, puts Ireland  into a very uncomfortable  
situation.  There  is now a very low floor to the market,  however  we have about  
6 years  before  guaranteed  limits come  off. Six years  of preparing  dairy  farmers  
for limitless  production  is very dangerous.  Logically  one can only be 1- 2 years  
preparing  then action  is required.  If the Milk Quota  tap is still closed  by 2010  
we, as a nation  will begin to lose our enthusiasm  and vision. We may even 
lose another  generation  of farmers! Many other issues are recognised  that 
need to evolve,  i.e. land fragmentation/land  lease  etc., but milk quota  is No.1 in 
the short term if farmers  want  to grow and expand.  The EU want more efficient  
farms in the future, then we need at least 5% increase  in quota per annum  
immediately.  There  is need for a joint approach  between  farmers,  co-ops  and 
the Irish Dairy Board  to show  leadership  to develop  a Dairy  Strategy  for Ireland.
Young  farmers
It is almost  5 years  since  there has been a brand  new dairy entrant.  This is not 
sustainable.  The industry  requires  at least 100 new farmers  a year because  
there are about 800 - 1000 people  exiting  the business  for various  reasons  
every  year. Along  with the 2% proposed  increase  from 2008/09,  Ireland  should  
seek an additional  1% (45,000,0001)  of EU unused  quota  to be given in blocks  
of 400,0001  to brand  new entrants  on green  field sites. This is the equivalent  of 
setting  up 100 new dairy  farmers.
The EU must give young  people  an opportunity  to invest  themselves  into dairy 
production,  by giving them a license  to produce  before 2014. This means  
young  farmers  would  still have to invest  in infrastructure  costs (cows,  parlours,  
roadways  etc ), but can do so at a reasonable  scale to get started  and be 
sustainable.  This is equivalent  to about  a half million  € investment,  - how many  
are brave  enough  to take that on?
We need;
• Innovation  - calf rearers;
• Replacement  rearers;
• Winter grazers;
The best research  information.
72
Expansion  and profit: thinking  of expansion?  
implications  and options  for farmersCost
Michael  Brady
Brady  Group  - Agricultural  Consultants  & Land  Agents. The Lodge,  Lee Road,  
Cork.
Introduction
Dairy Farming  is back in fashion. Increased  milk prices and the predicted  
demise  of E.U. milk quotas  are the main drivers  in a renewed  enthusiasm  for 
expansion  of dairy farm businesses.  Dairy Farmers  in most dairy intensive  
regions of Ireland have been starved of opportunities  to expand their 
businesses  since  the change  in national  milk quota  legislation  in October  1999,  
which  prohibited  new land and milk quota leasing. The decoupling  of the E.U. 
Single Farm Payment,  poor profitability  from traditional  enterprises  and 
government  grant schemes  for farm buildings  coupled  with the main drivers  of 
improved  profitability  and the possible  demise  of milk quotas  have combined  to 
present  dairy  farmers  with a strategic decision  to make  on the future  expansion  
of their businesses.  Given the historical  and current social slant in Irish 
agricultural  policy to retain as many people as possible  on the land, will 
expansion  of dairy business  be widespread?  Is a proposed  expansion  of an 
individual  dairy business  a viable  proposition?
This paper  examines  the essential  requirements  and options  for the successful  
expansion  of a dairy  farm business.
Expansion  of a dairy  farm business  - the essential  criteria
Today, Irish dairy farmers  can be categorised  into four distinct  groups. They  
are described  as follows:
• Scale:  Dairy  farmers  who have grand  plans  for large scale expansion;
• Safe: Dairy  farmers  who have plans  for small  scale  expansion;
• Stop: Dairy  farmers  who have achieved  their business  goals;
• Scared:  Dairy  farmers  who don’t know  where their business  future  lies.
There are a number  of factors  which motivate  dairy farmers  to expand  their 
business,  i.e. increased  profit, increased  cows numbers,  more land, more milk
73
quota, family pride, continuation  of the family business,  etc. Whatever  the 
motivation  factor, there are a number  of essential  criteria  for the successful  
expansion  of a dairy farm business. These criteria should be rigorously  
assessed  before commencement  of any plan for expansion.  The following  
essential  criteria  for the successful  expansion  of a dairy business  are listed in 
order  of importance:
Ambition  - focus
A dairy farm business  is a time consuming  year round  career. Increasing  the 
scale of a dairy business  adds to the list of management  skills required.  
Expansion  of a dairy business  requires  a driven  ambitious  individual  with stated  
goals  and a clear  focus  on how to achieve  those  goals.
Grazing  area around  the milking  parlour
The majority  of milk produced  in Ireland  is low cost, grass based,  spring milk 
production  systems. Grazing  area around  the milking  parlour  is critical for 
expansion  of these  production  systems.  The small  fragmented  structure  of Irish 
farms  and the inherent  bond to the land by landowners  will make  this a difficult  
bridge  to cross  for many  dairy  farmers.
A minimum  of 65ha (160acres)  but preferably  from 100ha  (247acres)  upwards  
must be available  within grazing  distance  of the milking parlour  if realistic  
expansion  plans  are to be realised.
Ability to manage  labour  - people  skiils
The successful  dairy  farmer of  the future  must have excellent  people  skills. It is 
accepted  that 1 labour unit is required  to run 100 cows plus replacements.  
Increases  in the scale of larger  units will be in increments  of 100 cows, which  
will involve  the employment  of additional  staff. Irish dairy farms are traditional  
small  family  farms  therefore  there is no history  or experience  of employing  and 
managing  staff. Cows don’t talk back but people  do. There  is a major  gap in 
the skill level of dairy farmers  in management  of employed  labour. Up-skilling  
is urgent  for successful  expansion  of dairy  farm business.
Financial  literacy  - bank and business  planning
A large expansion  programme  requires  a financially  competent  dairy farmer.  
There is no greater  ill than to have cash flow difficulties  in the middle  of an 
expansion  project  or during a busy period. Large-scale  dairy farming  is a 
business  as well as a way of life. A financially  competent  dairy farmer  will 
follow the pursue the following  to successfully  carry out an expansion  
programme:
74
• List, plan and cost all items for capital investment  and add a safety  
margin  (10%).
• Calculate  the financial  facilities  required  and plan taxation.
• Prepare  a farm business  plan and/or a partial budget showing  debt 
repayment  capacity,  sensitivity  analysis  and contingency  plans.
• Negotiate  finance,  security,  interest  rate and terms  and conditions.
• Plan a timetable  of events  for the completion  of the project.
• Monitor income  and expenditure  by quarterly  accounts  versus  the plan.
A dairy farmer intimately  familiar  with the up to date finances  of the farm 
business  will identify  opportunities  and weaknesses  early. This will ensure  a 
better  relationship  with the bank while giving  the farm business  a definite  edge  
on competitors  when  making  important  decisions.
Technical  efficiency
Technical  efficiency  is critical  to excellent  physical  and financial  performance  of 
a dairy  farm business.  However  Irish farmers  have a habit of over emphasis  on 
fashionable  technical  efficiency  factors  to the detriment  of financial  and other  
important  factors. Prioritise  the technical  efficiency  factors that require  
improvement  on your  farm.
Time management
There  are only 24 hours  in a day. One labour  unit can only handle  a 100 cows  
and replacements.  Expansion  does require  time. You cannot  do everything  
yourself. List and prioritise  tasks and plan how and who will carry them out. 
Work  smarter  not harder.
Mentor  and team
It is vital to have a trusted  sounding  board for the management  of expansion  
projects  and the day to day running  of a dairy farm business.  Every  business  
owner needs a core team of trusted advisors/mentors.  The team should  
consist  of a dairy advisor/consultant,  tax advisor,  legal advisor,  banker  and 
possibly  a person outside  of farming. Dairy farmers  should draw on the 
excellent  research  done by Teagasc  Moorpark  (via membership  of a relevant  
discussion  group) and fine tune with one to one contact with the 
advisor/consultant.
Stable  personal  life
Dairy  farmers,  farming  in partnership  with their wife, family  or non-family  must 
encompass  all partners  in expansion  plans. Expansion  projects  are stressful  
events  as they draw on time and finances,  both vital characteristics  in a stable  
personal  life. Often the enlarged  farming  programme  after the expansion  
project  can take time to implement.  One in five marriages  in Ireland  today  are 
ending  in divorce. In an existing  fragile  relationship  these events  can cause  a
75
complete  breakdown.  Do not consider  a farm business  expansion  project  
if you do not have  a stable  personal  life
A successful  expansion  of a dairy farm business  is directly  related  to all of the 
above  essential  criteria. The larger  the scale of the expansion  and the higher  
the level of risk, the more essential  the criteria  become  to enable  the dairy  
farmer  to successfully  navigate  the stressful  periods  in the project  and the 
enlarged  farming  programme.  If a dairy farmer  meets  all the essential  criteria  
for successful  expansion  of the business,  what options are available  to 
expand?
Options  for expansion  of a dairy  farm business
This paper considers  expansion  of a farm business  as 'increasing  both the 
amount  of land farmed  and the number  of cows  milked  (it is acknowledged  that 
expansion  can also occur within the farm gate by changing  from other  
enterprises  to dairying).  There  are three  areas  to consider  when increasing  the 
amount  of land farmed  and the number  of cows milked:
• Buying  land;
■ Leasing  land;
■ Investment  syndicates.
The route of expansion  will be individual  to each farm business  depending  on 
its particular  set of circumstances.  To examine  the options  for expansion  of a 
dairy farm business,  an example  is described  (Tables  1 & 2). The example  
farmer  is chosen  because  there is limited  capacity  to expand  within  the farm 
gate in the current  dairy unit. It is assumed  that the farmer  meets all the 
essential  criteria  for a successful  expansion  plan as outlined  above.
The options  for expansion  of the dairy  farm business  are then examined.
76
Table  1. Example  dairy  fanner  - farm  business  data
Personal
Age 34
Martial  status: Married
Spouse Age 30 - currently  works  in the home
Children 3 school  going  children
Education Both qualified  young  farmers
Physical
Land 50.6 ha (125 ac) all grazable  by cows
Dwelling  house Traditional  2 storey  farmhouse
Milk quota 613,722  litres (135,000gall)  @ 3.8% butter  fat
Livestock 100 cows  / 23 calves  / 23 ICH / 2 stock  bulls
Buildings 20u parlour  /125  cubicles  / pollution
Machinery Basic  machinery  - silage  & slurry  by
Labour  employed Casual  relief  - €5k/annum
Technical
Stocking  rate (LU/ha) 2.47 (ILU/ac)
Milk solids  (%) 3.4% protein  & 3.8% butterfat
Milk solids  sold/cow  (kg) 455 (1350gall/cow  sold)
Milk Solids  sold/ha  (kg) 1,123
Feed/cow  (kg) 533
Single  payment  scheme  (€) 20,000
Financial  summary €
Net farm profit* 130,000
Personal  drawings 50,000
Income  tax 20,000
Depreciation  provision 15,000
Bank  €200k -  20 yrs @ 6% 17,200
Surplus  for Investment 27,800
Net worth 3.5 million
Sensitivity  Analysis €
Milk +/- 1 c/litre 6,137
Feed +/- €10/tonne 533
Interest  +/- 1 % 2,000
SPS +/- 10% 2,000
"Net farm  profit  before  bank  and depreciation
77
Table  2. Income  and expenditure  account  for example  dairy  farmer
Income (€) (€) (€)
Total c/I sold €/ha
Milk Sales 33C/I 202,528 33.0 4,004
Calves 82 10,250 1.7 203
Cull cows 21 7,350 1.2 145
Bulls 1 1,000 0.2 20
SPS 20,000 3.3 395
Less Livestock  Purchase -1,800 -0.3 -36
Total 239,328 39.0 4,731
Expenditure
Variabie  costs
Fertilizer  & lime 13,971 2.3 276
Concentrates 19,322 3.1 382
Seeds  & sprays 1,500 0.2 30
Machinery hire 12,171 2.0 241
Vet, med & Al 13,287 2.2 263
Misc. variable costs 3,425 0.6 68
Total  Variable  Costs 63,676 10.4 1,259
iGross  Margin 175.653 28.6 3,472 1
Fixed  costs
Labour 5,000 0.8 99
Mach.  op. costs 11,000 1.8 217
Insurance 3,500 0.6 69
Car, phone  & electric 16,000 2.6 316
Gen maint & repairs 6,000 1.0 119
Prof  fees 3,000 0.5 59
Misc. 1,000 0.2 20
Total Fixed  Costs 45,500 7.4 899
iTotal  Costs 109,176 17.8 2.158  1
Net Margin 130,153 21.2 2,573
Inventory  change 0 0 0
Profit  before  depreciation  and interest 130,153 21.2 2,573
Expansion  options for the example  farmers  business
The example  dairy  farmer  is milking  10Ocows,  has 23 replacements  and 2 stock  
bulls on 125acres  (stocking  rate 2.47lu/ha  or llu/ac). All the land is available  
for grazing  by the cows. Bank debt is €200,000.  The following  options  are 
considered  for the future  of the farm business:
78
Table  3. Expansion  options  for the example  farmer
OptionsCow Acres 
No.Quota
GallLabour
Unit
1. Present  system:  -125  acres  owned 100 125 135,000 0
2. New dairy unit: - add a new 125 acre stand  alone  
unit100 125 135,000 1
3. Double  home  unit: - add 125 acre unit next door 200 250 270,000 1
4. Max grazing  block:  - add 70 acres 156 195 210,600 0
5. Land  for replacements:  - add 32 acres 125 157 168,750 0
6. Small  increase:  - add 13 acres 110 138 148,500 0
The above  options  are achieved  either by buying  or leasing  the land required  
for the expansion  plan. The following  is a description  of the reasoning  behind  
each option.
Option  1 - Present  System:  Continue  the present  100-cow  spring  milk system.  
This is included  as a comparative  as the profitability  outlined  in Table  2 will be 
the basis  for calculating  the net profit  of the other  options.
Option 2 - New Dairy Unit: This option examines  the viability  of running  a 
second  stand-alone  dairy unit identical  to the home unit. The difficulty  in 
obtaining  land adjoining  or near the home dairy unit in Ireland today is 
acknowledged.  The example  farmer  acquires  the new unit as a going  concern  
(land, buildings,  farmhouse,  quota, SPS, livestock,  machinery)  within a 50km  
radius  of the home unit. It is run as an entirely  separate  unit as it is too far to 
have any fixed cost savings. It is assumed  a fulltime  labour  unit is employed,  
housed  rent free in the farmhouse  and given the use of a jeep. It is also 
assumed  that technical  and financial  efficiency  factors  are the same as the 
home  unit. Both buying  and leasing  are examined.
Option  3 - Double  the Home  Unit: This option  assumes  the stand-alone  unit as 
described  in option 2 is acquired  alongside  the home unit. There is no 
additional  machinery  purchased  and there are savings  in fixed costs. The 
additional  labour  unit is still employed  even though  there is an option  for Mrs 
Example  Farmer  to replace  the employed  unit and let out or sell the farmhouse.  
Both buying  and leasing  are examined.
Option  4 - Maximise  the Grazing  Block:  This option  maximises  the number  of 
cows the example  farmer  can milk from the 125 acres he currently  owns and
79
farms. It assumes  that 1 hectare can carry approximately  3 cows  
(1.25cows/acre)  at the back end of the year; therefore  the 125 acres can carry  
156 cows. An additional  70 acres are acquired.  This land can be within a 
15km radius  of the home  farm. Both buying  and leasing  are examined.
Option  5 - Land  for Replacement  stock:  This is a conservative  version  of option  
4 where the stocking  rate on the grazing  block at the back is under less 
pressure  at 2.47lu/ha  (llu/ac).  An additional  32 acres  are acquired.  This land 
can be within a 15km radius  of the home farm. Both buying  and leasing  are 
examined.
Option  6 - Small  Increase:  This option  examines  an opportunistic  acquisition  of 
13 acres. This land can be within a 15km radius of the home farm. Both 
buying  and leasing  are examined.
Buying  land for expansion
The capital  investment  required  to buy the land and other  assets  in each of the 
options  is outlined  in Table  4. The capital  investment  sums  range  from €3.7 in 
option  2 to €338,3983  in option  6.
Table  4. Capital  investment  schedule  for dairy unit expansion  options  - 
buy land
Option  1Option  2Option  3Option  4 Option  5Option  6
(€) (€) (€) (€) (€) (€)
Total Total Total Total Total Total
Detail  of assets  purchased
Land & Bldg - ac 125 125 70 32 13
Quota  - litres 613,722 613,722 343,684 153,431 61,372
SPS 20,000 20,000 11,200 5,000 2,000
Cost  of assets  purchased
Land & buildings 2,845,758 2,845,758 1,593,624 728,514 295,959
Milk quota 171,842 171,842 96,232 42,961 17,184
SPS 40,000 40,000 22,400 10,000 4,000
Dwelling  house 350,000 350,000 0 0 0
Machinery 80,000 0 0 0 0
Livestock 212,400 212,400 118,944 53,100 21,240
Total Capital  
Invested0 3,700,000 3,620,000 1,831,200 834,575 338,383
Capital  Invested  
per acre0 29,600 28,960 26,160 26,080 26,029
80
The feasibility  of purchasing  the land in each of the options  is outlined  in Table
5. The purchase  of the new stand alone dairy unit in option  2 is calculated  to 
have a deficit of funds of €136,847  per annum  when paying  interest  only at 
6%pa on the €3.7million  to buy it. It has a Return  on Investment  (Rol) of 
2.7%pa,  well below  the interest  rate of 6%pa. Clearly  this is not a viable  option  
as a stand alone  unit with all funds  borrowed.  Option  3 also shows  a deficit  of 
funds and is also non viable on borrowed  funds. Option  4 has a surplus  of 
€13,146  after paying  interest  only on all loans, however  this surplus  is too small  
to make capital repayments  on the loan. Option 5, the purchase  of an 
additional  32 acres, buildings,  milk quota, SPS and livestock  to increase  from 
100 to 125 cows (plus replacements)  is very close to making a 20 year 
repayment  schedule. However  the business  would be very vulnerable  to 
negative  movements  in milk price and interest  rate. Option  6 the purchase  of 
an additional  13 acres, buildings,  milk quota, SPS and livestock  to carry an 
extra 10 cows and replacements  is viable  on a 20 year repayment  schedule.
Table  5. Source  and application  of funds for dairy  unit expansion  options  
- buy land
Option  1'Option  2 Option  3Option  4Option  5Option  6
(€) (€) (€) (€) (€) (€)
Total Total Total Total Total Total
Source  of funds
Net profit 130,153 100,153 245,305 211,018 167,316 145,218
Farmhouse  rental 0
Total  source  of funds 130,153 100,153 245,305 211,018 167,316 145,218
Application  of funds
Personal  drawings 50,000 0 50,000 50,000 50,000 50,000
Income  Tax 20,000 0 0 11,000 14,000 17,000
Depreciation  provision 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000
Bank  interest  @ 6% 12,000 222,000 229,200 121,872 62,074 32,303
Surplus/  Deficit  of funds 33,153 -136,847 -48,895 13,146 26,241 30,915
Total application  of 
funds130,153 100,153 245,305 211,018 167,316 145,218
'Option  2 is a stand-alone  option,  existing  debt  of €200k  not included  in interest  payment.
Lessons  from buying  land to expand:
• Borrowing  all the funds  to buy land will ensure  the scale  of expansion  will 
be limited.
81
If the stand-alone  unit in option 2 is to be feasible  on a 20 year 
repayment  schedule,  the farm should cost €990,151  (€7,921/acre)  
versus  the market  value  €3.7million  (€29,600/acre)  in the example!
The annual  yield or Return  on Investment  (Rol) in land is low (2.7% in 
option  2 above).
Buying  land allows  the possibility  for investment  gains by it increasing  in 
value  over  time i.e. capital  appreciation.  This suits the cash purchaser.  
Land has a good historical  record  of capital  appreciation  in Ireland.
Leasing  land for expansion
The capital investment  required  in other assets when leasing land for 
expansion  is outlined  in Table 6. The capital investment  sums range from 
€292,400  in option  2 to €21,240  in option  6 and are modest  when compared  
with buying  land, buildings,  SPS and milk quota. It is assumed  for the purposes  
of the exercise  that the buildings  are rented  with the land. Milk quota  purchase  
has also been omitted  due it its non-availability  in most areas  and its predicted  
demise. The cash surplus  can be used to calculate  the option  of purchasing  
milk quota  and or erecting  buildings.
Table  6. Capital  investment  schedule  for dairy unit expansion  options  - 
lease  land
Option  1Option  2Option  3Option  4 Option  5Option  6
(€) (€) (€) (€) (€) (€)
Total Total Total Total Total Total
Detail  of assets  leased  
Land & Bldg - acres
Quota  - litres
SPS125 125 70 32 13
Cost of assets  purchased  
Land & buildings 0 0 0 0 0
Milk quota 0 0 0 0 0
SPS 0 0 0 0 0
Dwelling  house 0 0 0 0 0
Machinery 80,000 0 0 0 0
Livestock 212,400 212,400 118,944 53,100 21,240
Debtors 0 0 0 0 0
ITotal  capital  invested 0 292,400 212,400 118,944 53,100 21,240
iCapital  invested  per acre 2,339 1,699 1,699 1,659 1,634
82
The feasibility  of leasing  land to expand  the dairy business  in each of the 
options  is outlined  in Table  7. All the land is leased  at €200/acre,  there is no 
SPS. Leasing  land to expand  the dairy enterprise  shows  a surplus  of funds in 
all options. The lease of the new 'stand alone dairy unit’ in option 2 is 
calculated  to have a surplus  of funds  of €18,609  per annum. This will  allow  the 
capital  to be repaid  on the loan of €292,400  for stock and machinery  over 10 
years. Banks  consider  this period  too long, therefore  this option  is considered  
high risk. The annual yield or Return on Investment  (Rol) in option 2 is 
18.9%pa,  well above  the interest  rate of 6%pa. The other  options  are all viable  
and leave enough of a surplus to consider  purchase  of milk quota and 
construction  of pollution  and winter  housing  facilities.  Option  3, the doubling  in 
size of the home unit by leasing  another  unit alongside  it shows  a good net 
profit and surplus  of funds,  however  income  tax burden  is increasing  due to the 
high profitability  and low bank interest  payment. Options  4, 5 & 6 are all 
attractive  options.
Table  7. Source  and application  of funds  for dairy  unit expansion  options  
- lease  land
Option  1Option  2Option  3Option  4Option  5 Option  6
(€) (€) (€) (€) (€) (€)
Total Total Total Total Total Total
Source  of funds
Net profit 130,153 55,153 200,305 185,818 155,916 140,618
Farmhouse  rental
ITotal  source  of funds 130,153 55,153 200,305 185,818 155,916 140,618
Application  of Funds
Personal  drawings 50,000 0 50,000 50,000 50,000 50,000
Income  Tax 20,000 4,000 43,000 39,000 29,000 23,000
Depreciation  provision 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000
Bank interest  @ 6% 12,000 17,544 24,744 19,137 15,186 13,274
Surplus/  Deficit  of funds 33,153 18,609 67,561 62,681 46,730 39,343
iTotal  application  of funds 130,153 55,153 200,305 185,818 155,916 140,618  1
'Option  2 is a  stand  alone  option,  existing  debt  of €200k  not included  in interest  payment
Lessons  from leasing  land to expand:
• Leasing  of land to expand  the dairy enterprise  is a viable alternative  
especially  if the land is priced properly,  is near the home unit and 
contains  pollution  compliant  wintering  facilities.
• Leasing  of land does not have the risk of high bank  debt.
83
The stability  of leasing  is an issue  without  a long-term  lease.
Income  tax is an issue  with a high profit lease, as there is a reluctance  
to invest  in facilities  on the leased  or home  farm if a long-term  lease is 
not in place.
Leasing  suits the cash poor dairy farmer  who has to borrow  to fund 
livestock  and machinery  purchases.
Syndicate  investment  for expansion
Syndicate  investments  are very popular  in the commercial  property  market,  and 
are now entering  the agricultural  market  in this country.  They have been used 
in other  countries  for many  years. This offers  another  option  for expanding  the 
dairy business.  A group of investors  come together  to invest in a dairy farm 
business.  This can be in any country  in the world. The same principles  of 
Return  on Investment  (Rol)  and potential  for capital  appreciation  still apply. It is 
possible  to borrow  on the strength  of the home farm to fund an investment  in 
the syndicate.
Conclusions
Take home  messages  for expanding  a dairy  business:
1. For  a dairy farmer  considering  the expansion  of the dairy farm business,  
it is essential the viability of the plan be assessed  before  
commencement.  There are a number  of physical,  technical,  financial  
and human  criteria  essential  for a successful  business  expansion.
2. When one buys land there are two distinctly  different  investments  
vehicles  at play. The first is an investment  in the land itself. This is an 
investment  whereby  the annual  yield or Return  on Investment  will be low 
(1-3%),  and the investment  gain depends  on an increase  in value over 
time i.e. capital  appreciation.  The second  is an investment  in the farm 
business  itself (i.e. the dairy enterprise).  This is an investment  whereby  
the annual  yield or Return  on Investment  is high (8-20%),  and capital  
appreciation  is minimal.
3. Buying  land for a stand alone dairy unit is suitable  for a cash rich 
investor  who is investing  for an increase  in the value of the property  i.e. 
capital  appreciation.
4. Leasing  land for a stand alone dairy unit is suitable  for a dairy farmer  
who is borrowing  100% of funds and is investing  for gain by realising  
annual surpluses  of cash from a high annual yield or Return on 
Investment.
84
5. Leasing  land within  cow grazing  distance  is viable  for every  dairy  farmer 
if they choose  to expand.
6. High profit leases  require  income  tax planning.
7. Milk price sensitivity  is the critical factor in the expansion  of dairy  
business.
85
Where  for dairy  cattle  breeding  in Ireland?
N. Lopez-Villalobos'  and D P. Berry^
^Institute  of Veterinary,  Animal  and Biomedical  Sciences,  Massey  University,  
Palmerston  North,  New  Zealand.
^Moorepark  Production  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork
Introduction
In 2006, there were approximately  1.09 million  dairy cows in Ireland  distributed  
among  30,900  herds. Totai Irish milk output  in 2003, amounted  to 5584 million  
litres. Of the total milk output,  9% was used  for liquid milk, 56% for butter/skim  
milk powder,  20% for cheese,  4% for cream,  5% for whole  milk powder,  and 3% 
for chocolate  crumb production;  75% of the milk produced  was exported  
accounting  for €6.7 billion.
Only 38% of the cows (408,375)  and 20% of the herds (6229)  in Ireland  milk 
record. The average  production  for all milk-recorded  cows in 2006 was 6723  
litres milk, 253kg fat (3.77% concentration)  and 226kg protein (3.36%  
concentration).  It is estimated  that oniy 30% of in-calf  heifers  entering  Irish 
dairy herds are sired by artificial  insemination.  In New Zealand  on the other  
hand, 71% of the 3.9 million  cows (75% of the 11,630  herds)  milk record  and 
73% of cows are inseminated  using Al. Similar  statistics  are evident  in other  
countries.
The Irish Cattle Breeding  Federation  (ICBF)  was estabiished  in 1998 with the 
purpose  of re-designing  the breeding  program  for the genetic  improvement  of 
dairy and beef cattle accounting  for future economic  and environmental  
conditions  in Ireland. The breeding  objectives  and genetic  evaluation  systems  
have been reviewed  and redeveloped  and now the ICBF is focused  on the 
establishment  of a breeding  program  to increase  the rate of genetic  gain for 
each breed in Ireland  using the best available  technologies.  The aim of this 
paper is to describe  a systematic  approach  to the design  and enhancement  of a 
breeding  program  as well as reviewing  the current  status of the breeding  
program  for Irish dairy cattle and highlighting  what components  of the Irish 
breeding  program  could  be enhanced.
A general  methodology  for the design  and enhancement  of a breeding  program  
for any livestock  enterprise  was presented  by Harris et al., (1984). This 
systematic  approach  was illustrated  by Lopez-Villalobos  and Garrick  (2005)  
using the breeding  program  for the genetic  improvement  of New Zealand  dairy  
cattle  as an example  (Figure  1). The steps are arranged  in a logical  sequence  
starting  with the definition  of a breeding  goal and ending  with an economic  
appraisal  of the breeding  program.  These  steps should  be repeated  iteratively  
to evaluate  various  scenarios.
86
Figure 1. A systematic  approach  to the design  and enhancement  of 
breeding  programs
GoalBreeding
objectiveSelection  criteria
Economic
analysis  >.Breeding  scheme  
design
Dissemination>-  
system
Breeding  goal
Definition  of a breeding  goal is the first step in designing  an animal-breeding 
program. Improvement  of dairy cows focuses  on directional  change  in the 
genetics  of cows in coming  generations,  such that they  will produce  the desired  
products  more efficiently  under  expected  future  economic,  social  and ecological  
production  environments  (Groen,  2000). The direction  of the improvement  is 
formalised  in the breeding  goal that farmers  would therefore  like improved.
The breeding  goal of most Irish dairy  farmers  is to improve  the genetic  ability  of 
the cow to generate  farm profit. However,  there is currently  no mention  of 
"environmental  sustainability"  in the breeding  goal of Irish dairy cattle. In the 
future it's likely that as phrases  such as "carbon  footprint"  and “sustainability ” 
come to the fore, the breeding  goal will change  to maximising  farm profit in an 
environmentally  and socially  sustainable  manner.
There  are different  goals  for seasonal  faming  systems  where  the main limiting  
resource  is pasture  grown on the farm. In the case of the New Zealand 
breeding  program  the goal has been defined  as the genetic improvement  of the 
ability  of the dairy  cow to transform  4.5t DM feed into farm profit  (AEU,  2007).
Breeding  objective
Given a goal, the breeding  objective  can then be formally  developed.  This 
involves  two somewhat  discrete  steps. First, the list of traits that influence  the 
goal can be identified.  Second,  the relative  emphasis  of each of the traits in the
87
list can be quantified.  Depending  on the country,  the weighting  placed  on each 
trait is derived  using economics  (i.e., Ireland,  New Zealand)  or desired  genetic  
gains  in each  trait (e.g.. The Netherlands).
Table 1. Economic  weights  and percentage  of emphasis  on the various  
traits  included  in the EBI in 2008 (Berry  et al., 2007)
Sub-index Trait € % Overall
Production Milk -0.09 11
Fat 1.26 6 40%
Protein 6.91 23
Fertility Calving  interval -11.97 26 34%
Survival 11.17 8
Calving Calving  difficulty,  direct -3.65 2
Calving  difficulty,  maternal -1.73 1
Gestation  length,  direct -7.54 4 8%
Calf mortality -2.85 1
Beef Cull cow -0.51 2
Carcass  weight 1.38 7
Carcass  conformation 10.32 3 14%
Carcass  fat -11.71 2
Health Lameness 1.13 1 4%
Udder  health -57.21 3
The economic  breeding  index (EBI) is a measure  of the genetic  ability of an 
animal's  progeny  to generate  farm profit per lactation. The traits and their 
economic  weights  in the EBI in 2008 are shown in Table 1. The economic  
values  are derived  using the ‘Moorepark  Dairy Systems  Model ’ (Shalloo  et al., 
2004)  using current  costs and future milk prices  when land is a limiting  factor,  
as is and will be the case in most Irish farms. Regular  revision  of the economic  
values  is also a norm to avoid the danger  of an outdated  selection  tool. The 
EBI will evolve according  to changes  in farm costs, milk payment  and 
agricultural  policies. Future traits that can be considered  to be part of the 
breeding  objective  are feed conversion  efficiency,  milk proteins,  fat composition  
and cow traits related  to environmental  sustainability  such as methane  and 
nitrogen  (urea)  emissions.
Selection  criterion
The selection  criterion  is made up of traits that can be measured  on animals  
and are associated  with traits in the breeding  objective  (i.e., the EBI). Traits  
included  in the selection  criteria  may be the same or different  from the traits in 
the breeding  objective.  Traits different  to those in the selection,  known as 
indicator  traits, are commonly  used as they are often easier or cheaper  to 
measure  than the objective  trait itself  or may be measured  earlier  in life. In the 
EBI, body condition  score, angularity,  foot angle and udder depth (scored  by
88
the Irish Holstein-Friesian  Association),  as well as milk yield are used as 
predictors  of goal traits  e g. calving  interval  and survival.
Cow fertility  is a very important  trait accounting  for 34% of the emphasis  within 
the EBI. However,  calving  interval  is not an ideal trait as a measure  cow fertility  
because  it is lowly heritable  (i.e., takes  a large amount  of information  to achieve  
good reliability),  takes a long time to measure,  and not all animals  (generally 
the least fertile), re-calve  and thereby  have no calving  interval  information.  
Research  is currently  underway  to utilise the routinely  collected  insemination  
and pregnancy  diagnosis  data to better differentiate  between  animals  for 
genetic  merit for fertility. The system  of genetic  evaluation  for New Zealand  
dairy  cattle  produces  estimated  breeding  values  for cow fertility  which  is defined  
as the genetic ability  of the cow to re-calve  next lactation  in the herd’s Al period  
(Harris  and Montgomerie,  2001). Other options,  such as the use of survival  
analysis  are also available  to better  differentiate  between  animals  for survival,  
which is currently  defined  in Ireland  as the probability  of survival  to the next 
lactation.
The national  genetic  evaluation  system  in Ireland  is conducted  across  breed  
using  an animal  model  (Evans,  2007). This system  of genetic evaluation  allows  
the simultaneous  evaluation  of cows and sires using all known relationships 
and is conducted  with a common  base for all breeds  and crosses. However,  
such a system  of genetic  evaluation  requires  good quality  data and statistical  
models. Connectedness  between  herds and breeds  should  exist to correctly  
estimate  breed and heterosis  effects. This is achieved  by having  a significant 
number  of herds  with cows of different  breeds  sired by common  sires.
New methods  of genetic  evaluation  have evolved  in other countries,  and the 
Irish dairy industry  may consider  the implementation  of some  of these,  including  
test-day  models and genomic  selection. The New Zealand  dairy industry  
implemented  a test-day  model genetic  evaluation  for milk production  and 
somatic  cell count  across  breeds  and lactations  in February  2007. The test-day 
model evaluation  system  accounts  for differences  between  cows in lactation  
persistency  (within lactation)  and maturity  rate (between  lactations)  and 
accounts  for the environmental  effects  related  to each specific  herd-test  date.  
These  improvements  increase  the accuracy  of the evaluations,  especially  for 
young test sires and cows, resulting  in a faster rate of genetic  gain for the 
industry. Greater  accuracy  is valuable  in better identifying  superior  dams as 
bull mothers.
Meuwissen  et al. (2001) described  the potential  of genomic  selection  to 
increase  the reliability  of estimated  breeding  values at early age thereby 
increasing  genetic  gain. Schaeffer  (2006)  using parameters  from the Canadian  
dairy cattle population  showed  that genomic  selection  can double  the rate of 
genetic progress  with a fraction  of the costs of running  the conventional  
progeny  testing  program  although  it does require  a large initial investment.  The 
analysis  of Schaeffer  (2006)  assumed  that genomic  selection  was based  on the 
same traits to those included  in the progeny  test. Additional  gains could be 
made by incorporating  information  on traits such as feed conversion  efficiency  
and dry matter  intake which are difficult  to measure  in grazing  systems  and
89
longevity  and fertility  that are typically  not available  with a high degree  of 
accuracy  until after  selection  of bulls  for widespread  usage.
Breeding  scheme
The fourth step of a breeding  program  involves  a sound and transparent  
structure  for the selection  of animals  of highest  estimated  genetic  merit for the 
breeding  objective;  some breeding  companies  use a different,  more futuristic,  
breeding  objective  to that used nationally. Reproductive  rate of breeding  
animals  and uncertainty  about  true genetic  merit of breeding  animals  (i.e., the 
reliability  of the estimated  breeding  values)  make  up the most important  limiting  
factors  in the design  of the breeding  scheme.  The task in designing  a breeding  
scheme  is to determine  how many,  but more importantly,  which  animals  should  
be selected  as parents  of the next generation.
A progeny-testing  scheme  has been the traditional  breeding  scheme  for the 
genetic  improvement  of dairy cattle in many countries.  The G€N€ IR€LAND  
progeny  testing  program  was launched  in April 2005  as a joint venture  involving  
ICBF and some Irish breeding  companies.  The aim of the breeding  scheme  is 
to progeny  test elite young sires under Irish farming  conditions,  ensuring  
enough  daughters  with information  to obtain  reliable  estimated  breeding  values  
for traits in the selection  criterion.  G€N€  IR€LAND  is targeting  to test annually  
100 dairy bulls based  on the phenotypic  performance  of 100 daughters  per bull 
spread  into some  700 co-operating  herds.
The G€N€ IR€LAND  breeding  scheme  will exploit the four pathways  of 
selection,  i.e. cows  to breed  cows, cows  to breed  bulls, bulls to breed  cows  and 
bulls to breed  bulls. Each path differs  in the age at which  animals  are selected  
(generation  interval),  the amount  of information  available  for the selection  
decision  (affects  reliability of estimated  breeding  values),  the number  of animals  
available  for selection  and the number  of animals  selected  (intensity  of 
selection).
Selection  of bulls and cows to breed bulls involve  few animals  and potentially  
there is a risk of reducing  genetic  diversity  and increasing  inbreeding  in the 
population.  A system  of contract  mating  to generate  superior  young  test sires 
is currently  being developed  and is based on optimal contribution  theory  
performing  multiple  objective  optimisation  to maximise  rate of genetic  gain and 
minimise  long term inbreeding.
Annual  genetic  gain of the national  herd for the breeding  objective  (profit per 
cow per lactation)  over the last 20 years  has been low at €2/cow,  but the gain in 
the last 4 years has increased  to almost  €5/cow. This confirms  that the 
breeding  program  for the genetic  improvement  of Irish dairy cattle is being  
effective  although  it is far below  the theoretical  optimum  of €20/cow/year.
An efficient  progeny  testing  scheme  requires  the participation  of a large group  
of motivated  dairy farmers  and a large scale system  to accurately  record  
parentage  and productive,  reproductive  and health events  of individual  cows
90
along  with an efficient  system  of genetic evaluation.  More data are required  on 
health and fertility  traits than milk production  traits to obtain  accurate  genetic 
proofs. However,  Irish farmers  should not be expected  to participate  in a 
progeny  testing scheme  unless they can be guaranteed  that the average  
genetic  merit of the young  test sires is superior  to that currently  available.  In 
Ireland,  only a small proportion  of cows are inseminated  with young  test sire 
semen. This should increase  in the future as confidence  in G€N€ Ireland  
gathers.
An alternative  to a progeny-testing  scheme  is genomic  selection  (discussed  
previously)  or the implementation  of a nucleus  herd using multiple  ovulation  
and embryo transfer  (Nicholas  and Smith, 1983). Nucleus  herds were  
designed  to reduce  the generation  interval  when compared  to progeny  testing  
schemes,  and to optimise  the use of information  on dam, full sibs, half sibs and 
other relatives  to increase  the accuracy  of selection  at early age. Furthermore,  
nucleus  herds  facilitate  and save large costs  on all the logistics  of selection  and 
the recording  of traits, including  those traits that are expensive  to measure  in 
commercial  farms,  such as feed intake  and feed conversion  efficiency.
Dissemination  system
The fifth step of a breeding  program  considers  the design  of a system  for the 
efficient  transfer of the superior  genes  from high genetic  merit animals,  already 
identified  in the breeding  scheme,  into the commercial  population.  The choice  
of the transfer  strategy  is largely  determined  by the size of the commercial  
population  and by the cost and efficiency  of biotechnologies  available  such as 
artificial  insemination,  multiple  ovulation  and embryo  transfer and sexed  semen.
Artificial  insemination  has remained  the main breeding  technology  in most dairy  
industries  for dispersal  of superior  genes  from high genetic  merit bulls into the 
commercial  cow population. The speed with which these genes are 
established  in the commercial  population  depends  on the number  of cows  
inseminated  and subsequently  calving  to the superior  bulls. In Ireland  only 
30% of the calves  were from artificial  insemination  despite  the average  EBI of 
stock  bulls being  €90 lower  than the average  EBI of the top 20 Al sires (Berry  et 
al., 2005). Furthermore,  the reliability  of the EBI of the stock bulls is very low 
(equivalent  to that of a young  test-sire)  implying  that the purchase  of stock bulls 
is very much a “luck dip”. The low penetration  rate of Al in Ireland  clearly  
suggests  that more resources  (education  of farmers)  of the breeding  program  
should  be dedicated  to ensure  a significant  increase  in the percentage  of cows  
inseminated  with semen of high genetic  merit bulls produced  by the G€N€  
IRELAND  breeding  scheme.
In New Zealand  about  75% of lactating  cows and less than 10% of heifers  are 
artificially  inseminated;  the rest of the animals  are naturally  mated (Livestock 
Improvement,  2007). These percentages  combined  with high pregnancies  
rates at the end of the mating  season  (about  90%) and low culling  rate (22%)  
ensure  that virtually  every  cow replacement  entering  the herd is the progeny  of 
a high genetic  merit bull.
91
Farmers  in many  countries  are using crossbreeding  as a mating  plan to exploit  
heterosis  effects. Under  New Zealand  grazing  conditions  crossbreeding  effects  
and breed complementarity  can increase  profitability  for commercial  farmers  
(Lopez-Villalobos  and Garrick, 2002). Crossbreeding  does not introduce  
genetic  improvement  into the population  but only exploits  the best combination  
of genes  from different  breeds. The total economic  benefit  of crossbreeding  
effects  can be fully exploited  through  careful  planning  of selection  of breeds  
and selection  of the best individuals  within  each breed. The best situation  for 
the Irish dairy  industry  is to use high genetic merit bulls  for farm profit  (EBI) in a 
systematic  crossbreeding  system,  but only if the EBI of the sires used are high 
and if they suit the farming  system.
Economic  analysis
The last but perhaps  the most important  step in the design of a breeding  
program  is the economic  analysis  of the breeding  program,  which is a very 
complex  exercise  only achieved  through  modeling  of the whole breeding  
program.  The simulation  must assume  that the breeding  program  is not under  
the control  of the industry,  but a result  of the collective  actions  of dairy  farmers  
in concert  with economic  and genetic  aspects  of the available  genetic  material  
(Garrick and Lopez-Villalobos,  1998).
A difficulty  in evaluating  the breeding  program  is the definition  of the variables  
measuring  the overall  effectiveness  of the breeding  program.  Some  variables  
may be: i) rate of genetic  gain in the breeding  goal achieved  in the commerciai  
population,  ii) industry  economic  benefit considering  an integrated  industry  
accounting  for all factors affecting  farm productivity,  factors affecting  the 
processing  of milk into dairy products  and its commercialisation  in the form of 
dairy products,  iii) profit for breeding  companies  which basically  is determined  
by semen  revenue  minus  the costs of the breeding  scheme,  and iv) profit for 
commercial  dairy  farmers.
The dairy industry  must review  continuously  the breeding  programs  to evaluate  
current  and futures  changes  at the farm or industry  level. For example.  Berry  
(2007)  examined  the potential  of genomic  selection  in Irish dairy cattle based  
on the methodology  proposed  by Schaeffer  (2006); costs of the breeding  
scheme  and industry  benefits  were compared  between  some alternative  
breeding  schemes  using genomic  selection  varying  the number  of animals  to 
be genotyped.
Priorities  for the future  of dairy  cattle  breeding  in Ireland
The current breeding  goal - profit per cow, is well defined according  to 
production  system  and future  market  conditions.  An industry  model  is currently  
under  development  by Moorepark  Production  Research  Centre,  (Shalloo  pars, 
comm.)  that simulates  the collection  of milk and the processing  and marketing  
of dairy products.  This model  will be linked  to the ‘Moorepark  Dairy Systems
92
Model ’ to calculate  economic  values  for current  and new milk traits according  to 
the evolution  of the breeding  goal and objective  as well as quantifying  the 
implications  of farmer breeding  goals  on the processor.
The list of traits considered  in the selection  criterion  is exhaustive  but some  
improvements  are required  to measure  cow fertility. Measuring  mastitis  instead  
of somatic  cell count  will improve  the prediction  of the cow health,  as will the 
measurement  of lameness  instead  of predicting  using  locomotion  as is currently  
done. New methods  of genetic  evaluation  considering  test-day  model or 
estimation  of breeding  values  using single  nucleotide  polymorphisms  (SNP)  are 
not a priority  for the breeding  program,  there is a need to improve  the current  
evaluation  based  on an across-breed  animal  model.
The G€N€ IR€LAND  breeding  scheme  when fully implemented  will deliver  
significant  industry  benefits  captured  directly  by the Irish dairy farmers. It is of 
paramount  importance  that Irish dairy farmers  use semen  from high EBI bulls 
tested under Irish conditions.  Percentage  of cows to artificial  insemination  
need to increase  significantly  to ensure  that cows leaving  the commercial  herds  
are replaced  by heifers  of higher  genetic  merit. This will reduce  the genetic  lag 
between  the genetic  merit  of the bulls and the cow population.
Experimental  results  comparing  strains  of Holstein-Friesian  cows or breeds  (for 
review see Dillon et al., 2006) across different  feeding levels provides  
information  on what type of cow will be the most suitable  for the current  and 
future  production  systems  of Ireland. Industry  benefit  can be evaluated  under  
different  usage of straight - and cross-breeding  systems,  accounting  for 
changes  in milk composition  and yield of dairy products  at the level of the 
industry,  and changes  in the management  system  at the level of the farm.
All these alternative  changes  in each of the components  of the breeding  
program  should be evaluated  in terms of the breeding  goal and economic 
analysis. Once a component  of the breeding  program  is modified,  the other  
components  have to be evaluated  to create  a synchronisation  with the change  
introduced  and achieve  a new optimal  stage  of the breeding  program.
References
Animal  Evaluation  Unit (2007). Understanding  AE. http://www.aeu.org.nz .
Berry, D P. (2007). Report  on the potential  of genomic  selection  in Irish dairy  
cattle. ICBF Report.
Berry, D.P., Cromie,  A.R., Goughian,  S. and Dillon, P. (2005). Objective  
comparison  of artificial  insemination  and the stock bull in Irish dairy herds.  
Technical  report  to the Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation
Berry, D.P., Shalloo,  L., Cromie,  A.R., Veerkamp,  R.F., Dillon, P., Amer, P R. 
Evans, R.D., Kearney,  J.F. and Wickham,  B.W. (2007). The economic  
breeding  index: a generation  on. Technical  report  to the Irish Cattle Breeding  
Federation.  December  2007.
93
Dillon, P., Berry, D.P., Evans, R.D., Buckley,  F. and Horan, B. (2006).  
Consequences  of genetic  selection  for increased  milk production  in European  
seasonal  pasture  based systems  of milk production.  Livestock  Science  99 
141-158.
Evans, R.D. (2007). Across breed proofs. ICBF Dairy Industry  Meeting.  
Moorepark  Production  Research  Centre, Fermoy,  Co. Cork, 18 Oct 2007 
(http://vww.icbf.eom/publications/files/ICBF_dairy_231107.pdf ).
Groen,  A.F. (2000). Breeding  goal definition.  In: S. Galal,  J. Boyazoglu  and K. 
Hammond  (Eds.)  Workshop  on Developing  Breeding  Strategies  for Lower  Input 
Animal  Production  Environments.  Bella, Italy. ICAR Technical  Series  No 3 pp 
25-104.
Garrick,  D.J. and Lopez-Villalobos,  N. (1998). Tomorrow's  cows - some kiwi 
cows of the future. Proceedings  of the Ruakura  Farmers'Conference  50 39- 
44.
Harris, B. L. and Montgomerie,  W.A. (2001). Fertility  breeding  values for 
seasonal  dairying.  Interbull  Bulletin  27, 139-142.
Harris, D.L, Stewart,  T.S. and Arboleda,  C.R. (1984). Animal breeding  
programs:  systematic  approach  to their design. Advaces  in Agricultural  
Technology  Agricultural  Research  Service,  USDA. Bulletin  AAT-NC-8,  ARS 
USDA,  Peoria,  llinois.
Livestock  Improvement  (2007). Dairy Statistics  2006-2007. Livestock  
Improvement  Corp. Ltd., Hamilton,  New Zealand.
Lopez-Villalobos,  N. and Garrick,  D.J. (2002). Economic  heterosis  and breed  
complementarity  for dairy cattle  in New Zealand.  Proceedings  of the 7th World  
Congress  on Genetics  Applied  to Livestock  Production,  Montpellier,  France.  
Electronic  communication  01-37.
Lopez-Villalobos,  N. and Garrick,  D.J. (2005). Methodology  for the design  and 
enhancement  of genetic  improvement  programs  illustrated  in the context  of the 
New Zealand  dairy industry.  Agrociencia,  IX, 553-568.
Meuwissen,  T.H.E.,  Hayes,  B.J. and Goddard,  M.E. (2001). Prediction  of total 
genetic  value using genome-wide  dense marker  maps. Genetics  157 1819-  
1829.
Nicholas,  F.W. and Smith, C. (1983), Increased  rates of genetic  change  in 
dairy  cattle  by embryo  transfer and splitting.  Animal  Production,  36, 341 -353.
Schaeffer,  L.R. (2006). Strategy  for applying  genome-wide  selection  in dairy 
cattle. Journal  of Animal  Breeding  and Genetics,  123, 218-223.
Shalloo,  L., Dillon, P. Rath, M. and Wallace,  E M. (2004). Description  and 
validation  of the Moorepark  Dairy Systems  Model. Journal  of Dairy  Science  
87, 1945-1959.
94
Using  the EBI: a farmer ’s perspective
Philip Donohoe
Ballyellen,  Goresbridge,  Co. Cariow
Introduction
The introduction  of the Economic  Breeding  Index (EBI) to Ireland in 2001 
marked  a change  in direction  of the breeding  of dairy cattle. Previous  indices  
focused  on increasing  milk production  only, and while successful,  the downside 
was a reduction  in fertility. The net result  was the cancelling  out of any financial 
gains achieved  through  increasing  milk yield. Poor fertility,  if not corrected  on 
farms has the potential  to completely  wipe out the natural competitive 
advantage  enjoyed  by Irish dairy  farmers  - grass  based  milk production.
After a slow and troubled  start, the EBI with it’s inclusion  of traits other than 
milk, e.g. fertility, calving  ease, health and beef is now being embraced  by 
farmers ’ in both spring and winter production  systems. Those  farmers  that 
have aggressively  used the index  since its introduction  are reaping  the rewards  
of increased  profits  and easily managed  cows.
Farm History
The farm Is located  one and a half miles on the Carlow  side of Goresbridge,  a 
small village  on the Carlow/Kilkenny  border,  and comprises  48.6 adjusted  ha. 
One third of this area is owned  and the remainder  is leased. It comes  in one 
block, is free draining,  and divided  into 20 paddocks  of varying  size and well 
serviced  by roadways  and water.
The farm is currently  stocked  at about  2.4 LU/ha. Quota  size is 63,000  gallons  
of which  half is leased. The stock  on the farm comprises;
• 70 Cows,
• 50 1-2 year olds (31 replacements);
• 55 0-1 year olds (26 replacements)
Herd History
The dairying  enterprise  was established  in 1969. The breeding  policy  centred  
on British  Friesian  Al bulls available  through  Dovea,  then the only Al service  in 
the area. Among  the most commonly  used of these  were BTR, CPR, COY  and 
LDL.
95
After completing  a DIY Al course  in 1996 the variety  and volume  of bulls 
available  increased  dramatically.  The glossy catalogues  and fast sales talk 
were impressive  and consequently  bull choice  changed  to high RBI, high milk 
volume  and high type. The most heavily  used bulls in this period  were, HSN,  
ENM and CAU. While  these  bulls did deliver  on production  alas, along  with the 
fancy cows came poor fertility. Before  the transition  to Holstein,  fertility  as 
measured  by conception  rate and mean  calving  date was very acceptable.  The 
decline  in fertility  can be seen in the table below, reaching  rock bottom  in the 
2001/2002  period.
Table  1. Herd  fertility following  change  to high RBI bulls  between  ‘96’ and 
‘07’
Year 1996 2002 2007
Con. 1® serve  (%) 70 43 59
Mean  calving Feb 20 Mario Feb 27
This negative  trend in fertility  did not go unnoticed  and breeding  policy was 
adjusted  to include  bulls with muscularity  and lower volume,  e.g. MTY, OMR  
and JOS. However,  it wasn ’t until 2001 that real action  was taken  to counteract  
the fertility  problem  that was now becoming  so evident. A look at bulls being  
used in New Zealand  showed  that bulls with high percentages  of New Zealand  
Friesian  had much better fertility  and survivability  traits than bulls of North  
American  Holstein  descent. This appeared  a very convincing  argument  that 
breeding  was the best route to rectify  this problem  and New Zealand  Friesian  
bulls were the ones that were going to do it. That year the bull UYC was 
Introduced  and used extensively  on the herd.
With the introduction  of the EBI later the same year, it served  to reinforce  the 
decision  to use NZ bulls. They dominated  the earlier  years of the EBI 'Active  
Bull’ lists. Over the next few years the NZ bulls LYE, SBH, CBH, CWJ and 
particularly  UYC were used. Today  38% of the herd Is directly  related  to UYC.
Over the last three years  the focus  moved  away  from NZ bulls, not because  of 
any dissatisfaction  with the strain itself but because  confidence  has grown in 
the EBI Index. Now a bull is not selected  based  on his strain but on his EBI 
figures. The bulls RUU, LLO, WLI and KBA have been the most widely  used 
bulls during  this last period.
A brief policy  of crossbreeding  to Rotbunt  sires was undertaken  during  the ‘03’ 
to '04’ breeding  seasons.  This was not continued  as the resulting  cows proved  
very inconsistent  with some  excellent  ones but also some  very poor performers.  
Table 2 shows  the different  panel of bulls used at different  stages  and their 
average  EBI.
96
Table  2. Panel  of bulls used and average  EBI
Period Bulls Averaae  EBI
Pre 1995 BTR, CPR, COY, LDL 48
1996-1998 HSN, ENM, CAU 11
1999-2000 MTY, OMR, JOS 39
2001 - 2004 UYC, LYE, SBH, CBH, CWJ 109
2005  - 2007 RUU, LLO, KBA, WLI 127
Trends  in EBI and profit
Herd EBI has made steady  progress  since its’ introduction  in 2001, averaging  
an increase  of €12 per year. Farm profit  as decided  by common  profit/dairy  ha 
appears  to be directly  linked to EBI movement.  Both comparable  farm profit  
and fertility  were at their lowest levels around  2002, as was the EBI value.  
Then as EBI increased  so too did profit.
Table  3. Trend  in EBI ‘01’ to ‘07’
Year 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
EBI (€) -0.1 ? 14 26 41 54 71
Common  profit/ha 2529* 2175 2042 2506 2315 2422 ?
achieved  that year
Current  situation
The current  production  and relevant  key performance  indicators  for the farm 
can be divided  into four categories.
Milk Production
Milk production  for 2007 averaged  418kg  milk solids  per cow. This represents  
a decline  compared  with 2006 when milk solids  yield per cow averaged  433kg  
but was due in part to a deliberate  policy  to increase  herd size. In 2007 first 
lactation  heifers  accounted  for 29% of the herd. Back in 2002 when  fertility  was 
a big problem,  the herd averaged  375kg  milk solids  per cow, with similar  milk 
volume  yields.
97
Table  4. Herd performance ‘97’to‘07’
1997 2002 2006 2007
Milk per cow (I) 5155 4915 5492 4864
MS per cow (kg) 356 375 433 418
Protein  (%) 3.25 3.41 3.60 3.66
Fat (%) 3.46 3.99 4.06 4.22
Fertility
Improving  fertility  performance  in the herd means  that fewer  cows are empty  at 
the end of the breeding  season. The fertility  data presented  in table 5 below  
excludes  information  on surplus stock sold and relates to the cows that 
remained  in the herd for the full breeding  season  in 2007.
Table  5. Herd  fertility data
% calved  in 6wks 75
Calving  interval  (days) 366
Empty  rate (%) 11
Submission  rate (%) 87
Con to 1®* serve  (%) 59
Financial
Financial  data (Table 6) is taken from the 2006 profit monitor  (2007 profit  
monitor  not available  at time of printing). According  to Teagasc  reports,  the 
cost and profit results  per litre are in the top 1% for spring  milk producers  in 
2006.
Table 6. Financial  data (from  2006 profit monitor)
Common  profit  (c/I) 19.13
Common  costs (c/I) 10.07
Cash  flow ratio (%) 38
Net worth  change  (%) 5
Net profit/ha  (€) 1,951
Net profit/cow  (€) 827
98
EBI
The herd has an average  EBI of €71, which  places  it just outside  of the top 1 % 
of herds in the country  which average  €72 EBI. It does however  compare  
favourably  with the national  average  of €43 EBI. Table  7 shows  the latest EBI 
proofs  for the herd (ICBF,  October  2007).
Table  7. Most  recent  EBI proofs  for the Donohoe  herd
CO
T3
Group
dzM(kg)
F(kg)
P(kg)F (%)
P (%)Surv
(%)
Cl
(Days)O
CO
€
0)u.O)c
■>
(0
O0)
CQ£
15
0)Xm
LU
Overall
Cows6814
6.6
4.40.12
0.080.9
-2.928.7 41.6 10.5 -8.0 -1.70 71
1st
Lactation20-8
7.4
4.30.15
0.091.2
-3.630.9 51.5 14.111.9-3.10 82
2nd
Lactation13-65
2.4
1.80.10
0.081.5
-3.717.4 56.2 8.9 -5.1 -1.70 76
3rd
Lactation114
7.5
4.30.15
0.081.1
-3.330.0 47.2 12.310.1-1.80 78
4th
Lactation773
8.2
6.30.10
0.080.6
-3.035.4 38.7 10.710.5-2.20 72
5th 83
Lactation 17 7.8 0.09 0.1 31.0 16.4 6.2 -3.1 0.10 51
(+) 5.7 0.06 -1.4
07 Calves 2751
7.5 0.12 1.5 32.1 64.0 16.7 -4.3 -0.9010
85.4 0.08 -4.4
11
06 Calves 32 6.3 0.12 1.1 26.6 52.3 14.3 ^.8 -2.60 86
4 0.08 -3.8
Using  EBI in the future
To date, the use of the EBI system  has delivered  results  by turning  around  a 
serious  fertility problem. Farm profits have increased  in tandem  with EBI 
increases.  Herd value  has also increased  as high EBI stock  are in demand  and 
fetching  a premium  price. In an attempt  to build on these successes,  the 
continued  use of the EBI will play a major  part in farm decisions.  They can be 
viewed  from two perspectives.
99
Herd perspective
Much of the talk in dairying  circles  at the moment  is centring  on expansion.  
This expansion  when it happens,  combined  with the current shortage  of 
replacement  stock,  will keep  the price of dairy stock  at exceptionally  high levels  
for the next number  of years. High EBI stock  will command  a premium  in the 
marketplace  and here lies an opportunity  to take advantage  of the surplus  
replacements  produced  on the farm. Selling these replacements  would of 
course  prevent  on-farm  expansion  but would  deliver  similar  profit per hectare  
as miiking cows, without  the need to provide  the capital to pay for quota  
purchase,  parlour  improvements  and bulk tank which are now operating  close  
to capacity.  This replacement  enterprise  would  only be a short  term one as the 
current  heifer shortage  is rectified. When this happens  the farm can then 
increase  its own milking  cow numbers  (parlour  and bulk tank issue  will have to 
be addressed  further  down the line). By then there should be more clarity  
regarding  quota and land availability.  This will aid decisions  that need to be 
made  concerning  issues  such as size and location  of parlour.
It is anticipated  that the herd EBI milestone  of €100 will be reached  by 2011.  
The intermediate  herd EBI averages  are outlined  in the table 8 below. This will 
be achieved  if a replacement  rate of 20% is used and the average  EBI of the 
replacements  introduced  is €120. There  is a surplus  of replacements  available  
to replace  the culls exiting  the herd. It is intended  to seiect  the highest  EBI 
heifers  to replace  them. This means  that the EBI of the average  in-calf  heifer  
entering  the herd next spring is €104 and that of the average  2007 born 
replacement  is €124.
Table  8. Predicted  intermediate  herd EBI average
Year 2008 2009 2010 2011
Expected  herd EBI (€) 78 87 94 100
EBI data is also used to measure  actual performance  of the herd versus  
genetic  potential  of the herd. For example  the predicted  difference  for herd 
protein  percentage  is +0.08%.  According  to recent  analysis  when  this figure  is 
multiplied  by 4 and add 3.28 to the answer,  you arrive at the yearly protein  
percentage  figure  that the herd has the genetic  potential  to achieve,  provided  
management  is correct. In this case the genetic  potential  is 3.60%  and the 
actual  achieved  on my farm for 2007 was 3.66%. Another example  is using the 
predicted  difference  for milk volume  to estimate  response  rate to meal feeding.  
The lower  the milk PD the lower  the response  obtained  to concentrates  fed.
Bull perspective
To maintain  continued  progress  in herd EBI, it is vital that replacement  stock  
have an EBI value  that is well in excess  of the herd average.  To increase  herd 
EBI by €5 per annum,  replacement  calves  need to be €35 EBI higher  than the
100
herd, at a 20% replacement  rate. Achieving  this requires  using bulls that are 
€70 EBI higher  than the herd average.  The criteria  used for bull selection  on 
the farm are:
• High EBI: In order  to make progress  as outlined  above  the average  EBI 
of the panel  of bulls used on the farm needs  to be above  €140 EBI, and 
continuing  to rise on a yearly  basis. Regardless  of the current  EBI of a 
herd, why use bulls of €80 EBI when bulls of €120 or higher  are readily  
available?  Use the best.
• High Fertility  sub index: In seasonal  milk production  the proportion  of 
cows that go back in calf, and the speed they are got back in calf is 
critical to the profitability  and sustainability  of a herd. The economic  
value put on production  is calculated  assuming  the cow does a 305-day  
lactation.  If fertility  is not right, neither  is production.  To this end, fertility 
is the single most important  selection  trait. At some stage economic  
gain from fertility  will level off, when a 365 day calving  interval,  90% 6 
week  calving  rate and a 5% empty  rate are all achieved.  As progress  is 
still required  in these areas, a fertility sub index averaging  €60 EBI 
across  the bull panel  will be required.
• Milk/Fertility  balance:  Output  is important  in any business.  If you don’t 
bring money  in, you won ’t hold on to any of it. As outlined  above,  fertility 
is a key driver  of production,  but by selecting  bulls with good milk sub 
index as well as good fertility  sub index  there is opportunity  to increase  
milk solid output at no extra cost to the system.  A balance that  Is approx  
50/50 milk to fertility is preferred,  i.e. bulls with a milk sub index  
averaging  €60.
• Other  traits: A number  or other  traits are examined  before  a bull is finally  
selected.  At least two bulls are selected  with good calving  sub index  for 
use on heifers,  and while it would be nice to have a good calving  sub 
index on all bulls, it is not essential.  It is worth noting  that there are no 
hard calving  bulls at the top of the ICBF active bull list, where  all bull 
selection  takes place. Reliability  is not an issue as a panel of bulls are 
used. Neither  is cost, if a bull is going to deliver  profit to the farm, the 
extra semen  cost will be returned  many times over as genetic  gain is 
cumulative.
Challenges
Very few things  in this world are perfect  from day one, and the EBI index is no 
different.  It is necessary  that it evolve  as farmers ’ requirements  change,  and as 
more information  becomes  available  from research.  In fact the index should  
never  be fully complete,  it must always  be ready  to react to continual  changes.  
The main challenges  facing  the industry  and the index  are:
101
Supply  of bulls
The biggest  challenge  is to keep  finding  a continuing  supply  of new and quality  
bulls. 2-3 new bulls, with high EBI, suitable  to spring calving  systems  are 
required  every  year. The only way to do this is through  a clearly  defined  and 
focused  young  test bull programme,  such as G€N€ IR€LAND,  where  the best 
are bred to the best. Farmers  need to use this test semen  to create  reliability,  
but they need to be incentivised  properly  to do this. Getting  a few heifers  milk 
recorded  free, or coaxing  farmers  to use test bulls for the good of the industry  
won’t suffice.  The incentive  needs  to come  from the young  bulls themselves.  If 
the potential  EBI of these  young  bulls are high enough  to be right up at the top 
of the EBI list, farmers  will want to use them, without  needing  to be paid to do 
so. Add into the mix the requirement  for different  bloodlines  and the challenge  
escalates. Thankfully  pedigree  status as a requirement  for bull mother  
selection  is not to be continued.  The best must be bred from the best, and if 
the best are non-pedigree  they should  be used. The purchase  of some young  
bulls each year  from outside  Ireland  should  also be considered  to overcome  the 
inbreeding  challenge,  provided  of course  they have the potential  to deliver  in an 
Irish system. The challenge  is, can the system  produce  a steady  supply  of 
bulls that are €70 above  the herd EBI. The average  EBI for the 2008 test bulls 
in G€N€  IR€LAND  is €116 and this falls well short of the requirement  of €140!
Weightings  of sub index
All predicted  economic  gain by the EBI is made under  the assumption  that all 
animals  reach a 305 day lactation.  In spring-calving  herds, lactation  length  is 
much more likely to be below  260 days. This fact alone raises  the question  ‘is 
too much  weighting  put on production  and not enough  on fertility ’? Put another  
way, if days in milk increased  through  improved  fertility  then production  would  
also increase,  due to improvements  in fertility and not because  of milk 
production  potential.  Fertility  in young  bulls shows  high levels  of unreliability.  
Thus as things  stand, if fertility  weighting  was increased,  it would  only lead to 
greater  fluctuations  in individual  bull EBI as reliability  increased.  Therefore  the 
first challenge  is to provide  higher  fertility  reliability  at a younger  age, and then 
consider increasing  the weighting  of the fertility sub index.
Live weight
The introduction  of a live weight score to the EBI index has thankfully  
happened.  Research  shows  that a smaller cow will eat less. It is unfair  to rate 
two cows equally  who produce  the same  milk solids  but who vary in live weight.  
The smaller  cow that eats less will have a lower cost of production  and 
consequently  leave more profit. This live weight score would then be a 
negative  one.
Beef  accuracy
Question  marks  are immediately  raised  when one looks at the beef value on 
bull figures. Tall leggy bulls have positive  values  and at the other extreme  
British  Friesian  bulls have negative  values. Yet when  these  calves  are sold in a 
mart the British  Friesian  calf will be worth more money  than the leggy Flolstein.
102
This index  figure  is based  on carcass  weight at slaughter,  but should  this not be 
included  in an index  for the beef farmer  who rears the calves  and not the dairy  
farmer  who sells the calves?  Over  the last 12 months,  Friesian  bull calves  sold 
in the mart at 4-5 weeks  of age only made the value of the milk they drank.  
Therefore  it stands  to reason  that all dairy bull calves  are valueless  at birth!
Leadership  in breeding  strategy
There  is little or no industry  leadership,  particularly  where  alternative  breeding  
strategies  is concerned,  and consequently  much confusion  amongst  farmers.  
There  is some very solid and positive  information  coming  from the Jersey  trial 
in Moorpark  as well as from farmers  who have already  committed  themselves  
to the Jersey  cross  route. Yet this is not reflected  in the EBI rankings.  If Jersey  
crossbreeding  is the most profitable  route forward  we not only need the 
researchers  telling us that, but we also need the EBI index showing  us the 
same. The challenge  is not just to give farmers  information,  but to give 
direction  in alternative  breeding  strategies.
Summary
If there is just one message  that readers  should  take from this paper,  it is; EBI 
WORKS.  In the scenario  described  above,  EBI has correcting  a serious  fertiiity  
problem;  Increasing  profit  and  Increasing  stock  value. Building  on past success  
and maintaining  the momentum  is now a real challenge.  It is now up to the 
cattle breeding  industry  to provide  leadership  in developing  the EBI index, and 
finding  high EBI bulls, to ensure  that farmers  have the best possible  genetics  
available  to increase  profitability.
103
Anthelmintic  resistance  - a potential  crisis for sheep  
producers?
Barbara  Good,
Teagasc  Animal  Production  Research  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway
Introduction
Parasitic gastroenteritis,  caused by roundworms  (nematodes),  is well 
recognized  as a major production-limiting  disease,  particularly  in lambs.  
Effective  parasite  control  has become  heavily  dependent  on anthelmintics.  The 
development  of anthelmintic  resistance  by roundworms  poses  a potential  crisis  
for sheep producers  and measures  to avert and delay this are essential.  
Results  will be presented  from recent  studies  examining  anthelmintic  resistance  
of Irish lowland  flocks  and recommendations  to combat  the challenges  facing  
producers  in controlling  parasites  will be outlined.
Gastrointestinal  parasites
The main roundworms  that affect lambs  are Nematodirus  battus  in the spring,  
while later on in the season,  a number  of other roundworms  feature,  among  
which Teladorsagla  (formerly  known as Ostertagia)  and Trichostrongylus  
species  (black  scour  worm)  are the most important.  In general,  the life cycle of 
all these  gastrointestinal  parasites  (with the exception  of Nematodirus  battus)  is 
similar  (Figure  1). Adult worms  in the sheep's  gastrointestinal  (Gl) tract mate 
and the females  lay eggs, which pass out in the sheep ’s faeces. The egg 
develops  in the faeces  and hatches  to release  a feeding  larva (LI stage). This 
LI subsequently  undergoes  further  development  to the L2 stage and then to 
the non-feeding  infective  stage (L3), which subsequently  migrates  on herbage  
awaiting  ingestion  by a suitable  host. Once ingested,  the L3s will complete  
their development  to adults  (at their preferred  sites along  the Gl tract)  within  15 
to 21 days, for most common  roundworm  species. The life cycle of 
Nematodirus battus  is slightly  different  in that development  to L3 occurs  entirely  
within  the egg and hatching  occurs  in response  to a cold stimulus  the following  
spring. Thus N. battus  is a parasite  that can largely  be avoided  if grazing  lambs  
on the same  pasture  each year is avoided.
Anthelmintics
While there are many anthelmintic  products  on the market  that are highly  
effective  against  a broad  spectrum  of roundworm  species,  they can be grouped  
based on their mode of action into three classes of compound. All 
anthelmintics  within a particular  class work the same way killing the 
roundworms  by starving  or through  some  method  that results  in worm  paralysis.  
The white  drenches  (Group  I - benzimidazoles  and probenzimidazoles  such as
104
albendazole,  fenbendazole,  oxfendazole,  mebendazole)  affect the energy  
metabolism  of the parasite,  which eventually  leads to starvation  of the worm.  
Levamisole  (Group  II) works  by interfering  with the nervous  system  (affect  the 
nicotinic  acetycholine  receptors)  of the worm causing  muscular  spasm and 
rapid expulsion,  while the macrocyclic  lactones  (Group  III such as abamectin,  
doramectin,  ivermectin,  moxidectin,)  interfere with the worm's nerve  
transmission  by permanently  opening  ligand-gated  chloride  channels  in the 
membrane  of worm ’s nerve cells. This leads to inhibition  of nerve cells 
responsible  for control  of muscles  e g. in the pharynx,  body muscle  or uterus  of 
the worm  causing  flaccid  paralysis.
Figure 1. Diagram  depicting  the general  life cycle of ovine parasitic  
roundworms
Ingested  L3 
develops  to adult Eggs In faeces
L3 migrates  
on herbage LI in faeces
i# ^ L2 in faeces
Anthelmintic resistance
There  is no doubt  that the advent  of broad-spectrum  drugs  has played  a crucial  
role in diminishing  the effects of parasitism  in grazing  ruminants,  and has 
supported  an increase  in productivity.  However  the benefit  of this approach  is 
compromised  by the parasites  developing  resistance  to these anthelmintics.  
Wormer  resistance  is heritable  and worms  with the genes  for resistance  have  
the ability to survive exposure  to the standard  therapeutic  dose of the 
anthelmintic  and thus survive and produce  offspring. So over time, with 
increased  anthelmintic  use the development  of anthelmintic  resistance  is 
inevitable  as resistant  worms  become  more prevalent  in the worm population.  
Clinical  evidence  (persistent  diarrhoea,  lack of thrive)  for failed treatment  will 
then become  apparent.  Resistance  can occur  within  anthelmintic  classes  (side
105
resistance)  and to more than one class of anthelmintic  (multiple  anthelmintic  
resistance).
Methods  to detect  anthelmintic  resistance
The most widespread  methods  used to detect  anthelmintic  resistance  are the 
faecal  egg count reduction  test, egg hatch assay  and larval development  test. 
The faecal  egg count reduction  test involves  calculating  the mean reduction  in 
faecal  egg count  at a defined  interval  post treatment  (which  is dependent  on the 
anthelmintic  being tested)  for a subgroup  of the flock (minimum  of 12 to 15 
sheep). While this is suitable  for testing  all anthelmintic  groups  (Coles  et a!., 
2006)  it is only reliable  if more than 25% of the worms  are resistant  (Martin  et 
at., 1989). The egg hatch and larval development  assays  involves  examining  
the development  of eggs and larvae,  respectively  (from eggs obtained  from a 
pooled fresh faecal samples  from a sub group of the flock) in various  
concentrations  of the anthelmintic  (Coles  et at., 1992; Coles  et a!., 2006). The 
larval development test  can be used to detect  resistance  to both benzimidazole  
and levamisole.
Evidence  for anthelmintic  resistance
The evidence  for nematode  resistance  to benzimidazoles  worldwide  is 
compelling.  As yet there is no evidence  for anthelmintic  resistance  in 
Nematodirus  battus. The first evidence  for resistance  to benzimidazole  in 
nematode  populations  of Irish flocks, was reported  by O’Brien (1992), and 
resistance  to levamisole  by Good et at., 2003. Results  from recent  studies  in 
Irish flocks  reveal  an alarming  incidence  of anthelmintic  resistance  to two of the 
three  anthelmintic  classes  currently  available  on the market  (Good  et at., 2003;  
Good et at., 2006; Patten  et at., 2007). Using  the faecal egg count reduction  
tests on 16 farms  involved  in collaborative  projects  with Teagasc,  resistance  to 
benzimidazole  was evident  in 94% and to levamisole  in 38% of flocks  (Figures  
2 and 3). Similar results  where  also observed  in a nationwide  survey  of 64 Irish 
farms. These  farms were representative  of lowland  producers  with a long 
established  enterprise  and with a ewe flock size greater  than 100. Using the 
larval development  test, 95% and 48% of flocks showed  some degree  of 
resistance  to the benzimidazoles  and levamisole  drugs respectively  (Patten  et 
at., 2007) (Figures  4 and 5). Teladorsagia,  Trichostrongylus  and Cooperia  
were the main species  involved.
106
Figure  2. Results  of faecal  egg count  reduction  test on 16 lowland  flocks  
following  benzimidazole  treatment  (source:  Good  ef a/., 2003; Good  et a!., 
2006)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0IL
<50 51-75  75-90  91-95
% Reduction  in FEC95-100
Figure  3. Results  of faecal  egg count  reduction  test on 16 lowland  flocks  
following  levamisole  treatment  (source:  Good et a!., 2003; Good et at., 
2006)
107
Figure  4. Results  of larval development  test for benzimidazole  of 64 
lowland  flocks  (source:  Patten  et a!., 2007)
70
60 ■
50
I 40
£ 30 
O
20
10
X
0 1-5 6-20 >20
No. of L3 (%) that  developed  in the discriminating  dose  of 
bemzimidazole
Figure  5. Results  larval development  test for levamisole  on 63 lowland  
flocks  (source:  Patten  et a/., 2007)
No. of L3 (%) that developed  in the discriminating  dose  
of levamisole
The evidence  above  clearly  shows  that Irish flock owners  need to realise  that 
the development  of anthelmintic  resistance  is in progress  on many  farms. The 
development  of anthelmintic  resistance  and its implication  for helminth  control  
practice  is a serious  issue and will impact on animal performance.  While  
research  efforts  to find new parasiticides  are ongoing,  it is a sombre  fact that no 
new anthelmintic  class for ruminants  has appeared  on the market  since 1981 
(McKellar  and Jackson,  2004). Currently,  there is excitement  over a recent  
report on the discovery  of a new class of anthelmintics,  namely  the amino-  
acetonitril  derivatives  (AADs),  which  have shown  considerable  promise  in being  
efficacious  against  a number  of livestock  roundworms  including  T. circumcincta  
and T. colubriformis  of sheep  that were resistant  to other anthelmintic  classes  
(Kaminsky  et al., 2008). As observed  in all other classes  of anthelmintics,  
resistance  to AADs is possible  (Kaminsky  et al., 2008). No indication  was
108
given when this ‘new" class of drug is likely to reach the market  but further 
development  of the drug will be necessary  (Prichard  and Geary,  2008). While 
this is an encouraging  development,  it will be some time before  such a 'new*  
product  will appear  on the market  to offset  the reduction  in efficacy  of existing  
products  due to wormer  resistance.  Even if this product  became  available 
tomorrow,  a serious  effort is needed  to preserve  and prolong  the useful  life of 
existing  drugs.
Measures  to delay  anthelmintic  resistance
The development  of anthelmintic  resistance  poses  a potential  crisis for sheep  
producers  and measures  to avert/delay  this is essential.  In light of this, the 
fundamental  question  of how anthelmintic  resistance  can be delayed  has been  
the subject  of much discussion.  Against  a background  of an increasing  
prevalence  of anthelmintic  resistance  in sheep  nematodes  on farms in the UK, 
parasite control measures  have been reappraised  in order to develop  
recommendations  to slow the development  of wormer  resistance  (Stubbings,  
2003; Abbot et al., 2004). The essential  actions required  to slow the 
progression  of anthelmintic resistance  are:
• the effective  (proper)  administration  of anthelmintics
• only  use anthelmintics  when  necessary
• use the most appropriate  anthelmintic
• reduce  dependence  on anthelmintics
• avoid  the introduction  of resistance  onto a farm by treating  purchased  
stock  on arrival followed  by a quarantine  period
• test for anthelmintic resistance  (regularly)
• maintain  a susceptible  population  of worms.
As Irish producers  are facing the same challenges  the recommendations 
outlined  above are relevant  here also. These recommendations  alongside  
results  from a questionnaire  on parasite  control  practices  on Irish farms have 
been discussed  in detail previously  (Good,  2005). Essentially,  if the underlying  
principles  of delaying  resistance  namely  (a) best anthelmintic  practice  and (b) 
strategies  that reduce  the selection  pressure  for resistance  are adhered  to, the 
emergence  of anthelmintic  resistance  will be minimised.
The future  for anthelmintics
Fundamental  to sustainable  parasite  control  is a reduction  in the reliance  on 
anthelmintics  with more effort  directed  in managing  parasites  than just the 'treat  
and forget'  approach  of the past. The future  for anthelmintics  in the control  of 
gastrointestinal  infections  lies in our increased  understanding  of how 
anthelmintic  resistance  develops  and the adoption  of best anthelmintic
109
practices. This will help to preserve  the effectiveness  of anthelmintics  
controlling  the impact  of parasites  on animal  performance.in
References
Abbot,  K.A., Taylor,  M. and Stubbings,  L.A. (2004). Sustainable  worm control  
strategies  for sheep,  A technical  manual  for veterinary  surgeons  and advisors.  
SCOPS  43 pages.
Coles,  G.C., Bauer,  C., Borgsteede,  F.H.M.,  Geerts,  S., Kiel, T.R., Taylor,  M.A. 
and Waller,  P.J. (1992). World  Association  of Veterinary  Parasitology  methods  
for the detection  of anthelmintic  resistance  in nematodes  of veterinary  
importance.  Veterinary  Parasitology,  44: 35-44.
Coles, G.C., Jackson,  F., Pomroy, W.E., Prichard,  R.K., von Samson-  
Himmelstejerna,  G., Silvestre,  A., Taylor,  M.A. and Vercruysse,  J. (2006). The 
detection  of anthelmintic  resistance  in nematodes  of veterinary  importance.  
Veterinary  Parasitology,  167-185.
Good,  B. (2005). Anthelmintics  - what are you spending  your money  on? Irish 
Grassland  Association  Journal,  39:1  -8.
Good, B., Hanrahan,  J.P. and Kinsella,  A. (2003). Anthelmintic  resistance  in 
sheep  roundworms  - preliminary  observations.  Proceedings  of the Agricultural  
Research  Forum,  Tullamore,  page  78.
Good, B, Hanrahan,  JP, Kelly,  W., Glynn,  A. and Nally, J. (2006). Evidence  for 
anthelmintic resistance  in ewe flocks from Kilkenny,  Teagasc  Research  Report,  
Beef  and Sheep  Production.
Kaminsky,  R., Ducray, P., Jung, M., Clover, R., Ruffner, L, Bouvier,  J., 
Schorderet  Weber,  S., Wenger,  A., Wieland-Berghause,  S., Goebel,T.,  Gauvry,  
N., Pautrat,  F., Skripsky,T.,  Froelich,  O., Komoin-Oka,  C., Westiund,  B., Sluder,  
A., and Maser,  P. (2008). A new class of anthelmintics  effective  against  drug 
resistant  nematodes.  Nature,  452: 176-180.
Martin,  P.J., Anderson,  N and Jarrett,  R.G. (1989). Detecting  benzimidazole  
resistance  with faecal  egg count  reduction  tests and in vitro assays. Australian  
Veterinary  Journal,  66: 236-240.
McKellar,  Q.A. and Jackson,  F. (2004). Veterinary  anthelmintics,  old and new. 
Trends  in Parasitology,  20: 456-461.
O Brien, D. (1992). Anthelmintic  resistance  in sheep. Irish Veterinary  News,  
25-26.
Patten,  T., Good, B., Hanrahan,  J.P. and de Waal, D.T. (2005). A survey  of 
helminth  control  practices  on lowland  sheep  farms in Ireland. Proceedings  of 
the Agricultural  Research  Forum,  Tullamore,  58.
Patten  T., Good, B., Hanrahan,  J.P., and de Waal, D.T. (2007). A survey  of 
anthelmintic  resistance  on lowland  sheep  farms in Ireland. Proceedings  of the 
Agricultural  Research  Forum,  Tullamore  128.
no
Prichard,  R.K. and Geary,  T.G. (2008). Fresh hope to can the worms. Nature,  
452: 157-158.
Stubbings,  L.A. (2003). Internal  parasite  control  in sheep. Proceedings  of a 
workshop  to decide  short term control  strategies  to slow the development  of 
anthelmintic  resistance  in Internal  parasites  of sheep  in the United  Kingdom.  
11-12 “' March,  Kensington,  London  26 pages.
Ill
The Irish sheep sector: future prospects  in a 
globalising  world
Kevin  Hanrahan
Teagasc,  Rural  Economy  Research  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway
Introduction
The Luxembourg  Agreement  of June 2003 introduced  decoupled  direct  
payments  into the European  Union (EU) Common  Agricultural  Policy (CAP).  
From 2005 onwards  all incomes  from Irish sheep  farms have been determined  
by returns  from the market  place. Entitlements  established  over the period  
2000-2002  reflect  a decoupled  single  farm payment.  The CAP is scheduled  for 
another  “mid term review ” in 2008 - the “CAP Health Check ”. The widely  
leaked  text of the Commission's  proposals  (Agra-Europe  2008)  indicates  that in 
contrast with  the previous  “revievif ” which  introduced  decoupling  to the CAP, the 
Health check will be much more modest  in ambition  (with the exception  of 
reforms  to the milk quota). The possibility  of an agreement  in the agriculture  
negotiations  that form part of the World Trade Organization ’s (WTO) Doha  
Development  Round  is likely  to be of more importance  in the medium  term.
In this paper Baseline  projections  from the FAPRI-lreland  model on the 
evolution  of the Irish sheep  sector  in terms  of animal  numbers,  volume  of lamb 
produced,  prices and value of sector  output, are presented  together  with an 
analysis  of the impact  of a possible  WTO agreement.  The impact  on the Irish 
sheep sector of developments  on international  agricultural  markets,  and of 
other  policy  and market  changes  related  to climate  change  is also discussed.
Luxembourg  Agreement  revisited
Under  the terms of the Luxembourg  Agreement  (EC, 2003), Ireland  chose  to 
fully decouple  direct payments  from production  from 2005 onwards. The 
decoupling  of direct payments  at the time was expected  to lead to a dramatic  
change  in Irish and EU livestock  production.  Binfieid  et al., (2003)  projected  
that as the returns from cattle and sheep production  declined  with the 
decoupling  of the direct payments,  Irish suckler  cow and ewe numbers  would,  
by the end of 2006 decline to less than 1 million and 3.2 million head 
respectively.
For a number  of reasons  (economic  and non-economic)  the decline  in suckler  
cow numbers  has not transpired.  December  2006 suckler  cow numbers  were 
still over 1.1 million. Breen et al., (2007) suggest  some reasons  why the 
expected  decline in suckler cows has not occurred. They suggest  that 
satisfaction  of the cross-compliance  criteria  associated  with receipt  of the single  
farm payment  necessarily  involves  incurring  some direct costs, and that since  
over-head  costs  have to be met regardless  of production  decisions,  that for the
112
majority  of cattle  farmers  the decision  to continue  to farm post-decoupling  may 
be economically  rational.
In contrast  to the seeming  absence  of a supply  response  to decoupling  in the 
beef sector, the decoupling  of the ewe premium  has coincided  with a large  
decline  in the Irish ewe flock. Since  the end of 2003 Irish ewe numbers  have  
declined  by more than 20%. All of the decline  in the Irish ewe flock over this 
period  should  not be attributed  to the decoupling  of the ewe premium  since  the 
flock has been in decline  since 1992 (Figure  1). However,  in all probability  the 
decline  in ewe numbers  since 2003 has at least in part been due to the 
decoupling  of the ewe premium,  which reduced  the returns  to time spent  
farming  sheep, as off-farm  labour  returns  increased.  The divergence  in the 
supply  response  on cattle  and sheep  farms  has not yet been  fully explained  but 
may be due to the different  demographic  characteristics  of sheep and cattle  
farmers  and the higher  investment  costs of running  a sheep enterprise  on a 
part-time  basis.
Figure  1. December  ewe numbers
Source:  CSO December  2006 Livestock  Survey,  April 2007 and CSO (2008)  
EIRESTAT  database.
In comparative  terms, over the period 1999-2005  the gross margins  of sheep  
enterprises  from the National  Farm Survey  (NFS)  have been higher  than those  
earned  from cattle enterprises.  In Table 1 the average  gross margins  per 
hectare  of the top 25% of farms (when  ranked  by margin  per hectare)  in mid­
season  lamb production  are compared  with average  gross margin  of the top 
25% of different  cattle  enterprise  margins.  As is clear  from Table  1 the margins  
achieved  from better  sheep  enterprises  consistently  exceed  those  achieved  by 
the better  cattle  enterprises.
113
Table.1 Comparative  gross  margins  in cattle  and sheep  enterprises
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Mid Season  Lamb 625 716 1544 1180 1094 1211 1054
Single  Suckling  - Calves  to 
Weanlings375 565 929 853 866 835 706
Single  Suckling  - Calves  to 374 484 730 844 694 763 675
Single  Suckling  - Calves  to 399 625 816 935 838 1030 974
Weanling  and/or  Stores  to 487 513 945 937 725 935 1060
Source:  NFS as published  in Teagasc Management  Data for Farm  Planning,  various issues  
Note:  Average  margins  are not weighted  reported  are not weighted  by population  weights  and 
consequently  will differ  slightly  from margins  reported  by NFS enterprise  anaiysis.
The real value of the margins  earned  from sheep  enterprises  in the National  
Farm Survey  sample  are graphed  in Figure  2, where  the nominal  values  of the 
gross  margin  for the mid-season  lamb enterprises  is deflated  by a GDP deflator  
with the year 2000 as its base year. Figure  2 clearly  shows  that margins  per 
hectare,  when expressed  in real terms, have increased  over the period  1998 to 
2005. Analysis  of NFS enterprise  margins  data for 2005 and 2006 also 
indicates  that on a hectare  basis, margins  on mid-season  lamb enterprises  are 
lower  than in 2005  but still higher  in real terms  than margins  achieved  in or prior 
to 2001 (NFS  2006, NFS 2007).
Figure  2. Real gross  margins  per hectare  - mid-season  lamb  (soil one)
1998  1999  2000 2001
Source:  Own  calculations2002  2003 2004  2005
114
Policy  and market  prospects  for agriculture
Climate  change  and bio-fuels
Climate  change  can be expected  to affect  agricultural  markets  including  those  
for sheep  and sheep  meat in a number  of direct  and indirect  ways. Some  of the 
impacts  of climate  change  on production  in different  parts of the world  will have  
direct consequences  for sheep  markets;  other impacts  will be indirect  and will 
be the result  of policy  and other responses  to the climate  change  problem.  In 
the medium  term indirect  impacts  may be more important  than the direct  ones.
The recent  droughts  in the southern  hemisphere  may or may not be caused  by 
global warming,  but if their increased  frequency  is a result of global climate  
change  then the role of countries  such as Australia  as a major producer  of 
temperate  agricultural  commodities  will be negatively  affected. The recent  
droughts  have positively  affected  prices for dairy commodities  and grains in 
Australia  (and internationally).  In the short  term, the same  weather  shocks  had 
the opposite  impact  on sheep and cattle prices; as herds and flocks were  
liquidated  during  the drought  as prices  fell (Drum et al., 2007; Fetcher  et al., 
2008). Over the medium  term (assuming  average  climactic  conditions)  
Australian  livestock  prices are expected  to recover  as breeding  inventories  of 
cattle  and sheep  are rebuilt. If climate  change  were to cause  a permanent  and 
negative  shift in agronomic  conditions  in countries  such as Australia  then 
international  lamb prices together  with prices for many other temperate  
agricultural  commodities  would  be expected  to increase.
Such permanent  climate  driven  developments  are still uncertain  and may (or 
may-not)  arise in the future. However,  in contrast  to such direct impacts,  the 
indirect  impacts  of climate  change  are already  being felt. In response  to the 
problem  of climate  change,  policies  are being considered  and introduced  that 
have already  or will in the future  affect  Irish sheep  producers.
Internationally  the growing  of crops to produce  bio-fuel  is increasing,  and 
becoming  more and more controversial.  Even if the bulk of scientific  opinion  
shifts to the no-side  in the debate on the environmental  benefits  of first 
generation  bio-fuels,  their production  is likely to continue  into the near to 
medium  future.
The bio-fuel  demand  for crops (grains  and oilseeds)  has contributed  in recent  
years  to the growth  in international  prices  for these  commodities,  though  much  
of the observed  growth  is also due to other supply  and demand  factors. Other  
things  being  equal the emergence  of this industry  and its support  by taxpayers  
and consumers  through  either  direct subsidies  as in the US or via mandatory  
inclusion  rates in petrol and diesel as in some EU countries,  increases  the 
prices  of most  animal  feed ingredients.  The negative  impact  can, depending  on 
location,  be offset  by increased  availability  and lower  prices  for distillers ’ grains  
and oilseed  meals. On balance,  however,  it is probable  that bio-fuels  by 
increasing  feed costs, improve  the competitiveness  of Irish sheep  production 
versus  continental  EU competitors  who have  a greater reliance  on concentrates 
while also increasing  the price competitiveness  of lamb versus  other meats
115
(beef, pork, and poultry  meat)  whose  production  systems  are more reliant  on 
grain and oilseed  based  feeds  than lamb production.
Bio-fuels  represent  one of the policy  responses  to climate  change  that has the 
potential  to affect  agriculture  and the sheep  sector  in particular.  However  other  
specific  climate  change  policies  could have more of an impact. Agriculture  in 
Ireland  contributes  over a quarter of Ireland's  green  house  gas emissions,  and 
within agriculture,  ruminant  animals  are the most important  source  of green  
house  gases. It is conceivable  that polices  could  at some  time in the future  be 
introduced  that would seek to reduce  Irish agriculture ’s contribution  to green  
house  gas emissions.  Such policies  range  from carbon  taxes  to cap and trade  
schemes.  Within  the context  of Irish agriculture ’s green  house  gas emissions,  
the sheep  sector  is a relatively  small contributor  when compared  with the cattle  
and dairy sectors. However,  polices introduced  in Ireland that attempt  to 
reduce  emissions  from agriculture  would  likely to have some negative  affect  on 
Irish sheep production.  If similar  policies  were introduced  at an EU or at a 
wider international  level the negative  impact  on the competitiveness  of Irish 
agriculture  and Irish sheep  production  would  be ameliorated.
CAP health  check
The upcoming  CAP Health Check proposal  from the European  Commission  
has been widely  leaked  (see Agra-Europe  for a summary).  Given  that Ireland  
has fully decoupled  all direct  payments  for the sheep  sector,  the most important  
proposals  (other than  those  relating  to reform  of the milk quota  system)  are for 
increased  rates of modulation  of single  farm payments  and the possibility  of 
changing  from the historic  model  applied  in Ireland  towards  a regional  flat area 
payment  model  similar  to that used in Germany.
For farmers  with single farm payment  entitlements  greater  than the €5,000  
franchise,  the modulation  proposal  will entail a loss of farm income. On 
average,  farmers  (both full and part-time)  whose  farm business  is classified  by 
the NFS as "mainly  Sheep ” have SFP entitlements  in excess  of the €5,000  
franchise  and will lose out if the increased  rates of modulation  are agreed.
The Commission ’s proposals  on moving  towards  a flat area payment  model  is 
that countries  would  be allowed  to do this rather  than be required  to do it. This 
is an important  point since it allows member  states such as Ireland who 
currently  apply the historical  model to maintain  the status quo. On farms  
classified  as “Mainly  Sheep ” by the NFS, single  farm payment  entitlement  per 
hectare  are lower than on any other farm type, and sheep farmers  would  
probably  (on average),  benefit  from a change  to a flat area payment  system.  
Shresthra  et al., (2007)  analysed  the Implications  of a move to a flat area 
payment  system  and concluded  that sheep  farms would  benefit,  but that since  
such a change affects farm income as opposed  to enterprise  margins,  
production  decisions  would  not be significantly  affected.
Given the potentially  large re-dlstributive  impact of a move to a flat area 
payment  system,  its introduction  in Ireland  is unlikely  in the near term. In the 
medium  to longer  term however,  as the political  justification  for basing  single
116
farm payments  on production  decisions  taken  in the period  2000  to 2001 wanes  
and the so-called  public good justification  for payments  to farmers  gain 
credence  the pressure  for a flat area payment  system  in Ireland  and other  
countries  will increase.
WTO
The ongoing  WTO negotiations  in Geneva  at the time of writing (mid-April  
2008) are still unresolved.  A further  revision  of the agriculture  negotiations ’ 
Chairman  Ambassador  Crawford  Falconer ’s February  2008 modalities  paper  
(WTO, 2008) is expected  by the end of April. A mid-May  WTO Ministerial  
meeting,  at which political  decisions  concerning  the talks would be taken, is 
being mooted  but is as yet not confirmed  (ICSTD,  2008).
Arguably  the biggest  stumbling  block to an agreement  on the agricultural  
modalities  are problems  in agreeing  an equivalent  paper  for reforms  to the rules 
governing  trade in non-agricultural  goods, or NAMA (non-agricultural  market  
access)  in WTO jargon. Currently  large and competitive  exporters  such as 
Brazil and India are unhappy  with the “rate of exchange ” between  the 
agricultural  market access offered in the agricultural  negotiations  and the 
increased  access  to their markets  for non-agricultural  goods demanded  by 
developed  counties  such as the EU and the United  States. Countries  such as 
the EU and the US are similarly  “unhappy ” that the rate of exchange  in the 
opposite  direction  is too high, i.e. too much agricultural  market  access  is being  
demanded  for too little in terms  of increased  market  access  for non-agricultural  
goods.
It is difficult  at this point in time to predict  whether  or not a political  agreement 
will be reached  before  the electoral  timetable  in the United  States effectively 
rules out the possibility  of an agreement  in 2008. If no agreement  is reached  
this year, the process  will effectively  be put on hold. It is almost certain,  
however,  that when  negotiations  resume  they will begin  from where  they left off 
in 2008,  which will  be close  to where the  current  draft modalities  paper  lies.
The current  draft modalities  paper proposes  liberalising  reforms  across  the 3 
key areas of negotiations:  market access, export competition  and trade  
distorting  domestic  support  to agriculture.  These  are the so-called  three  pillars  
of the negotiations.  The current  modalities  text (since it is still the subject  of 
negotiations)  contains  a number  of areas in which  what will or might  finally  be 
agreed  is uncertain.  However  for a number  of the key trade policy  instruments,  
ranges  for the tariff cuts that might be agreed,  the schedule  for the elimination 
of export  refunds  and cuts in government  support  for agriculture  are specified  in 
the text. Key areas of continuing  disagreement  within the agriculture  
negotiations  involve  issues  relating  to the designation  of product  as sensitive,  
special  and differential  treatment  for less developed  economies,  and the impact  
of the trade  reforms  on tropical  commodities.
The current  draft modalities  paper  envisages  cuts of between  66 and 73% in 
the tariffs  that protect  EU agricultural  commodity  markets,  that export  subsidies  
be eliminated  by the end of 2013 (with a cut of 50% in 2010),  and that overall
117
trade distorting  domestic  support  be reduced  by 70% from bound  levels. The 
current draft also  allows  WTO  members  to designate  between  4 and 6% of tariff 
lines as “sensitive  products ”. What  such a designation  means  is that the tariff 
cut required  could be reduced  by up to only 1/3 of what it would  otherwise  be. 
Such designation  would however  come with the requirement  to expand  tariff 
rate quota (TRQ)  for the products  designated  as sensitive  by an amount  equal  
to between  4 and 6% of total domestic use of the product  concerned.
The technical  details  of the sensitive  product  designation  in particular  are still a 
matter  for negotiation  and controversy  (ICSTD,  2008), and could potentially  
limit the extent to which a WTO agreement  would negatively  affect EU 
agricultural  commodity  markets. However  the number  of lines that can be 
designated  as sensitive  is limited  to between  4 to 6% of the more than 2000  
tariff lines for agricultural  and food products. For some products  the TRQ 
expansion  that would result from sensitive  product  designation  could be “as 
bad” in terms of the increased  market  access  afforded  as the non-sensitive  
product  designation.
FAPRI-lreland  baseline  and WTO  scenario  anaiysis
FAPRI-lreland  is currently  undertaking  analysis  of the impact of possible  
outcomes  of the WTO Doha Round of negotiations.  Previously  published  
studies  (Binfieid  et al., 2006)  examined  the impact  of the current  EU within  the 
WTO  negotiations  (European  Commission,  2005).
The FAPRI-lreland  model  has over the  last 10 years been used to analyse  the 
impact  of successive  CAP reform proposals  and agreements,  and has also 
been used to analyse  the impact  of WTO reform. In conducting  this type of 
analysis  it is necessary  to construct  a counter-factual  simulation  in which the 
policy change  being considered  does not take place. In the methodology  
employed  by FAPRI-lreland,  this simulation  of a future where current  policy  
remains  unchanged  into the future (the Baseline),  effectively  acts as the 
experiment  control. The impact  of the policy change  being analysed  is the 
difference  between  the simulated  outcome  when the policy change is 
introduced  (the scenario)  and Baseline.
Under  the current  FAPRI-lreland  Baseline  (Binfieid  et al., 2008a)  agricultural  
policies  currently  in place are held constant.  These  policies  incorporate  all the 
details  of the CAP agreed  in the Luxembourg  Agreement  of 2003 and allow  for 
the differential  implementation  of that agreement.  Thus all Agenda  2000 direct  
payments  are decoupled  in Ireland. The new 'suckler  cow" welfare  scheme  
payment,  financed  by the Irish exchequer  is implemented.  International  trade  
rules agreed  in the Uruguay  Round  of the GATT  are assumed  to hold for the 
entire  projection  period. Forecasts  of macroeconomic  variables  such as rates  
of inflation,  population  growth,  per capita  incomes  and currency  exchange  rates  
are obtained  from the ESRI and Global Insight Inc. (an international  
macroeconometric  forecasting  firm.
118
Baseline  results
Under the Baseline  simulation,  the contraction  in EU sheep production  
observed  since early 1990 is projected  to continue. In most EU Member  
States,  the ewe premium  was fully decoupled  and this is projected  to lead to a 
continuation  of the decline  in the EU ewe flock. Ewe numbers  in the EU are 
projected  to decline  by almost  8% between  2007 and 2020. The decline  in ewe 
numbers  is largely matched  by a decline  in sheep meat production,  which  
between  2007 and 2020  is projected  to decrease  by over  8%.
EU domestic  sheep meat consumption  is also projected  to decline  over the 
Baseline  period,  with total EU domestic  use in 2020 almost  4% lower than in 
2007. This decline  in is due to declining  per capita  consumption  of lamb across  
the EU, which results  from projected  increases  in lamb prices. Per capita  
consumption  is, by 2020, projected  to be over 6% lower  than in 2007. By 2020  
EU sheep  meat prices  are projected  to be over 5% higher  than in 2007.
Under  the Baseline  simulation,  production  of sheep  meat in the EU declines  at 
a greater  rate than domestic  use. To fill the increasing  gap between  EU 
production  and consumption  of lamb, EU imports  are projected  to increase.  By 
2020 EU imports  of sheep  meat are projected  to be over 12% higher  than in 
2007. From 2010 onwards  EU imports  of lamb are projected  to be in excess  of 
the EU TRQ for lamb, with all over-quota  imports  paying  the full tariff that 
comprises  of a customs  duty of 12.8%  plus a specific  tariff that on average  is 
over  €200/1  OOKg.
The price outlook  for the Irish sheep sector is largely determined  by the 
prospects  on its export markets. Under  the Baseline,  Irish lamb prices are 
projected  to increase  from the levels observed  in 2007, with the 2020 price  
level projected  to be almost 7% higher. Figure 3 illustrates  the projected  
Baseline  supply  and use balance,  and sheep  meat prices  on the EU market  to 
2020 .
119
Figure  3. Baseline  EU sheep  meat  supply  and use balance
1,600 -r
1,400 - -.. '450
440
430
420
O)
410 ^ o
400 §
390
380
370
360
2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019
n Production  C □ Imports  I I Use “ “ Price
Source:  Binfieid  et al., (2008a).
Under  the Baseline,  the Irish ewe flock is projected  to continue  to decline.  Over 
the period 2000 to 2007 the ending stocks of ewes in Ireland  declined  by 
almost  26%. Between  2007 and 2020 the rate of decline  in ewe numbers  is 
projected  to slow considerably.  The Irish ewe flock is projected  to decline  by a 
further  9% over the projection  period  2007 to 2020, so that by 2020 ending  
stocks  of ewes are 2.8 million  head. This compares  with an ending  stock of 
ewes in 2000  of over 3.9 million  head.
The reduction  in ewe numbers  is not matched  by reduced  lamb slaughter.  
Under  the Baseline,  average  productivity  per ewe, in terms  of lambs  weaned,  is 
expected  to be higher  on those farms remaining  in sheep production.  As a 
result, by 2020, the volume  of sheep  available  for slaughter  declines  by only 
9%. The percentage  change  in total sheep  and lamb slaughterings  between  
2007 and 2020 indicates  a more dramatic  reduction  of over 15%, with the 
difference  between  the percentage  change  in lambs  available  for slaughter  and 
total sheep  slaughtered  due to the high rate of ewe slaughter observed  in 2007.  
Over the projection  period,  the high levels of ewe slaughter  observed  over the 
last 7 years  are not projected  to continue.
Lower  slaughter  and largely  unchanged  average  slaughter  weights  mean that 
under  the Baseline  the volume  of Irish lamb production  is projected  to decline  
by approximately  15% between  2007 and 2020.
Irish domestic  use of lamb is projected  to increase  by more than 9% over the 
Baseline  projection  period  2007-2020.  The increase  in total domestic  use of 
sheep meat in Ireland is entirely  due to strong population  growth that is 
sufficient  to offset  the projected  decline  of over 6% in per capita  consumption  of 
sheep meat. With increased  domestic  use and projected  declines in
120
production,  Irish exports  of lamb decline  under the Baseline, By 2020 Irish 
lamb exports  are projected  to be over 23% lower  than in 2007.
The value  of the sheep  sector ’s output  at producer  prices  (inclusive  of the value  
of changes  in stocks)  in 2020 is projected  to be more or less equal in nominal  
terms to that observed  in 2007. The projected  increase  in lamb prices  of 7% 
over the Baseline  period,  and the projected  slow down in the rate of decline  of 
sheep stocks are sufficient  to offset the impact of the reduction  over the 
Baseline  projection  period  in the volume  of lamb produced.
Implications  of a WTO  agreement  for the Irish sheep  sector  
In the analysis  conducted  of the impact  of a WTO reform  on the Irish sheep  
sector,  lamb is not designated  as a sensitive  product. There  have been calls 
for lamb to be given this status in the event  of an agreement  being reached.  
Future  analysis  may examine  the impact  of lamb being designated  a sensitive  
product  (however  at the moment  it looks politically  unlikely  that lamb would  get 
such status).
Linder  WTO  reform  scenarios  analysed,  the tariffs imposed  on imports  of lamb 
in excess  of existing  TRQ are cut over a 4 year period  from 2010 onwards  by 
70%. Existing  TRQ are not expanded  since lamb is not designated  as a 
sensitive  product. The elimination  of export  subsidies  does not directly  affect  
the lamb sector  since the EU is expected  to remain  an importer  rather  than an 
exporter  of lamb.
Under  the WTO scenario  analysed.  EU lamb imports  in 2020 when compared  
with the levels projected  under the Baseline,  are expected  to be over 55% 
higher. By 2020 EU lamb imports  are expected  to account  for almost  35% of 
EU lamb consumption.  With the large increase  in imports  projected  over the 
period  2007-2020  under  the WTO scenario,  EU market  prices  are projected  to 
decline,  with lamb prices in 2020 projected  to be 10% lower than under  the 
Baseline.
Lower market prices for lamb, under the WTO reform scenario  analysed  
reduces  the economic  incentives  to produce  lamb. Ewe numbers,  by 2020, are 
projected  to be over 5% lower  than under  the Baseline.  EU lamb production  is 
projected  to be over 6% lower in 2020 when compared  with the Baseline  level 
in that year. Figure  4 illustrates  the projected  supply  and use balance  for lamb 
and lamb price under  the WTO  scenario  analysed.
As under the Baseline,  the prospects  for the Irish sheep  sector  under the WTO  
scenario  are determined  by the evolution  of the internal  EU market  balance  for 
lamb and the associated  lamb prices  on our export  markets.  As a result  of the 
dramatic  increase  in EU imports  of lamb  that are projected  to occur  with a WTO  
reform,  Irish prices  under  the WTO scenario  are projected  to decline  by almost  
11%. The decline  in Irish lamb prices relative  to the Baseline  leads to a 
reduction  in the returns  to lamb production  and a consequent  reduction  in Irish 
ewe numbers  and Irish lamb production.
121
Figure  4. WTO EU sheep  meat  supply  and use balance
1,600 -r
1,400 - ■ 
1,200 
1,000  
800 
600 
400 
200440
430
420
O)
410 ^ o
400 ? 
<•>
390
380
370
360450
2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019
□ Production  C □ Imports  I ■ Use -Price
Source:  Binfieid  et al., (2008b).
By 2020, under the WTO reform scenario  analysed,  Irish ewe numbers  are 
projected  to be 8% lower than under  the Baseline.  Irish production  of sheep  
meat is also projected  to decline  by approximately  8% relative  to the Baseline.  
With lower lamb prices, Irish consumption  of lamb is projected  to increase  by 
over  2% by 2020  relative  to the Baseline.
Lower  volumes  of output  and lower  prices  combine  to dramatically  reduce  the 
value of output  produced  by the Irish sheep  sector  under  the WTO scenario.  
By 2020 the  value  of output  at €121 million  is projected  to be almost  18% lower  
than under  the Baseline.
The large cut in the tariffs imposed  on lamb imports  into the EU, under the 
WTO reform  scenario  leads to a dramatic  increase  in the available  supplies  of 
lamb on EU markets.  The FAPRI-lreland  model  and the models  to which  it is 
linked  are non-spatial  models.  As such they are not able to project  from where  
the increase  in EU import is sourced. However,  given that New Zealand  
currently  supplies  the vast majority  of EU lamb imports,  it is likely that any 
increase  in EU lamb imports  will largely  be met from New Zealand  and perhaps  
from increased  supplies  from Australia.
It is not clear whether  or not New Zealand  and Australia  would have the 
capacity  to supply  such a large increase  in the absence  of very significant  
increases  in lamb prices relative  to dairy prices. The projections  from the 
Australian  Bureau  of Agricultural  and Resource  Economics  (ABARE)  indicate  
that by 2013  Australian  lamb production  would  still be less than the pre-drought  
levels (Fletcher  et al., 2008; Drum et al., 2007). The latest forecast  from the 
New Zealand  Ministry  for Agriculture  and Forestry  (MAF-NZ,  2007) show that
122
New Zealand  lamb exports  in 2011 would be 11 % lower than in 2007. The 
latest OECD-FAO  Baseline  projections  for lamb production  in Australia  and 
New Zealand  foresee  increases  in production  between  2016 and an average  of 
the period  2004-2006  of 8 and 3% respectively  (OECD-FAO,  2007).
While these baseline  projections,  by assumption,  have not accounted  for the 
positive  impact  of a WTO agreement  on New Zealand  and Australian  lamb 
prices, the relative competitiveness  of lamb versus other agricultural  
commodities  (most  notably  dairy commodities),  is likely  to constrain  the positive  
supply  response  one could expect. The projected  surge in EU lamb imports  
projected  by the FAPRI-lreland  model and the consequent  decline  in internal  
EU lamb prices  may possibly  overstate  the impact  of the trade  reform  analysed.  
The capacity  of New Zealand  and Australia  to supply  significant  quantities  of 
lamb to the EU if tariff barriers  were lowered  significantly  by a WTO  agreement,  
remains  an issue  that would  benefit  from further  analysis.
Conclusion
Given  the current  state of international  food markets,  with high and increasingly 
volatile  prices  seemingly  here to stay, the analysis  presented  in this paper  may 
appear  unduly  pessimistic.  Readers  should  remember  that for most  agricultural 
commodities,  world prices are still considerably  lower than EU prices,  so that 
even with the dramatic  increases  in world price levels currently  reported  in the 
media,  EU prices  are for the most part still higher. This means  that tariff cuts 
will still “hurf , though  the higher  world prices  go the less any given  tariff  cut will 
undermine  internal  EU prices.
The importance  of marketing  support  for lamb and of producing  products  that 
are tailored  to consumer  requirements  will remain  and arguably  increase  in 
importance.  Consumption  of lamb within  the EU has been in decline  as it has 
lost price competitiveness  against  other  meats. A small turn around  in the per 
capita  consumption  of lamb could  yield enormous  benefits  in terms  of price and 
returns  to production.  To achieve  such goals  the product  delivered  (lambs)  will 
have to be such that marketing  campaigns  supported  by organisations  such as 
Bord Bia (stressing  the healthy  attributes  of lamb) can have a chance  in 
succeeding.
Keady  and Hanrahan  (2006)  conclude  that pre-farm  gate efficiencies  of up to 
66c/Kg  are possible  from improvements  in the genetic  merit of sheep  flocks  
farmed,  grassland  management,  winter-shearing  and the use of high quality  
grass silage. On the basis of the analysis  of the impact  of a WTO agreement  
on the EU and Irish agricultural  markets  reported  here, such efficiencies  will be 
essential  to maintain  profitability  in Irish sheep production.  To improve  the 
profitability  of sheep production  in the medium  to long term (where  a WTO  
reform  close to that analysed  in this paper is highly  probable)  will require  the 
continuous  development  and adoption  of new technologies  and farming  
methods  that lower  the costs of production.  Changes  to the structure  of Irish 
livestock  farming,  that will allow it to compete  with southern  hemisphere  
producers,  will probably  also be required.
123
A WTO agreement  may not happen in 2008. Future or restarted  WTO  
negotiations  may occur  within  an environment  where  there  are heightened  and 
more politically  acknowledged  concerns  relating  to giobal climate  change  and 
global  food security. Nevertheless,  notwithstanding  the possible  incorporation  
of some non-trade  concerns  within a future trade reform  agreement,  a WTO  
agreement  along the lines being currently  negotiated  in Geneva  is highly  
probably  within the next 10 years. Irish farming  and Irish sheep  farming  will 
face a new and major  challenge  in the years  ahead  as a result.
References
Agra-Europe  (2008). Health check special: details of Commission  draft 
proposals.  Agra-Facfs  No. 19-08,  February  28*', 2008.
Binfieid, J., Donnellan,  T., Hanrahan,  K. and Westhoff,  P. (2003). The 
Luxembourg  CAP reform  agreement:  implications  for EU and Irish agriculture.  
In: The Luxembourg  CAP  Reform  Agreement:  analysis  of the Impact  on EU and 
Irish Agriculture.  FAPRI-lreland  Partnership,  Teagasc,  Dublin.
Binfieid,  J., Donnellan,  T., Hanrahan,  K. and Westhoff,  P. (2006). World  
agricultural  trade reform  and the WTO Doha development  round: analysis  of 
the impact  on EU and Irish agriculture.  FAPRI-lreland  Partnership,  Teagasc.
Binfieid,  J., Donnellan,  T., Hanrahan,  K. and Westhoff,  P. (2008a). Baseline  
2008 Outlook  for EU and Irish Agriculture.  Unpublished.
Binfieid,  J., Donnellan,  T., Hanrahan,  K. and Westhoff,  P. (2008b). Impact  of 
WTO  Agreement on EU and Irish Agriculture.  Unpublished.
Breen,  J., Hennessy,  T. and Thorne,  F. (2007). FAPRI-lreland  Baseline  2007:  
Farm level  analysis.  Teagasc.
CSO (2007). December  2006 Livestock  Survey. Central  Statistics  Office,  
Cork.
CSO (2008). Eirestat  Database.  Central  Statistics  Office, Cork. Online  at 
vww.cso.ie/px/pxeirestat/database/eirestat/eirestat.asp  Accessed April 15, 
2008,
Drum, F., Shaw, I., Wood,  A., Ashton,  D. and Lindsay,  P. (2007). Outlook  of 
beef and veal, sheep meat, pigs and poultry to 2011-2012.  Australian  
Commodities,  14 (1): 62-72.
European  Communities.  (2003). Council  Regulation  (EC) no. 1782/2003  of 29 
September  2003 establishing  common  rules for direct support  schemes  under  
the common  agricultural  policy  and establishing  support  schemes  for farmers.  
OfficialJournal  of the European  Union,  L270: 1-69.
European  Commission.  (2005). Statement  of EU conditional  negotiating  
proposals  - with explanatory  annotations.  Brussels,  10 October,  2005.  
Available  to download  at http://europa.eu.int/commission  barroso/mandelson
Fletcher,  S., Fell, J. and Hogan, J. (2008). Meat Outlook  to 2012-13.  
Australian  Commodities,  15 (1): 76-98.
124
ICSTD. (2008). Agriculture:  positions  harden on special products,  special  
safeguard  mechanism.  Bridges  Weekly  Trade  News  Digest,  12(13)
Keady,  T. and Hanrahan,  S. (2006). Efficient  sheep production  in a subsidy  
free environment  - Research  from Athenry. Annual  Journal  of the Irish 
Grassland  Association,  2006.
MAP - NZ. (2007). Situation  and Outlook  for New Zealand  Agriculture  and 
Forestry.  New Zealand  Ministry  of Agriculture  and Forestry,  Wellington.
OECD-FAO.  (2007). OECD-FAO  Agricultural  Outlook  2007-2016.  OECD,  
Paris, France.
National  Farm Survey.  (2006). Sheep  enterprise  analysis  2005. Mimeo,  
Teagasc.
National  Farm Survey. (2007). Sheep enterprise  analysis  2006. Mimeo,  
Teagasc.
Shresthra,  S., Hennessy,  T. and Flynes,  S. (2007). The effects  of decoupling  
on farming  in Ireland:  A regional  analysis.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  and Food  
Research,  46: 1-13.
Teagasc.  Management  Data for Farm  Planning.  Annual,  various  issues.
WTO.  (2008). Revised  draft modalities  for agriculture.  World  Trade 
Organization,  Committee  on Agriculture,  Special  Session.  TN/AG/W/4/Rev.1. 
World  Trade  Organization,  Geneva.
125
Report  on the future  of the sheep  and goat sectors  in 
Europe
Liam Aylward 
MEP
Issues  to be addressed
1. The  sheep  and goat sectors  in the EU are important  traditional  farming  
enterprises,  that support  the livelihood  of thousands  of producers,  thereby  
serving  to underline  its socio-economic  contribution  in rural areas  of the EU
2. Sheep  and goat farming  play a key environmental  role that includes  the 
natural upkeep  of less fertile areas and the preservation  of sensitive  eco­
systems.
3. The sheep  and goat sectors  in the EU (which  are concentrated  in less 
favoured  areas),  are witnessing  a critical  decline  in production  and an exodus  
of producers.
4. The sheep  and goat sectors  in the EU are characterised  by low producer  
incomes,  falling  domestic  production,  declining  consumption  and are exposed  
to increasing  international  market  competition;
5. The systems  of sheep and goat production  in Northern  and Southern  
Europe  are significantly different.
6. EU lamb does not have meaningful  access to the EU agricultural  
promotion  budget  and is in need of a sustained  promotional  campaign  to 
develop  consumer  preference
7. The upcoming  CAP 'Health  Check'  provides  the opportunity  to address  
the relevant  policy instruments  and CAP support  for the sheep and goat 
sectors.
Summary  report  recommendations
1. Acknowledges  the urgent  need for action  to be taken by the European  
Commission  (EC) and the EU Agriculture  Council  of Ministers  to halt the 
decline in sheep and goat production  in Europe, and advocates  the 
maintenance  of these traditional,  eco-friendly  farming enterprises  and a 
Community  supply  base of EU lamb.
2. Notes  the intention  of EC to review  policy  instruments  where  it has been  
demonstrated  that decoupling  has had a negative  impact,  and welcomes  further
126
reference  to this specific  issue in the context  of the recently  published  EC CAP 
Health  Check  communication.
3. Calls on the EC and the EU Council  of Agriculture  Ministers  to direct  
additional  financial  support  as a matter of urgency  to EU sheep and goat 
producers  in order to  retain  a critical  mass of sheep  and goat production  in the 
EU. The EC and the EU Council  of Agriculture  Ministers  is asked  to restructure  
the future  financing  of these  sectors  as part of the CAP Health  Check  through  
the implementation  of a variety  of measures,  giving each Member  State the 
flexibility  of choosing  from the following  possible  financing  options:
• Introduction  of a new Environmental  Sheep  Maintenance  Scheme  per 
ewe to be either  a) financed  directly  by National  Government  funding,  or 
b) co-financed  by EU and National  Governments  to arrest  the decline  in 
production,  linked to the positive  environmental  attributes  associated  
with the maintenance  of sheep production  as well as achieving  
improvements  in technical  and quality areas  of production;
• Analysis  of the availability  and utilisation  of unused  funds under  Pillar 2 
of the CAP with a view to redirecting  this support  to the sheep  and goat 
sectors;
• Amend  Article  69 of EU Regulation  1782/2003  as proposed  by the EC 
CAP Health Check Communication,  to provide  flexibility  for Member  
States;
• Use modulation  support  as referenced  under  EU Regulation  1782/2003  
to sheep  and goat producers;
4. Calls  on the EC to introduce  an additional  payment  for traditional 
mountainous  breeds  in order  to preserve  sheep  in sensitive  areas,  to be either 
a) financed  directly  by National  Governments  or b) co-financed  by EU and 
National  Governments.
5. As  part of the simplification  process  in the review  of the CAP Health  
Check,  request  that the EC allow 14 days notice  to livestock  farmers  for on- 
farm cross-compliance  inspections.
6. Notes that the return to the producer  for sheepmeat  products  as a 
percentage  of the retail price is insufficient.
7. Calls on the EC and the EU Council  of Agriculture  Ministers  to review  the 
introduction  of an electronic  identification  system for sheep intended  for 
31/12/2009  due to the difficulty  in implementation,  high costs and unproven  
benefits;  and asks that each Member  State be allowed  the discretion  of 
introducing  this system  on a voluntary  basis;.
8. Calls  on the negotiating  team for the EU at the WTO  talks to reduce  the 
scale  of the proposed  tariff cuts on sheepmeat  and to ensure  that the option  of 
sensitive  product  status  for certain  sheepmeat  lines be available  to the EU.
127
9. Calls  on the EC to review  existing  import  quota  management  regimes  to 
ensure that domestically produced  lamb is not exposed  to unfair  competition
10. Calls on the EC to introduce  a mandatory  EU labelling  regulation  system  
for sheepmeat  products,  which would have an EU wide logo to allow  
consumers  to distinguish  between  EU products  and those  from third countries.  
It is suggested  that this  would  be underwritten  by a number  of criteria  including  
a farm assurance  scheme  and a country  of origin indication,  ensuring  that 
consumers  are fully aware  as to the point  of origin  of the product.
11. Calls on the EC to increase  the current  annual EU Food Promotion  
Budget  (valued  at €45 million  for 2008),  and to ring fence  funding  for EU lamb 
and to change,  simplify  and streamline  the practical  rules governing  the 
operation  of the budget  so that lamb products  can be given meaningful  access  
to the budget.
12. Calls  on the EC to co-ordinate  promotional  campaigns  for PGI 
(Protected  Geographical  Indication)  and PDO (Protected  Designation  of Origin)  
sheepmeat  and goatmeat  products,  and to target  relevant  EU countries  in order  
to maximise  consumption.
13. Calls on the EC to provide  assistance  in opening  export  markets  for EU 
sheepmeat  and offals in countries  where unnecessary  restrictions  currently  
apply.
14. Calls on the EC to include  lamb in the 'Community  action  programme  for 
public  health' in order to promote  the health and protein  benefits  of lamb to 
consumers,  particularly  to young people who are low consumers  of lamb 
products.
15. Calls  on the EC to support  innovation  in the 'small ruminant ’ industry,  
concentrating  on both technical  innovation  for farms and product  innovation  
with regard  to lamb, cheese  and by-products  such as wool and pelts, known  as 
the fifth quarter,  where the  financial  return  is almost  negligible  at present.
16. Stresses  the need to improve  the availability  of medicinal  and veterinary  
products  for the sheep and goat sectors  at a European  level through  the 
simplification  of marketing  authorisations
17. Calls on the EC to publish  a price series  on retail, wholesale,  processor  
and producer  prices  for each Member  State on the Internet  every  three months  
to ensure  more  price transparency  within  the European  sheep  sector.
18. Request  the EC and the Presidency  of the Council to set up an 
implementation  task force  to oversee  the practical  reform  of the sheep  and goat 
sectors  in the EU, and to ensure  that this implementation  task force  reports  to 
the European  Parliament  Agriculture  Committee  and the EU Council of 
Agriculture  Ministers  every six months  for the next two years on the policy
128
changes  that it is enacting.  Also that this implementation  task force should  be 
comprised  of key officials  from the EC and from the countries  representing  the 
four forthcoming  Presidencies  of the EU.
Explanatory  statement
Introduction
The sheep  and goat sectors  in Europe  are at a critical  stage. Urgent  measures  
need to be taken at EU level to preserve  sheep and goat farming  on an 
economically  sustainable  basis. The structural  decline  in the production  of 
sheep and goats has significantly  accelerated  since the 2003 CAP reform.  
Sheep and goat farming  is a labour intensive  activity  that requires  specific  
skills. Unfortunately,  there is a lack of technical  services  and training  in the 
sectors. Incomes  are low compared  to other  farm enterprises  and depend  to a 
large extent  on public  support.
These  sectors  are experiencing  increasing  costs, particularly  as regards  fuel, 
electricity  and feed, which will be further increased  with the proposed  
introduction  of electronic  identification  in 2010. The age profile  of sheep  and 
goat farmers is much older than in other agricultural  sectors and it is 
increasingly  difficult  to attract young  farmers  to the business.  There is high 
competition  for land, particularly  in the context  of high prices for cereals.  
Processing  enterprises  are especially  challenged,  with difficulties  as regards  
investment  and the lack of a qualified  workforce.  The competitive  pressure  
from third country  imports  has increased.
It is estimated  that a lack of action  will result  in a decrease  in the production  of 
sheepmeat  and goatmeat  of at least 8 to 10% by the year 2015. Against  the 
backdrop  of rising  food prices,  such a decline  cannot  be allowed  to occur  as it 
is essential  to maintain  a security  of supply  within the EU. The imminent  
‘Health  Check ’ of the CAP provides  a timely  opportunity  to review  the sheep  
and goat sectors  and implement  proposals  before  it is too late.
Main issues  raised  by Rapporteur
Environment
Sheep  and goat farming  play a key environmental  role that includes  the natural  
upkeep of less fertile areas, the maintenance  of biodiversity,  sensitive  
ecosystems  and water quality,  the fight against  erosion,  floods,  avalanches  and 
fires. Typically,  sheep and goat farming  take place in less favoured  areas,  
where such farming  is often the only agricultural  option and which therefore 
makes  a crucial  contribution  to the economy  in rural areas  within  the EU.
129
Producer  income  support
Farm incomes  in the sheep  and goat sectors  are amongst  the lowest  in the 
agricultural  industry  and the financial  support  received  falls well behind  that of 
other  more profitable  agricultural  sectors.
The Common  Agricultural  Policy  has failed the sheep  and goat sectors  and this 
has led to a substantial  fall in production.  The 'decoupling ’ package  introduced  in 
the CAP Reform 2003 has contributed  to this decline in production.  The 
forthcoming  CAP Health Check must direct additional  financial  support to 
sheepmeat  and goatmeat  production  taking  into account  the different  models  that 
exist in Member  States. It must be noted  that a 'no-one-fits-all'  solution  in terms  of 
the future  financing  of the sheep  and goat sectors  can apply in an equal way in 
each  Member  State  in the EU.
Electronic  taggina
The European  Commission  intends  to introduce  compulsory  implementation  of 
an electronic  identification  system  for sheep  on 31/12/2009.  This is a huge issue  
for the entire sheep  sector. At a time when the sector  is in an economic  crisis,  
this proposal  will burden producers  with additional  costs. Furthermore,  the 
benefits  of electronic  tagging  have yet to be proven.
It is suggested therefore  allowing  each Member  State  the flexibility  of 
introducing  the identification  system  on a voluntary  basis,  given  the fact that  in 
most  countries  in the EU there  are already  adequate  identification  systems in 
place  to deliver  the requirements  for traceability  and animal  health.
Sheepmeat  imports
Imports  in excess  of 20% of EU lamb consumption  have a significant  bearing  
within  the EU market  place. It is acknowledged  that third country  lamb imports  
play an adjusting  role, given the current  EU deficit. However,  given that lamb 
imports  will continue  to contribute  a major part of overall EU supply, efforts  
must be made to ensure  that lamb imports  supplement  the EU supply  without  
inhibiting  the ability  of the EU supply  to develop.  It is clear  that the higher  costs  
of production  carried  by EU lamb put the domestic  product  at a competitive  
disadvantage  compared  to the imported  product. This imbalance  is all the 
more obvious  given that imports  are concentrated  mainly in two sensitive  
periods  in the European  calendar i.e. Easter  and Christmas.
Decrease  in the consumption  of sheepmeat
Consumption  has dropped  as a result of lower availability  and the relatively  
high price of sheepmeat.  Consumers  of sheepmeat  essentially  belong to 
higher  age groups,  with above-average  income. In contrast,  the penetration  
rate of the product  and the number  of consumers  below  35 years of age are 
considerably  smaller. Factors such as consumer  age profile, consumer  
perception  and price relative  to other  proteins  significantly  affect  potential  levels  
of lamb consumption.  The key to securing  a sustainable  future for the
130
sheepmeat  sector  will be strategies  aimed at recovering  consumption  levels  
across  the Community.
Marketing  of lamb
In order to generate  lamb consumption,  a number  of measures  need to be 
adopted. It is recognised  that there is a need for innovation  in the 
communication  of the message  to consumers.  Younger  customers,  who are 
low consumers  of lamb, need to be targeted  emphasizing  the convenience,  
quality  and health  aspects  of the product,  with the core objective  of increasing  
consumption  but also adding  value to EU lamb. The French,  Irish and British  
food promotion  agencies  are currently  conducting  a joint generic  promotional  
campaign  to inaease  lamb consumption  in France. This may lay the basis  for 
future  marketing  campaigns  in other EU Member States.
Domestically  produced  lamb must have access to the EU fund for the 
promotion  of agricultural  products,  which is valued  at €45 million  for the year 
2008, but in the majority  of EU countries,  the sheep  and goat sectors  are not 
utilising  European  Promotion  programmes  under EU Regulation  1257/1999  
(superior  quality products  labelled  at a national  level) and EU Regulation  
1171/2005  (products  bearing  European  official  quality  marks). The reason  for 
this is that the rules governing  these regulations  are too restrictive  and must 
have a national  quality label or a European  quality mark, such as PDO 
(Protected  Designation  of Origin),  PGI (Protected  Geographical  Indication)  and 
TSG (Traditional  Speciality  Guaranteed).
The European  Commission  is asked  to simpiify  these regulations  giving  the 
sheep  and  goat  sectors  real  access  to this budget  The existing  EU fund for  the 
promotion  of agricultural  products  needs  to be Increased  and a proportion  of 
this fund allocated  to the sheepmeat  sector. It is also suggested that  PGI/PDO  
campaigns  be co-ordinated  for sheep  and goat  products,  to target  certain  EU 
countries  so as to increase  consumption.
Labelling
At present  there is no EU legislation  dealing  with the issue  of origin  labelling  for 
the sheepmeat  sector. As a result there  are many  different  labelling  techniques  
in operation  within the EU for sheep products. In order to promote  EU 
preference  amongst consumers  and also to justify supporting  the 
promotion/marketing  of sheepmeat,  consumers  would  need to be convinced  on 
the basis  of food security,  indigenous  EU production  and traditional  methods  of 
production.
It is suggested  that consumers  should  be given  maximum  Information  about  
the origin  of the product,  which  they  purchase  so that they  can make  informed  
purchases.  In this regard  it is proposed  that a EU logo be developed  for 
sheepmeat  products,  which would  be underwritten  by a number  of criteria  
including  a farm assurance  scheme  and a country  of origin indication,  thus  
ensuring  that consumers are fully  aware  as to the point  of origin  of the prr^uct.
131
Support  for innovation
Innovation  in product  development  has the potential  to be the key to making  
sheepmeat  more attractive  to younger  generations  of consumers.  Such  
innovation  should focus on the imbalance  between  the cuts currently  
demanded  by the consumer  and the cuts arising from the whole carcass.  
There has to date been some success  in attracting  the younger  consumers  
through  offering  a versatile  range of cuts, a wider range of portion sizes,  
packaging  and a consistent  quality  product,  indicating  that lamb should  not be 
abandoned  as a lost cause  as far as the market  Is concerned  but rather  could  
flourish  with support  in developing  innovation  on products,  packaging  and 
processes.
At present,  the amount  of financial  return  on wool and pelts (the so called  fifth 
quarter)  is insignificant.  Developing  new uses such as highly efficient  and 
ecological  thermal  Insulating  material  could increase  value.
Market  access
At the moment,  there are restrictions  governing  EU exports  of sheepmeat  
products  into countries  such as South  Africa,  Algeria,  Saudi  Arabia,  China,  and 
Mexico. It would be of positive  significance  to the industry  if the European  
Commission  were to provide  assistance  in opening  non EU export  markets  for 
sheepmeat  products  in countries  where  unnecessary  restrictions  apply.
Consultation
Ernst and Young Government  Services  together  with the French Livestock  
Institute,  carried  out a study  entitled  'The future  of the sheepmeat  and goatmeat  
sectors  in Europe',  which was commissioned  by The European  Parliament.  
The study analysed  the characteristics  of these sectors  and made a series  of 
recommendations,  which were presented  to a meeting  of the European  
Parliament  Agriculture  Committee  on February  26, 2008.
In the preparation  of this report widespread  consultation  was carried out, 
including  meetings  with the EU Commissioner  for Agriculture  and Rural  
Development,  the Slovenian  Minister  for Agriculture,  the French  Minister  for 
Agriculture  together  with Agriculture  Ministers  from Poland,  Lithuania,  Ireland  
and Council  representatives  from the UK, Spain,  Italy, France,  Latvia,  Romania,  
Bulgaria  and Germany.  Also included  were EU farming  groups,  EU business  
groups, EU consumer  groups, and representatives  from the EU lamb 
processing  sector as well as representatives  of the sheepmeat  sector in 
Australia  and New Zealand. Relevant  officials  from the Directorates  of the 
European  Commission  (who deal with Agriculture  and Rural Development  and 
Public  Flealth  matters)  were also consulted.  In addition,  prior to publication  a 
lamb promotion  evening  was hosted  in the European  Parliament  on December  
4, 2007  sponsored  by Eblex  (English  Beef and Lamb  Executive),  Bord Bia (Irish  
Food Agency)  and Interbev  (French  Livestock  Association),  This brought  
together  200 representatives  from EU farming  groups,  EU lamb processors,  
consumer  representatives  from the 27 EU Member  States,  the EU Agriculture 
Commissioner,  the President  of the European  Parliament,  the Chairman  of the
132
Agriculture  Committee  of the European  Parliament,  MEPs  and representatives  
from Agriculture  policy units of the European  Commission  and from the 
European  Permanent  Representations.
Conclusion
The long-term  sustainability  of sheep and goat production  in the EU on a 
professional  scale is under severe  threat. Despite  a production  deficit of 
sheepmeat  in the EU, the sheep flock continues  to fall and demand  for 
shepmeat  Is weak. The last CAP Reform  (2003)  introduced  the decoupling  of 
direct payments,  and accelerated  the contraction  of the sheep and goat 
sectors. Sheep  and goats  are located  primarily  In less favoured  areas  and play 
a critical environmental  role in the natural  upkeep  of these areas as well as 
making  a huge socio-economic  contribution  to disadvantage  areas.
Many producers  are exiting the sheep and goat sectors  due to economic  
difficulties,  high labour requirements  and an older age profile. There are 
increased  pressures  from third country  imports. This is on top of unnecessary  
restrictions  that apply  to EU sheepmeat  exports  into certain  third countries.
Urgent  action  is needed  at EU level to safeguard  the sheep  and goat sectors,  
including  producer  income  support,  electronic  identification  to be brought  in on 
a voluntary  basis, marketing  measures  to generate  consumption,  a labelling  
scheme  to give EU consumers  maximum  information  about the origin of their 
purchases  and support  for innovation.  It is essential  that an EU implementation  
task force is set up to ensure  that the specific  measures  recommended  in this 
report  are enacted  over the next two years, thereby  securing  the future  of the 
sheep  and goat sectors  in Europe.
133
TechnoGrazing™  - a novel approach  to sustainable  
pastoral  production
J.F.L. (Deric)  Charlton
23 Sycamore  Cresent,  Palmerston  North,  New  Zealand  
Email:  dericoatHSramail.  com
J.H. (Harry)  Wier
Kiwitech  International  Ltd, PO Box 19, Bulls, New  Zealand  
Email:  kiwitech&kiwitech.  co. nz
Keywords:  TechnoGrazing;  controlled  grazing;  bull beef; electric  fencing,  
temporary  fencing;  irrigation;  water  supply;  sustainability.
Summary
TechnoGrazing  (TG) is an intensive  yet sustainable  grazing  system  developed  
by organic  beef farmer  Harry Wier in the lower North Island of New Zealand.  
Wer  adapted  the pasture/animal  research  findings of Brougham  and others  into 
a practical  and profitable  farm management  system,  initially  for farming  entire  
bulls but later for sheep, deer and dairy cattle. He also developed  cost- 
effective  fencing  and livestock  watering  materials  (and related  accessories),  
and now trains farmers  to use the concept  and his equipment  successfully  on 
pastoral  farms,  mainly in Australia,  New Zealand  and South  America.
The system  achieves  high yielding  efficient  livestock  production  with minimum  
investment  in plant, equipment  and labour. The system has also proved  
sustainable  over many  years and has many  features  that are environmentally 
positive.
The paper  outlines  the concept,  examines  what makes  TG so productive  and 
sustainable,  and gives some  general  case studies  from Australasian  farms  that 
illustrate  the potential  in Ireland.
The TechnoGrazing  system
TechnoGrazing  evolved  from the debate about rotational  grazing vs. set­
stocking.  Authors  like Voisin  (1959)  and Martin  Jones  (1933)  in Europe,  and 
C.P. McMeekan  in New Zealand,  made  this a fascinating  quest  to find the best 
system. During  study  at Massey  University,  Wier’s convictions  about  rotational  
grazing  were cemented  by a visit to a trial run by Ray Brougham  (late director  
of DSIR ’s Grasslands  Division,  Palmerston  North)  who was studying  various  
pasture  management  phenomena  using young  dairy-bred  bulls as the animal  
component.  The most significant  outcome  was not the actual  comparative  trial
134
results  themselves,  but the fact that he achieved  a production  level of about  
1100 kg/ha of net carcase  gain with low inputs,  a high stocking  rate and small  
group  sizes.
At that  time bull beef production  was a recent  innovation  in commercial  farming,  
driven by the demand  for very lean meat to supplement  fat-trim  from the US 
beef feedlot industry  for hamburger  production.  As part of his university  
studies,  Wier visited  several  pioneer  bull beef producers  and realised  that the 
high price for bull meat, the low cost of calves  and the inherent  efficiency  of 
lean meat production  made “bull beef an interesting  commercial  prospect.  
Wier’ s father had died several years earlier, so Wier went straight  from 
university  to running  his own farm with no one but himself  to answer  to. He 
immediately  started ripping out the entire farm infrastructure,  including  all 
fences  and watering  systems,  the sheep shearing  and handling  facilities;  he 
even relocated  most of the farm roads! His aim was to achieve  the production  
levels  of Brougham ’s trial, but on a commercial  farm scale.
Novel  development
In planning  his new system,  Wier  was convinced  of two key factors:  1) the need  
for many subdivisions  meant that the only practical  approach  was to make  
major use of temporary  electric  fencing;  and 2) the need for a novel watering  
system  to provide  a multitude  of watering  points  at an affordable  cost. He soon 
worked  out that long narrow  permanent  'lanes ’ would make temporary  fencing  
much easier,  and that calibrating  small grazing  cells using the fence posts as 
markers  would be very handy. Initially, Wier used off-the-shelf  fencing  
hardware  and various  crude  improvisations  for his portable  water  troughs  and 
hydrants.
Early experiences  with bulls at 50 per group convinced  him he had to try 
smaller  mobs. He also found managing  a gun irrigator  on a 14-day  cycle very 
difficult  when bulls were on a 30-40 day rotation. He discovered  he could  
safely  handle  electric  fences  by wearing  appropriate  footwear  and would  cross  
the fences  on a motorbike  and handle  the bulls by using ‘hot wiring ’ as a 
herding  and drafting  tool. He found that he could reduce  mob size to 20 and 
save much work by running  bull mobs side-by-side  in a set of six permanent  
lanes  with continuous  temporary  wires  (front  and back  fences)  laid on top of the 
permanent  fences. He invented  a 'fence  fender ’ apparatus  for the irrigator  to 
travel under temporary  fences,  so that it could run through  a mob of bulls,  
eliminating  the logistical  problem  of dodging  bull groups  that were on a different 
rotation  cycle.
At the same time, Wier continuously  upgraded  and developed  the fencing  and 
watering  hardware  components.  Advances  included  the use of fibreglass  
fenceposts,  lighter  gauge  high-tensile  wire and springs  to create  a lightweight,  
highly  resilient  fence that was tough  enough  to handle  bulls yet flexible  enough  
to pin down  for stock  movement  and vehicle  crossing.
135
In 1982 Wier and his wife Chloe established  a business  manufacturing  and 
marketing  their fencing  hardware  under the brand of Spicier  Fencing  that 
reflected  the spider-web  character  of the permanent  fence. In 1992 Wier 
decided  that the most valuable  innovation  he could offer his clients  was the 
grazing  concept  itself The concept  had become  a tightly  integrated  package  of 
technologies  and know-how  including fencing layout and grazing  
configurations,  design  methodologies,  practical  field techniques,  and fencing,  
watering  and animal  handling  hardware.  The term 'technosystem'  was quickly  
applied  to the Wier  grazing  system  exclusively.
In the following  decade  Wier  kept developing  the tools and sold the TG concept  
to Australasian  customers  as a design,  training  and hardware  package. He 
also converted  the farm to certified  organic  production,  partly because  he 
believed  in biological  rather  than chemical  solutions,  but also to demonstrate  
that his grazing  system  was more than just a 'bull beef system ’ and applicable  
to all grazing  livestock  classes  and that it was valuable  for sustainability  as well 
as productivity.
TechnoGrazing  layout
The basic TG layout is one of long narrow pasture lanes bounded  by 
permanent  Spider  fences  with fibreglass  'node' posts positioned  at intervals  
along each permanent  fence line to define identically-sized  areas (the area 
bounded  by 4 nodes). The CAD-based  design  always  ensures  that the node  
posts lie on a straight  line across  a set of lanes (even  when the lanes are not 
straight  or parallel,  so the farmer  shifting  livestock  can see clearly  where  to lay 
out the next fence). There are many different  shifting  options  with TG, as 
animals  can be moved under or over the temporary  and permanent  fences.  
Where  groups  proceed  in unison  along adjacent  lanes this is called 'multiplex'  
grazing. However  groups are often allocated  two or more lanes and 
'hopscotch'  from one end of the system  to the other. Yet another  mode is the 
'racetrack!  where  groups  go along one lane and return in the lane next-door.  
Systems  can even be circular to  suit centre-pivot  irrigators.  GPS technology  is 
used in conjunction  with CAD design  to initially  survey  the site and later to set 
out node  posts  to within  2 cm.
There  are no traditional  gates within TG as the fencing  is resilient  enough  to 
allow modified  farm vehicles  to be driven  over (or under)  wires. To move the 
temporary  fence  the farmer simply  drives  over the permanent  fences,  reeling  in 
the wire and collecting  the temporary  posts, and then lays out the new cross ­
fence by reversing  this procedure.  Typically,  the farmer  uses an all-terrain  
vehicle (ATV or 'quad' motorbike)  equipped  with fence fenders and a 
'PowerPac'  reel to handle  the temporary  fences. The PowerPac  winds in the 
temporary  wire at high speed  as the farmer  drives  along the temporary  fence  
line, and it flicks the wire out of the 'tread-in'  posts and rips the post out of the 
ground  for the operator  to collect  and stow. If the ground  is flat and the lanes  
are less than 40 m wide, no tread-in  posts  are used, enabling  a complete  set of 
6-8 lanes  (mobs)  to be moved  in under  ten minutes.
136
Water  supply
A new watering  system  was also developed  and manufactured,  based on 
portable  100 litre troughs  with special  bayonet-style  water  couplings,  as well as 
permanent  ‘Micro-troughs'.  The Micro-troughs  are the size and shape of a 
medium-sized  kitchen-mixing  bowl, and are made from heavy-walled  low- 
density  polyethylene.  A plate activates  the trough valve when an animal  
pushes  it down. The troughs  are connected  by poly-pipes  and are situated  
along alternating  permanent  fences,  giving stock access  from either grazing  
lane.
Micrograzing  - why TechnoGrazing  works
Microeconomics  focuses  on individual  businesses  and consumers  and takes a 
bottom-up  approach  to analysing  the economy,  whereas  macroeconomics  
looks at entire countries  and takes a top-down  approach.  Applying  the same  
approach  to grazing  management,  - focusing  on the individual  partition  or 
grazing  cell and studying  variables  and production  functions  at that level to 
determine  farm outcomes  can be described  as ‘micro-grazing ’. The other 
option,  'macro-grazing',  takes  the whole-farm  perspective  and focuses  on feed 
budgets  and models  based on broad-brush  parameters,  such as average 
pasture  growth rates, average  farm stocking  rate, average  residuals,  and 
average  quality  adjusted  by season. Macro-grazing  is the industry-standard  
model at this stage, but TG produces  results  that defy the standard  model  
predictions.  Consultants  find that their computer  models have to be re­
calibrated  for TG to produce  predictions  from their models  that match actual  
farm outcomes.
Clearly there are parameters  within the TG model that are changing  
fundamental  biological/physical  relationships  (what an economist  would call 
“production  functions ”) and it is hard to see how these changes  will be 
unravelled  by studying  the system  from the top down (macro-grazing).  Taking  
the micro-grazing  approach  to determine  the critical parameters  and their 
interrelationships  is the only practical  option. The most obvious  parameters  
that differ between  traditional  grazing  and TG is that pasture  subdivisions  are 
about  two orders  of magnitude  smaller  with TG (hundredths  of hectares  rather  
than hectares),  the mob sizes are much smaller  (20 or so per cattle  group),  and 
the grazing  on-time  is shorter (1-2 days).
Micrograzing  as a research  area does not really  exist, probably  because  good  
tools  for grazing  at the intensity  of TG are not available.  Notwithstanding  a lack 
of hard data, logic, commonsense,  visual appraisal  and farmer  experience,  all 
provide  many  clues as to why these productivity  differences  are achieved,  and 
reveal the many obvious  benefits  of a tool that gives us a very fine level of 
subdivision  in a system  that is logistically  very efficient.
137
These  include:
Fertility  Transfer
When  a large group  of animals  spends  a lot of time around  centralised  watering  
points,  under  shade  trees or on favoured  ‘stock camps'  there is very significant  
transfer  of fertility  to these sites at the expense  of the main grazing  area, and 
this nutrient  concentration  also accelerates  leaching. Small groups, small  
grazing  areas and a proliferation  of watering  points obviously  mitigate  this 
fertility  transfer.
Managing  the seasonal  forage production  curve
The most challenging  aspect  of grazing  management  is to maximise  production  
in the face of large, semi-predictable  variations  in pasture  growth  rate. The 
single  biggest constraint to maximising  total output  per hectare  on most  grazing  
farms is the inability  to convert  enough  spring pasture  into animal product.  
Either,  the stocking  rate is too low, so utilisation  rates and pasture  quality  suffer  
dramatically,  or too much high-quality  spring forage is expensively  and 
wastefully  converted  into lower-quality  conserved  forage. Traditional  
techniques  for coping  with erratic  pasture  growth  (forage  conservation,  fertiliser 
nitrogen,  forage cropping,  and purchased  supplements)  tend to involve  high 
costs, wastage,  pasture  and soil damage,  fossil fuels, man-hours,  chemicals,  
and costly  plant  and machinery.
TG and its associated  technologies  and techniques  allow the farmer  to control  
animal  intake  precisely  without  sacrificing  average  pasture  cover  (long rotations  
leave most of the grazing  area with good covers,  even though  recently  grazed  
areas  are very short  when intake  is restricted).  This capability  to control  intake  
and cover means that it is possible  to improve  utilisation  efficiency  during  
periods  of low pasture  production,  pick up some gains in terms of pasture  
quality  and animal  compensatory  growth  potential,  ration out forage  that has 
been stockpiled  in advance,  and maximise  the pasture  growth  rate - all at the 
same time. There  are no additional  costs - no use of fossil fuel, chemicals,  
machinery,  or extra  work, and the effect  on the pasture  is usually  very positive.  
Note that a ‘wintering  mode' is not nearly as practical  with large paddocks,  
large groups  and long grazing  on-times  - utilisation  efficiency  will decline,  soil 
damage  increase,  regrowth  will be compromised  and the animals  will suffer  
from dramatic swings  in intake.
The most profound  benefit  of this grazing  management  capability  is that the 
farmer  can carry  enough  stock  through  the winter  at very low cost, to fully utilise  
spring production  which, of course,  converts  so well into animal production.  
Furthermore  there are similar  benefits  throughout  the year where  the farmer  
can soften the peaks and troughs  of grass production  by adjusting  rotation  
length  in a very precise,  easily  managed  way.
The same precision  capability  can be used to adjust  grazing  intensity  to control  
weeds  in selected  areas,  to selectively  allocate  grass  to special  stock  classes,  
to avoid wet areas at certain times, and to encourage/discourage  selected  
pasture  species
138
Pugging  Management
Most farmers  would  feel that intensive  grazing  means  more soil and pasture  
damage  in wet conditions.  Many comment  that 'intensive  grazing  is a good  
idea but my soil is too wet’. From the micrograzing  perspective,  these  popular 
perceptions  are not accurate.
Firstly, moderate  soil impact  is often good. For example,  highly productive 
grasses  like perennial  ryegrass  are much more tolerant  of rigorous  pugging  
than most unproductive  grasses and broadleaf  weeds, especially  when  
seedlings. So, any treading  that pastures  receive  under intensive  grazing  
works to improve  pasture  composition  through  a weeding  effect. Secondly,  
hoof impact,  especially  moderately  severe  hoof impact,  can be a very effective 
way to keep pasture-damaging  insect pests and their larval stages under 
control.
In New Zealand,  several serious  pasture  pests can be checked  by ‘mob­
stocking ’ (using  very high stocking  densities  with a short on-time).  If this mob­
stocking  occurs  when the soil is holding  significant  moisture  it can be even 
more effective,  especially  on lighter  soils. This is seen with TG in the pasture  
strip underneath  a permanent  electric  fence (zero treading)  - it is often poor in 
composition,  yellowish  and harbours  high populations  of pests and larvae. In 
South America,  much grassland  Is covered  with anthills  but these disappear 
under  intensive  grazing.
Despite  such positive  treading  effects,  there is no doubt  that widespread  heavy  
pugging is harmful to pastures,  especially  ’young ’ pastures  with under­
developed  soil structure  and soil biology. However,  the perception  that 
intensive  grazing  using high stocking  rates through  winter  on heavy  soils will 
inevitably  produce  severe  pugging  damage  and long-term  productivity  loss is 
incorrect.
The management  variables  that really matter  with regard  to pugging  damage  
are:
• Immediate  stocking  density  (kg liveweight/ha)  on the currently  grazed  
subdivision.
• Level  of animal  activity  (hoofsteps/head/day).
• Grazing  on-time  (days,  or part-days).
• Recovery  time (days) before subsequent  grazing - this greatly  
influences  the number  of ’wet grazings'  likely to occur per year for a 
given  area.
TG offers  some  major  benefits  that more  than offset  the fact that it does tend to 
run a high stocking  density:
• Cattle run in small, socially stable groups under very routine  
management,  grazing  fresh  forage  at least every  two days, on a restricted  diet
139
(in winter)  are much less boisterous  and take a far fewer  footsteps  per day than 
animals  in a conventional  system.
• The  small size of subdivisions  minimises  the footsteps  taken  per day by 
livestock,  as there is little distance  to water  and forage. However  this is very 
sensitive  to the absolute  subdivision  size and shape. Small, but not slender  
areas  tend to reduce  group  surging  behaviour  seen when rain squalls  alternate  
with clearer  weather. As well as reducing  the risk of pugging/treading,  a 
reduction  in animal  activity  conserves  energy  that can be diverted  to weight  
gain.
• Because  the winter  rotation  is long (70-120  days in New Zealand)  and 
grazing  on-time  is short (daily  shifting  preferable  on wet areas),  the pasture  has 
a long period  of uninterrupted  regrowth  to recover  from any treading.  There  is 
much less chance  that a given area will suffer  a second  or third wet grazing  - 
very important  because  once a soil has been smeared  it is more prone to 
water-logging  and treading  damage. The short grazing on-on-time  helps  
because,  after a certain  degree  of animal  treading  the soil damage  changes  
from moderate  to serious,  which makes recovery  much slower. A shorter  
grazing  time might  seem  to imply a higher  stocking  density  which  could be self- 
defeating,  but the typical  behaviour  in rainy conditions  is for the group  to huddle  
in one comer of a grazing  area, and that area will be exposed  to similar  
damage  whether the overall  area is small or large.
In summary  - treading  impact  is a very important  micro-grazing  parameter,  
given  the right management  it offers  more benefits  than drawbacks.
Annual  pasture  yield
Early proponents,  particularly  French  farmer  Andre  Voisin (1959),  tended  to 
exaggerate  the improvement  in the digestible  organic matter yield that 
intelligent  rotational  grazing  generated.  In fact, isolating  the yield parameter  is 
quite difficult  because  of its interaction  with utilisation;  long-term  average  tiller 
density,  long-term  pasture  composition  and fertility  transfer  effects  (especially  
nitrogen). Some trends concerning  yield and grazing  management  can be 
stated  with reasonabie  confidence:
• More  erect cultivars/species  tend to out-produce  prostrate  forms, but 
need longer  recovery  periods  (normally  a TG feature)  to express  their potential  
and ensure  their longevity.
• Yields  are very sensitive  to the maintenance  of a good photosynthetic  
canopy  in a pasture. In winter/early  spring  however,  a pasture  typically  suffers  
from an inadequate  leaf area index, whereas  summer  to early winter  growth  is 
often compromised  by seedy senescent  material  standing  above the main 
canopy. Managing  the canopy  to avoid these ills can be achieved  purely  by 
grazing management.  TG is primarily  aimed at providing  the tools for 
managing  pasture  canopy.
Pasture  Utilisation
140
Most farmers  are aware  that harvesting  a larger fraction  of the  total annual  DM 
yield (reducing  wastage  from spoilage  and senescence)  is an important  way of 
increasing  total animal  production  per hectare. They also know that they can 
improve  utilisation  rates with higher stocking  rates and more subdivision.  
Commonsense  suggests  that if a farmer  has a hungry  animal  and offers  it only 
as much  forage  as it can eat in, say four hours,  that a much smaller fraction  of 
that forage  will be soiled  and trampled  than if the hungry  animal  was offered  a 
week ’s worth of the same ration  at one time, especially  if the standing  mass is 
large. However,  farmers  are much less conscious  of the influence  of utilisation  
rates on pasture  composition,  tiller density,  quality  and longevity,  and very few 
appreciate  the central role played in grazing management  by the conflict  
between  pasture  utilisation  ratios  and animal  feed conversion  ratios.
Higher  stocking  pressures  (appetite  versus  offer) give higher  utilisation  rates,  
less selective  grazing  and lower  residuals,  which  translate  into improved  quality  
on subsequent  grazings  (more fresh growth  and less weed content),  higher  
tiller densities  (because  of better light penetration),  shorter  residuals  and less 
'squodging'  (squashing  and lodging  of older grass onto developing  tillers). All 
this leads to improve  pasture  longevity  - a vastly under-rated  contributor  to 
long-term  productivity.
Pasture  composition  can improve  with time, especially  with regard  to plants  
adapting  to local eco-niches. Below ground there are also marked  
improvements  in soil structure,  organic  matter  content  and soil biology. Older  
pastures  can be very productive,  but more importantly,  they are much more  
resilient  to adverse  conditions  such as treading,  drought,  flooding,  pests and 
diseases  than juvenile  pastures.  Of course,  pasture  renewal  is not cheap  and 
some  production  is inevitably  lost during  its establishment.
While there is a fairly poor appreciation  of the pasture  benefits  of heavy  
stocking  pressure,  there is widespread  awareness  of the need to feed animals  
generously  for improved  productivity.  Intuitively,  farmers  know  that bigger  rates  
of gain are associated  with better  feed conversion  ratios;  counter-intuitively,  this 
association  is non-linear  and a 50% increase  in liveweight  gain from 1 kg/day  to 
1.5 kg/day  might  improve  feed conversion  ratios  by only 10%.
A 10% improvement  in pasture  utilisation  and/or  quality  is probably  much  easier 
to achieve  than a 50% improvement  in weight  gain, and since rate of gain is so 
sensitive  to pasture  quality,  chasing  gains at the expense  of utilisation  is often  
self-defeating.  High stocking  pressures,  under good management,  can do 
many desirable  things  to the pasture  and improve  utilisation,  but this comes  at 
the short-term  cost of lowering  animal  intakes  and hence  feed conversion.
The textbook  description  of the interaction  between  production  vs. stocking  rate 
shows  a dome-shaped  graph  with maximum  production  at the top of the dome.  
However,  under  TG that dome  is probably  flatter,  with the maximum  occuring  at 
a higher point on both axes. It is flatter  because  a farmer  can maintain  average  
pasture  covers  even while  restricting  intake,  whereas the traditional  model  soon  
falls apart  when additional  stocking  pressure  runs down the pasture  canopy  at 
critical  times such as late-winter/early-spring.  It is also higher  because  of the
141
efficiencies  discussed,  such as a much higher  utilisation  ratio. Deciding  on the 
optimum  stocking  rate for a farm is a difficult  business  because  of climatic  and 
market  uncertainty,  but it is easier  for TG farms, because  of the flatter  graph  
referred  to above. The flatter graph implies less sensitivity  to seasonal  
variation  and less risk of very poor performance  in years of low pasture  
production.
Animal  Stress
Small, socially  stable  groups  under  a regular  routine  are visibly  less stressed  
than their counterparts  (large  gps. Moved  less frequently).  This is obvious  with 
bulls that show stress in no uncertain  terms, but other stock classes  are 
probably  just as affected,  even if the signs  are subtler. A good gauge  of stress  
levels  is the length  of time livestock  spend  lying down  and grooming  - elevated  
social  activity  and its influence  on treading  have already  been discussed.  Most 
farmers  are aware  that contented  animals  finish well and many human  studies  
show  that stress  predisposes  to disease  and interferes  with normal  growth  and 
development.  Since bull’s stress symptoms  are so obviously  reduced,  it is 
reasonable  to accept  that TG is a good model  in this respect.  A study in New 
Zealand,  found that TG bulls were quieter  and fought  less than those under  
conventional  management  (M.W. Fisher,  pers. comm  ). So it is safe to assume  
that lower  stress  under TG is another  micro-grazing  variable  that contributes  to 
overall  performance.
Animal  Health
Less stress indicates  better immune  response  and lower susceptibility  to a 
variety  of diseases,  but there are strong  indications  that TG directly  mitigates  at 
least some  animal  diseases  more  directly:
• Facial  Eczema  is a liver disease  prevalent  in New Zealand  caused  by 
the fungal  spores  of Pythomices  chartarum.  The fungus  thrives  in dead pasture  
litter and can cause serious  long term symptoms  and death, especially  in 
sheep,  but also in cattle. The fungus  is most active  during autumn  in warm  
humid conditions.  Stock under TG do not appear  to be susceptible  to this 
disease,  probably  because  of the lower thatch and litter levels evident  under  
TG.
Internal  parasites  are probably  the most economically  significant  animal  health  
problem  of ruminants  world-wide,  and drench  resistance  in parasites  looms  as 
a very serious  problem.
TG provides  an excellent  platform  to practice  alternative  parasite  management:
• Alternating  grazings  with different  stock class (sheep  with cattle, or 
calves  with older cattle)  greatly  assists  in minimising  the larval challenge  in a 
pasture.
• Including  condensed  tannin-containing  legumes  (such as Lotus  species)  
and herbs  that are known  to lower parasitism  (chicory  and plantain)  in a pasture  
also helps significantly.  These  legumes  and grazing  herbs flourish  under  TG 
and are more  persistent  compared  with conventionally  grazed  herbal  pastures.
142
• Soil is much more biologically  active under  old TG pasture,  and when  
combined  with high digestibility  forage,  means  that the ‘half life’ of dung pats is 
so short that that they have usually  gone before  the next grazing,  so larva 
survival  is likely to decline  markedly.  The lack of thatch  and litter in a typical  
TG sward  also exposes  parasitic  larvae  to desiccation  and sunlight.
• For some parasite  species (in particular  Haemoncus)  long winter 
rotations  are particularly  effective  in reducing  worm burdens.  A four-year  trial 
near Armidale  in Australia  by Dr Lewis Kahn, University  of New England  and 
farmer  Rob Kelly has shown  that under TG, egg counts  are between  20% and 
0.1% of the levels  found in conventionally  - grazed  lambs, despite  a stocking  
rate that is over 50% higher than the latter. The same trial has shown  
improvements  in ground  cover, water infiltration  rates and weed-free  status  
under  TG.
Successful  adaption  on farms
TechnoGrazing™  has been in commercial  use by the developer  for more than 
30 years, and by commercial  farmers  for the past 20 years. It has been 
demonstrated  to be a reliable  and profitable  concept  when  used properly  and in 
suitable  situations.  To date no environmental  deterioration  has been recorded  
from TG farms,  indicating  that it is a sustainable  farming  system. The following 
summaries  are a few exampies  of the successful  adoption  of the TG system:
Australia
Tom Ellis runs Coola  Station  near Mount  Gambier  in southwest  South  Australia,  
where  average  rainfall  is 675 mm, falling  mostly  between  April and December.  
Summer  temperatures  can reach 40®C. The property  comprises  a total of 
2,464 ha, with 1,193 ha in intensive  grazing,  and is managed  with three full­
time staff. The remainder  of Coola Station  is run in traditional  sheep  breeding  
and steer finishing.  At present  681 ha is in classic  multi-lane  TG, and 125 ha 
has centre-pivot  irrigation  and is a circular  grazing  system, resembling  an 
unusual  dartboard.  A further  387 ha is in a larger  block-grazing  system  using  
TG lanes  with three  wires to run Coopworth  sheep.
The average  stocking  rate on TG at Coola  is 3 bulls/ha,  with up to 3500 bulls 
(averaging  700 kg/lwtg/ha)  carried  on a seasonal  basis. The grazing  systems  
are stocked  from April to June with bulls weighing  250 - 400 kg at a time when  
pasture  growth is optimal. De-stocking  begins in spring (October)  and is 
usually  completed  by early summer  (January)  before  pastures  dry off. Most 
bulls are sent to slaughter  with some  smaller  bulls going  to supply  a feedlot.
The farm sits on sheet  limestone,  with soils ranging  from sandy  loam to heavy  
black  with large deposits  of flint rock through  most of the farm. When  TG was 
first started,  the pastures  were based  on native  annual  species  with some  older 
cocksfoot.  In more recent  times older pastures  have been replaced,  initially  
with cocksfoot,  but latterly  with newer  cocksfoot  and tall fescue  selections  (in 
this region perennial  ryegrass  performance  suffers  from summer  droughts).
143
Approximately  100 ha are sown to lucerne. Soil fertility  is moderately  high. 
Superphosphate  and some urea is applied annually  to the grazing land. 
Compost  poultry  manure  is also applied  at 1000 kg/ha.
Near Guyra on the New South Wales tablelands,  Rob Kelly jointly runs 
Superfine  Merino  sheep  on a 570 ha property  with his siblings. Using  TG they 
have more than doubled  gross margins.  The farm has typical  low-moderately  
fertile  granite  soils and natural  pastures.  Annual  rainfall  averages  850-900  mm, 
but can vary immensely.  Historically,  the family ran sheep mostly by set 
stocking  at six ewes/ha,  almost  continuously  grazing  the same land. Recently  
however  the stocking  rate on the farm has increased  to 10 ewes/ha  with gross  
margins  of $335/ha  - a two-thirds  increase.  This was achieved  in conjunction  
with a trial carried  out by Dr Lewis Kahn (University  of New England),  who 
compared  the traditional  management  (5-6 ewes/ha)  with two TG areas  on 75 
ha stocked  at 6.8 and 9.7 ewes/ha  respectively.
Monitoring  showed  that the traditional  management  returned  A$29.65/ewe  in 
two years, giving a gross margin  of A$148.26/ha.  This contrasted  with TG 
ewes at 6.8/ha,  which returned  A$30.81/ewe  or A$209.48/ha.  At 9.7 ewes/ha  
under TG, returns  were boosted  to A$34.60/ewe  or A$335.64/ha.  Despite  
carrying  more animals  the TG ensured  a good quality  feed supply. The trial 
began  in May 2003 and by autumn  2004 the TG areas had 3,500 - 4,000 kg 
DM/ha  of forage,  a threefold  increase  compared  with 1,000 kg DM/ha  for the 
set-stocked  system.
Factors  favouring  TG in this situation  are thought  to include  more milk from 
ewes during  early lactation,  a closer  proximity  of ewes and lambs in the small  
grazing  cells, and lower  worm levels  in lambs. The lambs  under  TG initially  had 
tenfold  fewer internal  parasites  than those on set-stocked  pasture,  though  this 
declined  to five fold when the rotations  were slowed trying to boost lamb 
weights. Currently  the system  applies  spells  of 50-70 days rather  than 30-40  
days. The target is 15.6 DSE/ha  and at 10 ewes/ha  this is achieved.  
Experience  suggests  that it is best to put TG on the most productive  land, and 
to use it as the driving  force behind  the enterprise.  A farmer  can run enough  
livestock  on the TG area to ease pressure  on the remaining  farm area, offering  
a chance  to develop  it further.
New Zealand
John Hudson  who farms 1120 ha at Gwavas  Station  near Tikikino  in dryland  
Hawke ’s Bay was the first farmer  to attend  Wier’ s TG course  and install the 
concept. He runs bulls under  TG on part of the farm at 4.14/ha,  with returns  
exceeding  NZ$2,000/ha  (Taylor,  2001). Bulls start into the system  at 402 kg in 
August  and are sold by December  before  onset  of summer  drought.
Gwavas  Station  was used  for a Sustainable  Land Management  project  (Rhodes  
1999), and TG was approved  as a sustainable  land management  system  
following  several  years of assessment.  Consultants  involved  used standard  
decision-support  software  and warned  Hudson  that according  to their  output  TG 
wouldn ’t work, but the system  proved  them wrong  and adjustments  then had to
144
be made  when assessing  TG. Hudson  reported  that his gross margin  returns  
rose significantly  when  he changed  from conventional  beef  grazing  to TG.
Angus  Mabin  farms near Waipukurau  in dryland  Hawke ’s Bay in eastern  North  
Island, farming  nearly 3000 bulls on close to 1100 ha (including  167 ha of 
rolling hills and 100 ha leased). Mabin  developed  his first TG in 1997 and is 
now running  dairy bulls on all except  77 ha for deer. Previously  the farm was 
subdivided  into blocks  of 6-10 ha that were set-stocked  by beef cattle at 10-25  
per mob (0.6-0.75/acre).  However  feed shortages  occurred  every winter  and 
the system  required  high labour  input. Weed  invasion  was also problem  in the 
less productive  browntop-dominant  pastures.  The system  now runs rising  two- 
year-old  bulls under TG, buying them in autumn  at 350-450  kg. They are 
finished  at 600-650  kg and sold by late January  before  summer  drought  sets in.
The past few years  have seen long summer  droughts.  To date there has been  
no regrassing  as the existing  pastures  improved  markedly  under TG, and have 
remained  resilient. Following  the severed  droughts,  some pasture  areas  have  
been lost on the free-draining  land, though  it will recover  on the heavier soils.
Mabin considers  TG to be “very powerful  and flexible,  particularly  in drought  
seasons ” and even during drought  can deliver  some high quality regrowth,  
enabling  him to continue  grazing. Once the rains return in autumn  he can 
restock  quickly  and his farm production  remains  well ahead of neighbouring  
properties  using conventional  management.  Stock are checked  when moving  
them every two days, and disease  prevention  is much better than with the 
previous  conventional  system.
Ron and Chrissy  McCloy  milk a herd of 46 cows on a 20ha TG system,  rear 
over 500 bobby calves on the milk and then finish the weaners  on TG in 
Northland  (north of Auckland),  capturing  the calf rearing  and weaning  margins  
that other  bull-beef  finishers  must pay to purchase  stock. Their very  supportive  
bank manager  was initially  doubtful  about  TG but now sends  others  to see the 
McCloys,  as the production  and revenue  levels  have impressed  him so much.  
The McCloys  purchased  the 250ha farm in 2004 and established  a milking  
herd, calf rearing  and beef finishing  system. They put in 120ha of TG and 
purchased  an adjoining  80ha in 2006 and lOOha  recently.  They are aiming  for 
lOOOkg/ha  liveweight  (LW) gain using TG over the whole  farm. In 2004-2005 
the farm produced  200kg/ha  CW (the Northland  average)  and in 2005-2006,  
267kg/ha  CW, but their results  from the first 50ha of TG have been 900- 
1 lOOkg/ha  LW (450-550kg/ha  CW) over  the past four farming  years.
The farm is on steeply  rising hills, a most unlikely  place for TG. It receives  
2300mm  of evenly  spread  annual  rainfall,  and rises to 450m. Soil types are a 
mix of clay and bouldery  complex  with moderate  fertility  levels  on the main area 
but low on the new blocks. The farm ’s layout  is a patchwork  of 10 adjoining  TG 
systems  separated  by some rough gullies,  knobs  and volcanic  boulder  fields.  
Ron McCloy  feels that even the rockiest  paddocks  can be included  in a TG 
system. The 10 systems  are a mix of multiplexes  and single lanes and total 
122ha,  or just under  half of the home farm 250ha. The first TG in 2002 was 
20ha of four lanes and 60 cells/lane.  It is also the most irregular  layout,  to
145
avoid  wet patches  and preserve  regular  cell size. He can run a lane fence  right 
through  a swamp  or rocky  outcrop  and tolerate  a small grazing  loss in just one 
day of many. Net liveweight  gain has steadily  increased  from 954kg/ha  in 2002  
to 1100kg  in 2005-2006.  Ron and Chrissy  use TG on country  that is usually  
considered  unsuitable  for such systems,  running  450 (rising  one-year)  and 212 
(rising  two-year)  bulls on the hillsides.
The McCloys  rear 600 calves  on home  milk, supplementary  powder  and pellets  
over a year. They  operate  a once-a-day  milking  system  on a 20ha dairy  TG in 
0.25ha  cells, with twice-a-day  shifting. Milk is transferred  500 litres at a time 
into a mobile  calf feeder and is driven  a short  distance  to the calf barn. Calves  
are fed milk until 65kg LW and then supplementary  pellets  and hay until 90- 
100kg  and weaning.  The McCloys  calculate  that rearing  calves  saves  around  
NZ$100/head  compared  with buying 100kg LW weaners. When calves  are 
100kg  they  will graduate  to a calf TG.
The McCloys  believe TG can run large stock  numbers  forever. No drenching  is 
done unless  the animals  need it, and only half the drenches  are used on the TG 
compared  with the old paddock  grazing.
Conclusions
The TG system  has proved  itself by other farmers  successfully  adopting  it to 
other livestock  types in a wide range of farming situations. Cost-benefit  
analysis  of traditional  and TG systems  for beef finishing  (Ogle & Tither,  2000)  
found TG markedly  boosted  returns  on total capital  invested.  Some  exciting  TG 
productivity  benchmarks  have already  been set, but there is still room to 
enhance the system's  capacity.
Intensive  farming  is usually  associated  with machinery,  chemicals,  fertiliser  and 
heavy  energy  use, nitrate  leaching,  animal  stress  and soil damage.  Though  TG 
is intensive  in the general  sense,  and can be practiced  intensively,  there is no 
reason  for farmers  to do so. Pasture-based  livestock  farming  can be relatively  
natural, healthy, safe and sustainable,  and TG in particular  offers these  
benefits.
References
Brougham,  R.W., Causley, D.C. and Madgwick,  L.E. (1975). Pasture  
management  systems  and animal production.  Proceedings  of the Ruakura  
Farmers  Conference,  1975: 65-69.
Brougham,  R.W. and Cosgrove,  G.P. (1985). Pastures  and pasture  
management  for high animal  production  in New Zealand.  Proceedings  of the 
XV International  Grassland  Congress,  Kyoto,  Japan:  1134-1136.
146
Cosgrove,  G.P., Clark, D.A. and Lambert,  M.G. (2003), High production  dairy-  
beef cattle grazing systems: a review of research  in the Manawatu.  
Proceedings  of the New  Zealand  Grassland  Association,  65: 21-28.
Jones,  M. (1933). Grassland  management  and its influence  on the sward. Part
1. Factors  influencing  the growth of pasture plants. Empire  Journal  of 
Experimental  Agriculture,  1: 43-57.
Jones,  M. (1933). Grassland  management  and its influence  on the sward. Part
2. The management  of a clovery  sward and its effects. Empire  Journal  of 
Experimental  Agriculture,  1: 223-234.
Ogle, G. and Tither, P. (2000). An analysis  of the risks and benefits  of beef 
intensification.  Proceedings  of the New Zealand  Grassland  Association,  62: 
25-29.
Rhodes,  A.P., Mackay,  A.D., Lambert,  M.G., Krausse,  M.K., Willis, B.H. and 
Withell, B. (1999). Dirty Habits - a basis for developing  sustainable  
productivity.  Proceedings  of the New  Zealand  Grassland  Association,  61: 79- 
83.
Taylor,  M. (2001). Income  of $2000/ha  in Hawke ’s Bay. Article  in The New  
Zealand  Farmer,  123: 18.
Voisin,  A. (1959). Grass  productivity.  Publ. Crosby  Lockwood,  London.  1959.  
pp353.
147
Development  of the Scottish Monitor Farms  
Programme
'johnny  Mackey  and ^lain Riddell
^Technical  Projects  Manager,  Quality  Meat Scotland,  Rural Centre, West  
Mains,  Ingliston,  Newbridge,  Midlothian,  EH28  8LT
^Select Services  Group Manager,  SAC, PBS Perth, Sandpiper  House,  
Ruthvenfield Road,  Perth,  PH1 3EE
Background
The Monitor  Farms  Programme  (MFP)  is now well established  in Scotland  with 
twelve  farms successfully  operating  under  this banner  - ten livestock  and two 
arable. The concept  hails from New Zealand  where  it has proved  successful  in 
encouraging  the widespread  adoption  of new, successful  farming  techniques.  
Monitor  farms are normal  commercial  farms, representative  of enterprises  and 
conditions  in their local area, where the farmer is prepared  to allow other  
farmers  access  to the farm; and to the decision-making  process. The other  
farmers can then assess changes  made on the Monitor Farm and are 
encouraged  to adopt  the successful  ideas  themselves.
Aims of the MFP
The aim is to use the Monitor  Farm as an example  that will motivate  other  
farmers  to:
• Improve  the physical  and financial  performance  of farm businesses,  
using the whole farm business  planning  approach  adopted  on the Monitor  
Farm.
• Influence  farmer ’s attitudes  to change  and encourage  a more rapid  
uptake  of best practice  ideas,  by trying  these  out on the Monitor  Farm.
• Encourage  farmers  to record data, benchmark  their performance  
against others,  and identify  ways  to achieve  better  performance.
• Encourage  farmers  to set specific  goals, objectives  and budgetary  
targets.
• Encourage  the development  of systems  that reduce production  
costs, improve physical and financial performance  and free up more  
management  time.
• Increase  awareness  of methods  to improve  market  returns  and ways  
of adding  value.
Funding  of the MFP
Quality  Meat Scotland,  the red meat levy body in Scotland,  are the core funders  
for the Monitor  Farms Programme  through  their R&D programme.  Scottish  
Government  and Scottish  Enterprise  also contribute  significant  funds with the 
remaining  funds coming  from more local sources  depending  on the location  of 
the Monitor  Farm. The funding  is attributed  three ways - approximately  two 
thirds covers  the costs of the professional  facilitator,  with the final third being
148
split between  the exists of specialist  speakers  and analysis. It is important  to 
note that the Monitor  Farming  business  does not receive  any direct  payment.
How do monitor  farms  work?
The real strength  of a Monitor  Farm is that principally  the local farming  
community  selects  the business.  The main criteria  for selecting  a Monitor  Farm  
is that the business  in question  is typical  of the local area, there is room for 
improvement  and that the farmer  is willing  to take ideas on board to improve  
the overall  performance.
Once the Monitor  Farm has been selected,  the facilitator  advertises  for free 
membership  of the Community  Group  (CG). This group  will mainly  be formed  
of farmers  from the surrounding  area and will also include  associated  trade  
representatives  such as the farm vet, banker,  and accountant,  feed supplier,  
auction  mart and abattoir. Given the regular  discussions  of animal health  
issues  within the MFP, inclusion  of the local vet in the CG is now seen as 
essential.  The CG set the short, medium  and long-term  objectives  for the 
Monitor  Farm in the first two meetings  and then meet six times per year over 
the next three years to work on those objectives  for the greater  good of their 
local farming  economy.
Financial  issues  at monitor  farms
As one of the principal  aims of the MFP is to improve  the financial  performance  
of the business  in question,  work  on the finances  around  the Monitor  Farms  has 
been extensive.  The willingness  of Monitor  Farmers  to allow others  access  to 
their accounts  has been a big plus and helped  everyone ’s understanding  of 
financial  issues. It is a brave step to present  a set of accounts  for scrutiny  by 
others,  and we are greatly  indebted  to our volunteer  Monitor  Farmers  for their 
openness.  The whole farm approach  also creates  the opportunity  to look at 
each enterprise  and its contribution  to the bottom  line. The more open the 
Monitor  Farmer  is, the more others  will get from the project,  but it also works  
the other  way. The more open the Monitor  Farmer  is the more  they will expect  
others to do the same.
There is one golden rule. Sensitive  information  discussed  within the group  
stays within the group. To get round this issue, data is presented  as 
percentages  rather  than absolute  figures,  allowing  some  of the discussion  to be 
broadcast  for the benefit  of a wider audience.
This section  gives  an opportunity  to see how other sets of accounts  compare  to 
some of the Monitor  Farms. Of course  the bottom  line can be influenced  by 
other factors  such as the weather,  price fluctuations,  changes  to the support  
regime  and so on but this at least gives  a starting  point.
149
Borders  Monitor  Farm
Table 1 shows  four years accounts  analysis  for the original  Borders  Monitor  
Farm at Lilliesleaf.  Variable  costs are well under  control  and the level of gross  
margin  shows  that the business  was technically  efficient.  The only exception  is 
2001 when lamb prices  were so low, reducing  output  and making  costs look 
higher. Fixed costs came close to meeting  target in 2002 and 2004, a 
commendable  achievement  given the fact that most land is rented, and the 
business  is relatively  young. Net profit  exceeded  target  of 15% in two years.
Table  1. Accounts  analysis  for the Borders  Monitor  Farm by production  
year
Percentage  of gross  output
2001 2002 2003 2004 Target
Gross  output 100 100 100 100 100
Variable  costs 37 26 27 23 30^0
Gross  margin 63 74 73 77 60-70
Fixed  costs 67 55 60 55 45-55
Net profit -4 19 13 22 >15
The analysis  illustrates  the variability  of farm incomes  from year to year often  
due to factors  outside  farmers ’ control. The Monitor  Farm project  is all about  
improving  the aspects  of production  that are within a farmer ’s control. 2005  
figures  were also analysed  but the combination  of some  subsidy  payments  and 
delayed  payment  of Single Farm Payment  (SFP) made direct comparison  
difficult and for these  reasons  they have not been included  in this summary.
150
Figure 1. Graphic  representation  of Borders  Monitor  Farm accounts  
analysis
Gross  output  anaiysis■ 2000  
® 2001 
□ 2002  
a 2003  
° 2004  
- Target  Max
■■ Target  Min
Variable Labour Power  & Property  & Rent&
Machinery  General  Interest  Profit/
Loss
Comparison  with accounts  from 3 other local farms
Taking  this a stage  further,  accounts  were then compared  with those  for three  
other similar farms in the Borders,  from volunteers  within the Community  
Group. This was rated the most useful session  held at a Monitor  Farm  
meeting. The aim was to improve  peoples  understanding  of accounts  and to 
benchmark  the Monitor  Farm  with similar  businesses  in the group. Results  can 
be seen below. Accounts were  analysed  for the 2004  crop year.
151
Table  2. Comparison  of three  sets of accounts  with the Monitor  Farm
2004 Monitor
farmFarm  A Farm BFarm C Target
Gross  output
Crops  (%) 10 38 31 21
Cattle (%) 25 27 0 35
Sheep  (%) 59 30 60 34
Other  income  {%) 6 4 9 9
Output  (%) 100 100 100 100 100
Variable  costs  (%) 23 22 27 32 30-40
Gross  margin  (%) 77 78 73 68 60-70
Labour (%) 5 9 0 9 15-18
Power  machinery  (%) 25 21 37 32 15-18
Property  (%) 3 4 8 1
General  {%) 4 3 8 8 6-8
Rent & interest  (%) 17 19 0 7 15
Fixed  costs  (%) 55 60 53 57 45-55
Net profit  (%) 22 24 20 11 min. 15
One of the most useful benefits  from this exercise  was to discover  that their 
accounts  were not that much different  from other members.  All had relatively  
low labour  costs, but were well over target  for machinery  costs. Combining  
both labour and machinery  however  got all of the businesses  within target.  
Both the Monitor  Farm and Farm  A had high rent and interest  figures  due to the 
fact that they  were  tenancies.
For the next exercise  the group members  were split into three groups  and 
asked to look at the Monitor  Farm ’s machinery  list and identify  where any 
savings  could be made. The biggest  part of the valuation  comprised  a car, the 
farm truck and a tractor,  with all other items at less cost. None of the groups  
were able to identify  any items that could be considered  a luxury. The best 
suggestion  was that the Monitor  Farm could do a deal with an arable  farmer  to 
do the spraying  and fertiliser  spreading  (all other  arable  operations  are done by 
contractor).  The conclusion  was that the Monitor  Farmers  were doing a very 
good  job and had kept costs relatively  low.
Wigtownshire financial  analysis
Full details of the Profit and Loss Account  from the original  Wigtownshire  
Monitor  Farm, before the stage  of deducting  rent and interest  payments,  can be 
seen in the following  table.
152
Table  3. Analysis  of four  sets  of accounts  from  Wigtownshire  MF
Percentage  of gross  output
2002 2003 2004 2005 TARGET
Gross  Output 100 100 100 100 100
Variable  Costs 34 30 27 42 30-40Gross  Margin 66 70 73 58 60-70Labour 11 13 11 8 15-18Power 26 20 23 18 15-18Overheads 11 13 16 10 4-6Profit  before  rent/finance 18 24 23 22 Min 30
Output increased  steadily  over the four-year  period and the Single Farm  
Payment  contributed  25% of this by 2005. Variable  costs had been falling,  but 
rose in 2005, largely  due to expenditure  on feed, seed and fertiliser  almost  
doubling,  to fall just outside  the target  range  at 42% of gross  output.
Wages  at 8% of output were well below the target of 15-18%. Machinery  
repairs coupled  with depreciation  contributed  to the spend on power and 
machinery,  which  was 18% of output  and close  to the target,  but still suggested  
room for improvement.  General  overheads  accounted  for 10% of output in 
2005 (against  target of 6%) and include  property  repairs  and expenditure  on 
fencing  and drainage.
The group concluded  that only fine-tuning  was reguired  going forward  — 
variable  costs should  come back in line, as part of this increase  in 2005 was 
one off expenditure  on lime.
Net margins  for individual  enterprises
After decoupling  many Monitor  Farm groups looked at the individual  net 
margins  without  support  payments  of each enterprise  on the farm. Accepting  
that support  payments  are an integral  part of the whole  farm accounts,  it is 
possible  to compare  the returns  from different  enterprises  and fine-tune  the 
system.
A classic  example  of this was on the first North Argyll Monitor  Farm when the 
autumn  calving  cows left a considerably  lower margin  than the spring  calvers  
The Community  Group recommended  that the autumn  herd be sold and the 
spring  herd increased.
153
Table  4. Net margin  figures  for two herds  on North  Argyll  MF
Spring Autumn QMS av. 2003
Net margin 62 -81 32
Less support  payments -143 -372 -148
The figures  can also help inform on the fragility  of farming  in remoter  areas.  
The second North Argyll Monitor  Farm is a well-run  unit, but is heavily  
dependent  on Single Farm Payment  (SFP), LFASS, and Agri-environment  
schemes  to turn in a profit on farming  operations.  This is a case of the Monitor  
Farm informing  others  or acting  as a barometer  for farms in the area, which  is 
of interest  to policy  makers.
Figures  produced  by SAC facilitator  Niall Campbell  showed  that the sheep  
enterprise  net margin,  excluding  support  payments  and including  all costs,  was 
a hefty loss of £54 per ewe. Adding in a share of SFP, LFASS, Land  
Management  Contract  payments,  and Agri-environment  payments  converted  
this to a small  profit  of £8.14  per ewe.
Sheep numbers  are reducing  in the north and west Highlands,  which has 
serious  implications  for employment  in the area, as well as environmental  and 
landscape  concerns.  One of the aims of the Monitor  Farms  Programme  is to 
address  these  concerns  and come  up with practical  solutions.
The Buchan  Monitor  Farm has probably  made  the most changes  to production  
after analysing  performance  figures  in Year one. Heifers  that were grazed  for a 
second  summer are  housed  from weaning  and finished  on an ad lib cereal  diet; 
herd fertility  has been improved  through  cow and bull management;  and health  
planning  has been undertaken  to minimise  the impact  of disease. This was 
already  a well-run  unit but the Monitor  Farmer  freely  admits  that the project  has 
helped  quickly focus  in on areas  requiring  attention.  The following  table shows  
how performance  has improved  and how the Monitor  Farm exceeds  QMS  
survey data for rearer  finisher enterprises.
Results  (Table 5) are shown for calves bom in 2005 and finished  in 2006  
(2005) and those bom in 2004 and finished  in 2005 (2004) for the spring  
calving  herd only. The Monitor  Farm performance  is particularly  impressive,  
and encouragingly continues  to improve.
154
Table  5. Analysis  of two years  accounts  from  Buchan  MF
Monitor  farm QMS Rearer 
finishers
2005 2004 Average  2004
Calf output 757 635 560
Support  payments 38 255 294
less net replacement  cost -44 -41 -58
Output 751 848 796
Purchased  concentrate 15 19 89
Homegrown  concentrate 113 61 53
Other  feed 27 39 26
Forage 37 30 44
Total  feed and forage 192 149 212
Vet and med 47 38 22
Bedding 36 31 43
Other  costs 36 26 17
Total variable  costs 312 244 294
Gross  margin 439 604 502
Fixed  costs 457 437 422
Net margin -18 167 80
Net margin  less subsidies -56 -90 -214
Feedback  on the MFP
To date only anecdotal  feedback through  direct  communication  and some  short  
surveys  carried  out by the facilitators  is available.  For example  the North  Argyll  
Monitor  Farm surveyed  its community  group  to discover  that 91 % of the group  
had implemented  ideas generated  on the Monitor  Farm in their own business.  
Personal  communication  with dozens  of farmers  involved  in the programme  via 
the community  groups  suggests  that they find the meetings,  and subsequently  
generated  reports,  extremely  useful to their businesses.  The reports  loaded  
onto the QMS website  are some of the most visited  pages  on that site. The 
Monitor  Farm work reaches  a much larger audience  through  regular  press  
articles  and through  use of the information  at meetings  around  the country.  
Feedback  from those not attached  to Monitor  Farm groups  has also been  
positive.
In order to provide some independent  analysis  on the effectiveness,  or 
otherwise,  of the Scottish  Monitor  Farms Programme,  QMS and Scottish  
Government  have commissioned  an evaluation  of the MFP which is due to 
report  in September  2008.
Future  Development
Future  development  of the MFP will very much depend  on the findings  of the 
review referred  to above. There are some obvious  geographical  gaps in
155
Scotland  (Dumfriesshire,  Lanarkshire,  Stirlingshire,  Caithness,  Orkney)  in which  
groups  of farmers  are starting  to request  that they be allocated  their own 
Monitor Farm.
Conclusions
The Monitor  Farm Programme  has for the first time given farmer's  access  to 
good, reliable  physical  and financial  information  for individual  farms, which is 
freely  available.  The information  gathered  from the MFP allows  the industry  to:
• Compare  farm accounts  against  the Monitor  Farms;
• Compare  enterprise  performance  against  the Monitor  Farms;
• Glean  practical  information  that fellow farmers  have used to improve  
performance  on their  farms.
There  is no substitute  for joining  a Monitor  Farm community  group, however  if 
this is not possible,  then all reports  can be accessed  on the Monitor  Farms  
Programme  pages  in the QMS  website  - www.amscotland.co.uk/monitorfarms
156
Essential  steps to successfully  investing  in the stock  
market
Ardle  Culleton  and Susan  Hayes
37 La Touche  Park, Greystones,  Co. Wicklow
Introduction
Investing  in the Stock Market  can be easy to do and very rewarding.  It is an 
established  fact that markets  rise over time and one way to win in the stock  
markets  is to buy business  value when it's available. In this paper, we 
endeavour  to explain  through  five easy to follow  steps, the most effective  way 
of achieving  stock market success. During the course of the paper, the 
different  procedures  an investor  will need to adhere  to are explained  are as 
follows;
Know  ‘who you are’ in the market;
Take volatility  out of the market;
Follow  a logical,  easy  to understand  and time tested  strategy;  
Keep brokerage  costs low;
Let the power  of compounding  work its magic.
Know  who you are in the market
In the market  there are both investors  and speculators,  and before  participating,  
it is important  to identify  which one you are. A speculator  may have some of 
the following  trading  characteristics;  active  buying  and selling,  short term bets, 
uses technical  analysis  to examine  companies,  contracts  for difference 
accounts,  spread  betting  etc. An investor  is very different,  as this type of an 
individual  will use fundamental  analysis  i.e. look at a firm’s cash flows, yield 
value ratios, and undertakes  logical,  time-tested  strategies  and is committed  to 
remain  in the market  for the medium  to long term. It is extremely  difficult  to be 
a speculator  and emerge  with a positive  return, for two reasons. Firstly, a 
commission  must be paid each time one buys and again  when one sells. If an 
individual  is making  frequent  short term bets, these commissions  will quickly 
eat in to profits  and diminish  them substantially.
The poker  analogy  illustrates  how difficult  it is to make a consistent  gain in the 
short  term. Imagine  four people  sitting  around  the table playing  poker  - by the 
end of the evening,  two people  will have  won and two will have lost but no new 
money  leaves  the room, it is simply a zero sum game. The gains the two 
winners  make  arise due to the losses  of the two other  participants.  This is very 
similar  behaviour  to speculators  who are in the stock market  for short-term  
plays. A business  could not hope to have growth  rates consistently  of 5% (or 
even 1% daily), and if it did it would rapidly meet with production  capacity
157
problems.  Consequently,  the only way to make money  in the short term is to 
be at the opposite  of another's  loss. It is arguable  that a good speculator  can 
take advantage  of some good short-term  bets and this is true. However,  we 
live in an ‘Information  Age’ where professional  investment  institutions  have 
access to second by second stock market news from companies  like 
Bloomberg  and Reuters.  These  professional  investment  institutions  will spot an 
arbitrage  opportunity  and make use of it long before an amateur  has even 
heard the news flow. As a result, similar to the poker game, what the 
speculator  may gain in one short term bet, they are almost  certain  to lose on 
another  one and have to pay two commissions  to boot each time, driving  their 
profits  potentially  into the red and their  head into the sand.
The investor  has a much higher  chance  of success.  Firstly,  he/she  is investing  
in companies  based  on fundamental  analysis,  and hence  will buy firms that are 
offering  good value in the medium  to long term. It is an established  fact that 
markets  rise over  time as society  trades  and economies  develop.  For instance,  
the S&P 500 has grown 11% compound  per annum  (cpa) since 1970. This is 
an index  that is made  up of the five hundred  richest  companies  in America  and 
accounts  for 80% of the market  capitalisation  of all stocks  listed on the New 
York Stock Exchange.  This is one example  of many that stock markets  rise 
over  time.
In addition, investors  undertake  logical, time tested and easy to follow 
strategies.  If an individual  has a good approach  that has these  characteristics,  
they have clear, defined  guidelines  so as to maximise  their returns  without  
letting  emotion  lead them to speculators ’ pitfalls.
Take  volatility  out of  the market
It is impossible  for anybody  to predict  with consistent  accuracy,  which  way the 
market  will move. So instead  of trying in vain to time the market,  one can 
eliminate  volatility  in so far as it is possible  from an individual ’s perspective.  In 
the short term, the stock market  is an “irrational  beast ” - it reacts wildly to 
positive  or negative  news flows, which can drive share prices apart from the 
intrinsic  value of the company,  which is both the cause and effect of 
unpredictability.  However,  if an investor  engages  in a regular  investment  plan, 
they can deal effectively  with this issue. If the market  falls, the buyer  can invest  
at a lower  price and as pointed  out earlier,  the market  will rise over time. As a 
result, the individual  does not have to attempt  to time the market, but 
nonetheless deals with volatility  effectively.
The SSIA Experience  in Ireland  from 2001-06  is an excellent  example  of how 
this theory  works in practice. Figure  1 illustrates  that the European  FT Euro-  
First 100 index  was higher  at the beginning  of the SSIA timeframe  than at the 
end of it; therefore  if an investor  had put a lump sum into this particular  market  
in May 01, it would  have produced  a negative  return  by the end of the five year 
period. However,  if this same person  had bought  the equity  based SSIA that 
tracks  the same market  and regularly  invested  the maximum  amount  of €254 
each month at the market  rate; they would have emerged  with a tidy profit
158
(Figure  2), due to dollar  cost averaging.  E.g. if a lady invests  €254 when the 
fund price is €10 per unit, she can purchase  25.4 units. If the price drops to 
half of its value i.e. €5 per unit, she can buy 50.8 units. Consequently,  her 
average  price is not €7.50  per unit, but €6.67  since  she was in a position  to buy 
a larger number  of units at the lower price. Similarly,  in the Euro land Unit 
linked  fund SSIA product,  the investor  could buy double  the amount  of units in 
Jan 03 than Sep 00, with the same  amount  of money. As a result, it only takes  
a small upside  for the investor  to be back in profit. This explains  the success  of 
the SSIA ’s, and also the reason  that equity based  SSIA's  outperformed  cash 
deposit  products  despite  two of the worst years in the past thirty-five  years in 
the stock  market.
Figure  1. FT - Eurofirst  Index  (May 2001 - May 2006)
Figure  2. SSIA  - New Ireland  Euro land unit equity  fund (May 2001 - May 
2006)
Follow  a logical,  easy  to understand  and time tested  strategy
159
The third step to stock  market  success  is to have a logical,  easy to understand  
and time tested  strategy.  After deciding  which type of market  participant  one 
‘falls into’, as well as understanding  how to take volatility  out of the market,  the 
next crucial  move is to decide  what to put into the investment  portfolio.  It is all 
too easy to take uninformed  “tips" from speculators  or brokers  interested  in 
making  commissions.  However  if one really wants  to become  informed  as to 
picking  a selection  of stocks,  it is of paramount  importance  to develop  a winning  
strategy.
Important  features  of a strategy
There  are certain  criteria  that define  a successful  strategy  including;
• A good, long term, performance  record;
• A portfolio  of shares  with a minimum  of ten stocks;
• Guidelines  pertaining  to what to buy and when  to sell;
• An easy to follow  and understandable  rationale  underpinning  the stock  
selection.
A good, long term, performance  record
It is important  for a strategy  to have a good, long term; performance  record,  i.e. 
a record  of unbiased  performances  for at least a twelve  year period  where  the 
overall  return has outperformed  the market  in aggregate  over that timeframe.  
The reason  that this particular  length  of time is chosen  is that in general,  any 
given  market  will see both bull and bear periods  and hence  will give a balanced  
view on the strategy  performance  itself. Consequently,  if one has faith in their 
chosen  approach,  they will have the conviction  to stick with it during  volatile  
periods  and hence remain in the market  until the portfolio  recovers  in the 
knowledge  that it has survived  bear markets  in the past. In addition,  as 
explained  in the previous  section,  the majority  of 'investors'  can’t time the 
markets  so they won’t know  when a downturn  or upturn  will occur. As a result,  
it is imperative that a strategy  has a proven  track record  over the different  types  
of market  conditions;  so that the individual  is satisfied  that it can survive  tough  
times.
A portfolio  of shares  with a minimum  of ten stocks
It is of great importance  that an investment  portfolio  has a spread of 
companies,  so that if one or two fall in value, this does not have an unduly  
negative  effect  on the average  return. Thus, in a portfolio  of ten stocks,  should  
one or two fall in value,  there is still a significant  number  of shares  to neutralise  
this effect.
Guidelines  pertaining  to what  to buy and when  to sell
Without  doubt, this is an absolutely  crucial characteristic  of a successful  
strategy. If the investor  has any ambiguity  regarding  what to buy or when to 
sell, there is room for emotion  to enter the equation  and misguide  their stock  
selection  process.  An approach  must provide  a comprehensive  and complete  
set of criteria defining  “what to buy” and also impart a timely selling signal  
indicating  “when  to sell” to the investor.
160
An easy to follow  and understand  rationale  underpinning  the stock  selection
If a strategy  is full of complicated  and time consuming  conditions,  it is easy for 
an amateur  to misinterpret  instructions  and/or  lose interest. As a result, it is 
essential  that one can follow and comprehend  without difficulty  why they 
choose  to add stock to their portfolio. In addition,  if a stock price falls, the 
individual  need not worry  unduly  as they know  why the stock  was bought  in the 
first place, and will be in a position  of knowledge  as to when  to sell it.
Stock  selection  using qualitative  or quantitative  factors  
Fund managers  may use qualitative  factors i.e., quality of management,  
product  positioning,  economic  outlook  etc., or quantitative  factors  (numbers  
based), i.e., Price/Eamings  Ratio, Price/Cashflow  Ratio, Dividend  Yield,  
Return-On-Capital-Employed,  Earnings  Yield etc., in their stock selection.  For 
the amateur  investor,  the qualitative  factors  can be ignored  - the reason  being  
the professionals  will interview  management  such as C & C, their customers  
and competitors,  and try to make  an overall  forecast/prediction.  It’s well known  
that the majority  of fund managers  prefer  to use this method,  but many get it 
wrong  as they have a misguided  belief  that they can predict  the stock market.  
Those that get it right are the chosen  few like Warren  Buffett and George  
Soros. In order to empower  the individual  to be able to choose  a successful  
portfolio  themselves,  it is sufficient  to use a completely  numbers  based  
approach  (for example,  the ISEQ Market  strategy  detailed  below). There  are 
several  valid reasons  to use a quantitative  approach  including,  an absence  of 
subjectivity,  easy access  of quality  information  and emotion  is eliminated  from 
the stock  selection  process.
The ISEQ (Irish market)  strategy
The ISEQ (Irish Market)  Value  Approach  is based  on good business  values;  it 
has worked  well over time (time-tested)  and is relatively  easy to follow. In 
essence  this approach  takes advantage  of the market ’s natural  tendency  to 
over-react  to negative  information.  By adopting  Time-Tested ’ approaches  to 
selecting  stocks  in an unemotional  way using  quantitative  factors,  investors  are 
essentially  forced  to buy low when extra value is on offer. It is that extra value  
purchased  that delivers  the extra returns (on average)  over time to the 
individual.  The two numbers  based  factors  used in this methodology  are High 
Return-On-Capital-Employed  (ROCE)  and High Earnings-Yield  (EY). In effect,  
the ROCE shows how profitable  a company  is and the High EY captures 
companies  that are essentially  "on sale”. During  the period  of 1995-2007,  this 
strategy  has returned  24.5% cpa in comparison  to the Irish market  (ISEQ),  
which  has returned  13.6%  cpa over the same period. A €10,000  investment  in 
the ISEQ Value  Approach  would  have compounded  to €173,000  (before  costs)  
over this 13-year  period. The same  €10,000  invested  in the ISEQ index grew 
to a lesser  amount  of €52,000.  This strategy  has 12/13  stocks  in its portfolio  at 
any one time, which ensures  good diversification  across  the Irish market  and 
hence  has built in protection  to minimise  risk. The highest  combination  of the 
ROCE and EY of the Irish market creates the current picks list of the 
aforementioned  12/13  stocks;  hence  there is a very clear, defined  plan in place
161
addressing  the question  of “what to buy". In addition,  there can be no doubt  
regarding  “when to sell" - if and when a stock no longer  fits the strategy,  the 
company  is then removed  from the portfolio  and replaced  by the new share  that 
does meet  the criteria. As a result,  the investor  has a solid framework  and they 
have no uncertainty  as to what to buy and when to sell. It is also noteworthy  
that this particular  strategy  has very little turnover  and therefore  keeps costs  
low (the importance  of this is stressed  in more detail in the next step). This is 
not a time consuming  exercise,  in fact, it only needs  about  two hours  per year, 
due to the small number  of trades  required.  In order  to acquire  the information  
there are a number  of options  including;  the data can be ascertained  from the 
companies ’ financial  statements  which  can be tedious  or it can be found in the 
www.investlikethebest.com  website  at a low cost which is updated  weekly.  
Consequently,  an amateur  investor  knows  exactly  “what to buy” and “when to 
sell”, and hence does not have to rely on the recommendations  given by 
brokers  who would  prefer  their clientele  to be active  in the markets,  so they can 
receive  more commissions.  In summary,  the market  consistently  over-sells  
companies  experiencing  pessimistic  news flow; however,  this methodology  
ensures  that the investor  is, on average,  buying profitable  companies  in the 
Irish Market  at good value.
Collective  investment  products
A strategy comprising  individual  stocks  may not be for all types  of investors  and 
so there are several  collective  investment  products  available.  By definition,  a 
collective  is a fund containing  several  stocks, e.g. Exchange  Traded  Funds  
(ETFs)  and Investment  Trusts. ETFs are the fastest  growing  product  in the 
world  - they act like a fund and trade like a share,  hence  an investor  incurs  one 
commission  on adding  it to his/her  portfolio.  An ETF’s defining  characteristic  is 
that it tracks  a specific  index product  such as the Irish market,  the FT100. It 
can also track commodities  like gold, silver or soybeans.  For example,  the 
ISEQ 20 Tracker  is an ETF designed  to track the ISEQ twenty  and mirror  its 
returns  - buying  this single  product  will provide  automatic  exposure  to the top 
twenty stocks on the Irish market,  and is a low cost method  of achieving  
diversification.  In addition,  some funds can be put into an Investment  Trust.  
This is a company  set up to solely invest in other companies,  for example,  
Gartmore  Irish pic is an Investment  Trust  that employs  a fund manager  to pick 
out the  best stocks  in the Irish market  and wrap them up in a fund to be traded  
on the stock market. Apart from active management,  an Investment  Trust  
carries  the same characteristics  as an ETF, i.e. low cost method  of achieving  
diversification  etc.
Keep  your brokerage  costs  low
The information  supplied  in this paper  is futile unless  implemented.  In order  to 
actually  buy and sell shares,  one needs  to set up an account  with a broker  who 
acts as a medium  between  them and the market. There are two types of 
broker, namely  traditional  and online discount. Some examples  of the big 
name traditional  brokers  include  Davys,  Goodbodys,  Merrion  Capital  etc. The 
purpose  of these  companies  is to take an order  from you and then proceed  to
162
execute  the trades  on your behalf. Some  of these  firms have set up an “online  
trading ” facility,  but this is not discount  brokering,  rather  they establish  an email  
relationship  with their clientele  as opposed  to dealing  with requests  over the 
phone. An online discount  broker  (e g. E-Trade  ODL and Sharewatch)  is in 
existence  to offer a cheaper  method  of trading  but the investor  makes  a more  
hands  on contribution  to the trading  activity. At the moment  there are none of 
these  companies  based  in Ireland,  but one can successfully  set up an account  
with a UK or US online  broker  and use their trading  software  to buy and sell 
shares. It is noteworthy  that both types of brokers  provide  advisory  and 
execution  only facilities. An execution  only account  simply Involves  the 
individual  placing  the trade with the broker. An advisory  account  is where  the 
broker  gives  recommendations  and executes  trades  - this service  costs  more.
There are  many  questions  that one should  ask potential  brokers  when  shopping  
around,  as there can be vast differences  between  them in terms of value and 
service.  Also brokers  can have many  other  hidden  charges  that can potentially 
eat into returns. The following  are a list of useful queries  when deciding  to 
open a brokerage  account.
• Are there  set up fees?
• Are  there any account  maintenance  fees and if so, what are they?
• If one wants  to buy a stock denominated  in a currency  other than their 
domestic,  how much will the FX (Foreign  Exchange)  cost in order to 
transfer your money  into that currency?
• Are there any minimums  involved  in trading  with the broker?
• Are there any markets  that the stockbroker  will not trade on an 
individual ’s behalf?
On selecting  a broker,  the investor  needs  to set up an account  and then buy the 
stocks  that fit their chosen  strategy.  There  is no more action  needed  from the 
individual  at this stage  apart  from the patience  to let the power  of compounding 
work, as will be discussed  in the next section
Let the power  of compounding  work  its magic
The power  of compounding  cannot  be over emphasised  and will be illustrated  
below by means  of an example;
Investor  A saves  €2,000  per annum  from the age of 25 and stops  saving  
at the age of 32. A theoretical  10% return  per annum  is received  until age 65. 
Investor  B starts  at the age of 33 and saves  €2,000  per year  until he is 65, and 
gets the same 10% return  per annum. Which  of the two has the most saved  at 
age 65?
The answer  is Investor  A, who only Invested  for 8 years. The reason  for this is 
that Investor  A started to invest at age 25 and his money also began  
compounding  at that age. By the time he is 32, his money  had grown  to the 
point where  it was generating  over €2,516  each year. However  at this stage.  
Investor  B is only starting  at €2,000. The money  is compounding  at the same
163
rate, but since Investor  A has gained  the head start on Investor  B, he simply  
cannot catch up in the time given.
This result  is worthy  of some  comments  - firstly, don’t hold back - start now! As 
illustrated  above,  the longer  a person  is in the market,  the more time you are 
allowing  your money  to work  for you. Secondly,  again  in favour of the investor,  
if somebody  has the patience  to stick with a strategy  and not interrupt  it with 
active buying  and selling,  their money  can grow without  several  commission  
charges  continually  deflating  the profit. Finally,  if an investor  chooses  a good,  
solid underlying  portfolio  of stocks,  he/ she can put these  into a medium  to long 
term plan and simply  hold and let them compound  into the future  until they are 
called  upon. An individual  does not need a large lump sum in order to start this 
process  - some  suggestions  may be to set up a regular  savings  plan with child 
benefit  or initiate  a monthly  contribution  to a self-administrated  pension.  In both 
cases, the money  is usually  set-aside  for the future beyond  the short term. 
Instead  of leaving  these  sums of money  on deposit,  one could certainly  create  
a regular  savings  plan following  a time tested strategy  for the power of 
compounding  to work over a significant  timeframe.
Conclusion
In summary,  each of the five steps needed  to become  a successful  investor  in 
the stock  market  have been detailed.  Each phase  requires  a level of effort on 
behalf  of the individual,  but the most important  requirement  is to get training.  
Stock  market  success  is a choice for everybody  - as opposed  to a secret  for an 
elusive group.
164
LJlii
... ^r-^-  -■-N'r^  t ■
i,. .LV-" -1 =: '" I ^ " ■■ •!>sf _
E;^ ' i / . ■ : V ■ "
■ * ■ ■ T J l g p  J U ~ f ^1.  - =— ' '- . ' i - - ^ * - . ‘' 4 < ® - i . T ' S i
> = " ^ 1  i?^ ^ “. -
. -- ““oA -Mt  ■ -’ - J- 7^ ..-w-^ ■ -;
^ t?-f-  ■ ^ ^ ^ -
- dC_i I -•' .=_ -^-  i- .- J_ C-- . ■•
