Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
Second  Edward  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  Lecture
Fifteen  Years of Development  
in Fodder  Conservation  and 
Feeding
by
R. B. McCARRICK,  B.Agr.  Sc., M.Sc.,  Ph.D.
International  Meat Packers  Ltd., Dublin
(previously  Principal  Research  Officer,
Animal  Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
The family  of the late Edward  Richards  Orpen  has established  
a Trust in his memory.  It is intended  that the Trust Fund should 
be used to sponsor  an annual  lecture  from a prominent  worker  in 
the field of agricultural  research.  The Trust will select the 
lecturer  on the merit of his work and its relevance  to Irish farm  
practice.  In recognition  of the lecturer ’s contribution  to Irish  
farming,  the Trustees  will award an honorarium  to the invited  
speaker.
The following  have kindly consented  to act as Trustees  along 
with Captain  Orpen ’s son, John Richards  Orpen,  and his daughter,  
Mrs. E. P. Hill: R. Ivan Allen,  Stan Brophy,  John G. Litton  and 
Patrick  O’Keeffe.
The first lecture  was by Dr. Tom Walsh,  Director,  An Foras  
Taluntais,  on “RESEARCH  IN FARMING ” and was delivered  
at the Winter meeting  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  on Friday,  29th November,  1968, in the 
South County  Hotel, Dublin.
This second Richards  Orpen Memorial  Lecture by Dr. 
McCarrick  was given at the Grassland  Association ’s Spring 
Meeting  in the Sunset  Ridge  Motel,  Cork on February  18th, 1970.
Printing  of this paper has been made possible  by the generosity  
of Messrs.  International  Meat Packers  Ltd., and it was prepared  
for publication  by V. E. Vial, Editor,  Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  Journal.
EDWARD  RICHARDS  ORPEN
1884—1967
Born 20th Oct., 1884, Edward  Richards  Orpen  was educated  at 
St. Paul ’s School,  London,  and at Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  
where he studied  mathematics.
After leaving  Cambridge  he farmed  at Monksgrange  which  had 
been in the possession  of his mother ’s family  (Richards)  for five 
generations.  He took an active interest  in the Co-operative  Move ­
ment as a member  of the Committee  of the Enniscorthy  Co­
operative  Society,  and was also active in the Farmers ’ Union.  He 
took part with Loftus Bryan and Mrs. Lett in the discussions  
which led to the foundation  in Bree of the United Irishwomen,  
now the Irish Countrywomen ’s Association.
He served  in the British  Army in the 1914-18  war in which he 
variously  ran a school for the care and maintenance  of motor  
vehicles  and a mobile  workshop  for the repair of lorries in the 
field. After  the war, he took his family  to England  in 1921. There  
he worked  for a while for the Rural Industries  Bureau  on the 
revival  of rural crafts in the West of England  and Wales.
He returned  to Ireland  in 1926 and shortly  afterwards  started  a 
small furniture  industry  at Monksgrange  with 2 carpenters  and 2 
assistants.  The worldwide  trade depression  closed this venture  
in 1931. Later he turned  to tourist  development  and ran Monks ­
grange  as a guest house in conjunction  with a New York travel  
agency  until the outbreak  of war in 1939.
His participation  in politics  started  in 1932 with the formation  
of the Centre  Party. He became  an active member  of the agricul ­
tural committee  of that party and subsequently  of Fine Gael. In 
1947 the then Taoiseach,  Mr. Costello,  appointed  him a member  
of the Senate.  His political  work  led him to read widely  on technical  
and economic  developments  in agriculture  in other countries  and 
he set down his views in agricultural  articles for the Irish  
Independant.  These  aroused  considerable  interest  at a time when  
agricultural  journalism  in this country  was at a low ebb.
He was a founder  member  of the Irish Grassland  Association  
and its President  in 1951 /52. He died on the 14th November,  1967.
Roger McCarrick  grew up on a farm at Coolaney,  Co. Sligo.  
He attended  University  College,  Dublin  where he was awarded  
his B. Agr. Sc. degree  in 1956, and his first job was in the Grass ­
land Research  Unit at Johnstown  Castle,  from November  1956 to 
February  1959. His work was mainly  concerned  with research  on 
silage and haymaking  and their quality  at farm level, and he was 
responsible  for developing  a silage analysis  service for farmers.  
In February  1959, he was appointed  to the staff of the newly  
formed  Agricultural  Institute  farm at Grange  where he continued  
research  on grass conservation  and developed  winter feeding  re­
search.
He was awarded  M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees  at University  College,  
Cork in 1962 and 1965 respectively.  He went to Iowa State  
University,  Ames, Iowa, U.S.A. in 1965 to spend one year on a 
Post Doctoral  Fellowship.  After his return  from the U.S.A.  he be­
came involved  in research  on housing  accommodation  for cattle  
which resulted  in the development  of sawdust  pads and topless  
cubicles.
He has published  more than 40 research  papers  and has written  
extensively  in the farming  press. He was a member  of the Royal  
Dublin  Society  panel of specialist  lecturers  for four years. He has 
lectured  to farming  groups  throughout  Ireland  and by invitation  to 
several  groups  in England  and Wales.  He lectured  also at several 
International  Congresses  and was invited  to chair  two sessions  at the 
Second  World  Congress  on Animal  Production  in Maryland,  U.S.A. 
in 1968.
He was Hon. Secretary  of the Irish Grassland  and Animal  
Production  Association  for two years and is currently  its President-  
Elect. He is also a Council  member  of the Irish Agricultural  
Economics  Society.  He has frequently  broadcast  on radio and tele­
vision and in 1969 he preparad  and presented  a series of seven  
television  programmes  on beef farming.
His research  has given rise to a number of developments  
of direct interest to farmers. Among them were cold 
silage-making,  which opened  the way to large scale contracting;  
the use of polythene  for sealing  silos thus eliminating  waste; bun 
silage  which  reduced  the capital  involvement  in silage-making,  and 
additive  research  which put into perspective  the importance  of 
additives  and their relative  merits.
He left the Agricultural  Institute  to Join International  Meat  
Packers  as Field Service  Manager  in November  1969, In his new 
post he is responsible  for developing  communications  with 28,000  
shareholders  of the Company  and for developing  a team of 
specialist  beef advisors  to service  producers.
FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF DEVELOPMENT  IN FODDER  
CONSERVATION  AND FEEDING
BY R. B. McCARRlCK
Mr. Chairman,  Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I felt very honoured  and 
also very surprised  when I received  a letter inviting  me on behalf  
of the trustees  to deliver the second Edward  Richards  Orpen  
Memorial  lecture.  Tonight  I feel no less honoured  to have been  
chosen.  I know that in selecting  me for this job, the trustees  in­
tended that I should represent  the various  people working  on 
grassland  conservation  within the Agricultural  Institute.
In this talk I will start by reviewing  progress  made in the field 
of grass conservation  and feeding  during  the past fifteen years. 
Fifteen  years ago silage was almost a rarity on Irish farms and 
there was little research  in progress  in the area.
Dr. Neenan  who headed the new Grassland  Department  in 
Johnstown  Castle  revived  research  on silage in 1955. Prior to that 
little research  had been conducted  for almost  15 years. In the 20’s 
and 30’s some very excellent  research  work had been conducted  
by such people as Professor  Drew, Professor  Sheehy,  and Dr. 
Deasy  at U.C.D.  and by Professor C. Boyle  and Dr. Ryan  in U.C.C.  
When  these people  moved  out of research,  a void was created  and 
it was this that Dr. Neenan  attempted  to fill when he initiated  
silage  research  in 1955. I joined  Dr. Neenan ’s section  at the end of 
1956 and we both worked  in this area for the next two years.
Silage surveys
In 1958 Dr. Neenan  and I with the co-operation  of the Agri ­
cultural  Advisory  Services  conducted  a survey  of silage throughout  
the country.  The results  of this survey  showed  that less than 2% 
of all farmers  in Ireland  made silage and that only 160,000  tons 
of silage  was made,  which  was less than 2% of the total conserved  
feed in the country.
The remaining  95% was hay. At that time a great majority  of 
the silage was made in two areas in the Cork-Tipperary  and the 
Kildare-Meath-Dublin-Wicklow  area. Throughout  the rest of the 
country  silage was so rare that most farmers  had never seen any. 
Silage-making  in the late 30’s and early 40’s was even lower than 
in 1958.
From 1958 onwards silage-making  increased  dramatically.  
Surveys  conducted  by the Department  of Agriculture  and the 
County  Advisory  Services  has shown that since 1964 silage has 
become  very popular  indeed,  (figure 1).
SILAGE  MADE IKl MILLIONS  OF TONS
o
(h uiK>6yo
01 o
Between  1958 and 1964 the amount  of the silage  made increased  
from 160,000  tons to 658,000;  it had reached  almost  one million  
tons per annum  in 1965, 1.3 million  in 1966, 1.8 million  in 1967,  
2.3 million  in 1968, and last year it passed  the three  millions  mark.  
At the same time the number  of farmers  making  silage have in­
creased  from about  2,000 in 1958 to 16,591 in 1969. To-day  silage 
represents  20% of all conserved  fodder.  We are now making  more  
silage on percentage  basis than in England.  Silage-making  in 
England  has not increased  very much in the last decade.  The 
importance  of silage  to Ireland  is however,  much greater  than this 
figure would suggest  because  it is the progressive  farmers  who 
make  it. It is difficult  to find a farmer  who makes  a decent  effort at 
intensification  in any cattle enterprise  without  relying  largely  on 
silage  to provide  winter  feed. Furthermore,  the quality  of the silage  
produced  is likely  to be somewhat  better than that of the average  
hay.
Reasons  for expansion  in silage-making
What  were the reasons  for the rapid  expansion  in silage  making?  
The first thing that can be said is that there is no single reason.  
However,  a variety of labour saving techniques  have been 
developed  and these certainly  played  a major  part in popularising  
silage.  The first of these was the discovery  of self-feed  silage. This 
removed  the drudgery  of silage-feeding.  Credit  for the idea of self­
feed silage must go to Mr. Sean O’Neill from Lurgan,  Co. Armagh  
who is a very respected  member  of this Association  and his neigh ­
bour Mr. Willie Hamill.  Sean O’Neill started self-feeding  silage  
in 1952 and it immediately  aroused  interest  particularly  amongst  
the bigger  farmers  who were hankering  for a labour  saving  method  
of feeding.  In the South  of Ireland,  the first self-feed  silo was built  
in 1956 by Mr. Tom Lalor, of Kilbeggan,  Co. Westmeath.  When  
the Agricultural  Institute  was set up at Grange  in 1959 the first 
winter feeding  experiments  conducted  were designed  to compare  
self-feed  with trough-feed  silage for pail-fed  weanlings,  suckled 
weanlings  and store cattle. In three comparisons  with each type of 
stock, self-feeding  was found to be equal to trough-feeding.
The second  factor  which  contributed  largely  to silage-making  was 
the introduction  of the Silorator  in the late 50s and its successor  
the forage  harvester.  The forage  harvester  took the labour  out of 
silage-making  and perhaps,  what was more important,  it reduced  
the number  of mechanical  operations  in silage-making  by combin ­
ing the cutting of grass and its collection.  It brought  other  
advantages  also such as laceration  of grass which improved  the 
chances  of a good fermentation,  reduced  labour  in spreading  silage 
in the pit and it speeded  up output.
Development  of cold silage
The discovery  in the U.K. and Ireland  that it was not necessary  
or indeed  desirable  to allow grass to heat in the silo opened  the 
door for large scale silage contracting.  Although  the facts of cold 
silage were recognised  in America  and continental  Europe  for 
years, its practice  didn ’t penetrate  to England  until 1960. That  
year. Dr. Murdoch,  of N.I.R.D.,  read a paper at the International  
Grassland  Congress  in Reading in which he showed better  
fermentation  in parts of the silo which  weren ’t allowed  heat than 
in areas  which  heated.  This started  a re-think  of the whole  subject. 
Prior to this we thought  cold silage  was only for acid additives  and 
wilted herbages.  Our own experiments,  conducted  at Grange  and 
Johnstown  Castle that year showed  no advantage  in favour of 
heating,  either in terms of nutrient  savings  or feeding  value. The 
following  year we began  to advocate  cold silage. Initially,  farmers  
were sceptical  but good results  in the folloiwng  year lead to its 
widespread  adoption.  In England,  the adoption  of cold silage was 
much slower  and even today,  one can find advocates  of the warm  
method.  Cold silage opened  the door for large scale contracting  
by allowing  the contractor  to complete  a job of silage-making  
without  waiting  for the traditional  heating-up  period.
The introduction  of polythene  also had a major effect by 
obviating  the necessity  for daily rolling for several  weeks after  
the silage was made. We first used polythene  in 1957 on small 
silos at Johnstown  Castle.  We soon learned  that a good seal could 
be made by covering  with polythene  and weighting  with farmyard  
manure  as soon as silage-making  was completed.  This kept air 
out and eliminated  surface  waste.
Apart  from saving  labour,  the value of polythene  in preventing  
waste of prime economic  importance.  A saving of 4" of visible  
waste  on the surface  of the silage  means  the saving  of 12" of settled 
silage which is a saving of 24 tons of silage on a silo 
60 ft. long and 21 ft. wide. In money terms this silage had a 
production  value of £70 to £95. The classical  work of Minson  in 
New Zealand  during the early 60’s demonstrated  the value of 
polythene  in eliminating  waste  in out-door  silos. However,  I think  
we can say that we at Grange  had advocated  polythene  covering  
before  the New Zealand  experiments  had been initiated.  Polythene  
also led to the introduction  of the bun silo at Grange  in 1965. The 
principle  of the bun was that all sides of the silage heap were  
sloped at an angle of about 45°. The whole surface  area was 
covered  with polythene  and weighted.  Surface  waste was thus 
avoided.  Silage-making  by this method  became  very popular  al­
most immediately,  amongst  farmers  with little capital and it 
brought  silage within the reach of the small farm. In 1967, a
survey conducted  by John Craig, Department  of Agriculture,  in 
conjunction  with the Agricultural  Advisory  Services  showed  that 
there were 499 of these bun silos made in Ireland.  This fact is, 
in my opinion,  rejection  of the commonly  held view that farmers  
are conservative  by nature  and resist change.  It proves  that when  
an idea is suited  to their requirements  and properly  presented  that 
they are quick to catch on to its economic  implications  for them ­
selves.
Unroofed  silos
At about  that time, the concept  of the walled  unroofed  silo was 
re-introduced  using  polythene  as a seal. The first major  demonstra ­
tion of this was at Mullinahone  where  Dan Browne  of the Agri ­
cultural  Institute  had set up a number  of dairy herds which  were 
self-fed in walled unroofed  silos. Again farmers  showed their  
adaptability  by building  several  hundred  of these silos in 1967 even 
though  they were not grant-aided.  Between  1966 and 1967 less than 
1,000 new roofed  silos were built but 2,000 additional  silos in the 
form of unroofed  silos, buns and clamps  were filled.
The movement  towards  Increased  silage-making  was also aided  
by a number  of other factors.  Not the least of these was the 
explosion  of a number  of myths  and prejudices  which  were inbuilt  
in our thinking  a decade ago and which have as a result of 
research  been exploded.  For example,  ten years ago any discussion  
on silage inevitably  centred  about which additives  we should  use 
and what was the best type of silo. We had a pre-occupation  with 
such things as AIV silage and tower silos. The importance  given  
to these two points has since been shown to be unwarranted.  
During  the past 13 years we have conducted  experiments  to com­
pare more than 20 silage additives.  Most of these were shown  to 
have no value whatever  for preserving  nutrients  in silage or in 
improvement  of silage quality  from a fermentation  viewpoint.  
Others  were found to have some value as a nutrient  preservative  
but were unsuitable  for our feeding  conditions  because  of un- 
palatability  or physiological  stresses  on the animals.  Only two 
types of additives  have been found  to give improved  performances.  
These are additives  based on sugars such as molasses,  and 
additives  based on organic acid such as formic acid. Even  
these additives  have not Invariably  improved  performance.  They  
have only shown an advantage  when ensiling  conditions  were  
extremely  difficult  such as occurs  in late Autumn  with wet grass. 
The case for additives  as a general  precaution  has not yet been 
proved  despite  volumes  of research  papers  written  on this subject  
in every country  of the developed  world.  The fact is that excellent  
quality  silage with low inherent  losses can be made under most
circumstances  without  additives,  if the proper  ensiling  techniques  
are adopted.
Again  our pre-occupation  with tower silos was based on a mis­
conception.  Tower  silos were and perhaps  still are more efficient  
for preserving  heavily  wilted silage and in every country  where 
they are widely  used it is wilted silage  that is made. It is wrong  to 
transfer  such a technique  to a country  like ours where unwilted 
silage is being made and to suggest  that it is still best. Indeed  
American  work on this subject  has disproved  theory. In recent  
years the concept  of tower silos has been revived  on big farms in 
the U.K. and elsewhere.  Now they are serviced  with automatic  
unloading  devices,  Although,  it makes a little more sense when 
equipped  with such mechanical  aids, the cost is still prohibitive  as 
has been shown by American  research  in their affluent  farming  
situation.
Silage  evaluation
The increase  in our knowledge  of silage-making  during  the past 
decade  has had an effect on improving  silage quality  and eliminat ­
ing the unpredictability  of feeding  value. The original  work of 
Homb  in Norway,  Reid in U.S.A.  and Minson,  Raymond,  Harris  
at Hurley,  England,  sparked  off a new wave of research  which 
has largely  clarified  the importance  of cutting  grass at the leafy 
stage before  ear emergence,  in order to ensure  high quality.  This 
area was also investigated  at Grange  by Dr. Wilson,  and I, and 
the position  for Ireland  established.  This combined  with the usual  
rules for good silage-making,  fast filling, avoidance  of soil 
contamination,  proper  and immediate  sealing  has taken  the chance  
out of silage-making.  Armed with this information  it is now 
possible  to predict  the practical  outcome  from silage in terms of 
animal  performance.  On this point,  the work of Mr. Joe O’Shea at 
Dunsinea  demands  special  mention.  He has developed  a chemical 
method  called in vitro digestibility,  for measuring  the digestibility  
of silage. He has been working  with Mr. Matt Barlow  and Mr. 
John Craig  of the Department  of Agriculture  on their farm record ­
ing of beef cattle  and with Grange  exf>eriments.  As a result  of this 
work,  he has gone a long  way towards  producing  a technique  which 
will predict  the feeding  value of silage at the start of the Winter.  I 
don ’t need to emphasise  the importance  of this. It will enable  the 
farmer  to formulate  the proper  ration to supplement  his sUage in 
order to produce  the required  animal  performance.  It will also 
help him to decide  the type of cattle to buy and the trade to 
pursue.  This work is indeed  very important  and its devleopment  
must continue.
10
Feeding  values  of silage for animals  of different  classes
During  the past decade  we have learned  a lot about silage feed­
ing. Ten years ago it was commonly  held that cattle should  not be 
fed on silage as the sole diet because  it was unbalanced  or it 
hadn ’t enough  fibre or some other reason.  It was also believed 
that young  cattle  such as weanlings  were physiologically  incapable  
of digesting  silage properl- It was recommended  that some hay 
and/or  meals should alw s be fed to supplement  silage. I re­
member  the day we starteo  the first feeding  experiment  at Grange  
in November  1959. We were walking  40 weanlings  to the feeding  
shed where  they were being  put on an experiment  to compare  self­
feed and trough-feed  silage. A colleague,  who is a good cattleman,  
quipped  to one of the men “There go 40 Kevin Barry ’s.” The 
inference,  of course,  was that these animals  were doomed  to die 
during  the winter.  When I heard the remark,  I was worried  too, 
because  I didn ’t know whether  they would live or die. Well, the 
calves  didn ’t die and we now know that such animals  can put on 
a lot of weight  on silage alone. But like most myths  there is some 
element  of truth involved.  The fact is that weanlings  won ’t grow as 
fast on silage as will older cattle. In our experiments,  we found  
that store cattle will put on about 0.6 lb per day more when fed 
on silage than will weanlings  fed the same silage. Both can, 
however,  be self-fed  without  loss of performance.
TABLE  1: Growth  Rates of Weanlings  (400 lb. liveweight)  and 
Store  Cattle  (800 lb. liveweight)  when  fed the same silage  at Grange.
Liveweight  gain lb. per day
Weanlings stores mean difference
Experiment
(1959)1 0.5 1.1 0.6
Experiment
(1960)2 0.1 0.7 0.6
Experiment
(1961)3 0.7 1.4 0.7
Recent  research  by Alder  McLeod  and Gibbs  at Hurley  confirm  
this relationship  and show that with 4-month  old calves weight 
gain per day are ^Ib. lower than with weanlings.  (Table  2).
11
TABLE  2; Liveweight  (lb. per day) of cattle  of different  ages fed 
wilted silage (Alder,  McLeod  & Gibbs).
Unwilted  silage 
Wilted  silageage of cattle in months  
4 10 16
0.3 0.8 1.4
0.5 1.3 2.0
More  recent  work at Grange  suggests  that heavy  cattle will gain 
about  0.25 lb./day  more than light stores.  As a result of this and 
other work we are now in a position  to predict the likely 
performances  of animals  of different  ages fed high quality  unwilted 
silages.  (Table  3). This prediction  must be based  on a good assess ­
ment of the silage quality  such as by in vitro digestibility.
TABLE  3: Predicted  growth  rates of cattle  of different  ages when 
fed high quality silage (from results of experiments  at Grange
and elsewhere).
liveweight  gain/day,  lb.
Heavy stores (8^ cwt.) 1.8—2.0
Light stores (6—7 cwt.) 1.6—1.8
Yearlings  (4^—5^ cwt.) 1.3—1.5
Weanlings  (3—4 cwt) 1.0—1.2
4-month  old calves  
(2—2^ cwt.) 0.3—0.5difference  from  
previous  category
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.7
This type of relationship  can be applied  down the scale with 
medium  and poor quality  silages.  It can be scaled up slightly  for 
wilted  silages.  The increased  advantages  of wilted silage according  
to our figures  and those of Alder et cd amount  to an additional  
0.25— 0.5 lb. liveweight  gain per day depending  on the degree  of 
wilting.  The question  of whether  wilting  should be advocated  is 
not yet very clear. There  is no doubt that wilting  increases  intake  
of silage and reduces  effluent  as well as increasing  animal per­
formance.  However,  if the silage is being supplemented  with 
concentrates  the differences  in intake between  wilted and un­
wilted  silage  decreases  as level of concentrate  supplements  increase. 
Thus the extra return for the additional  trouble  of wilting and 
sometimes  higher  nutrient  losses may not be worthwhile.
12
Feeding  concentrate  supplements  with silage
On the question  of feeding  barley supplements  with silage,  
considerable  information  is now available  from the work of M. 
Drennan,  V. Flynn,  A. Conway,  F. J, Flarte and myself  at Grange  
in the case of beef cattle  and from P. A. Gleeson ’s work  at Moore-  
park on cows and dairy replacement  heifers.  Responses  to barley  
feeding  with silage or hay are greater  with young  cattle than with 
older  animals.  For example,  if one wanted  to put on an extra  ^ live- 
weight  gain/day  above that obtained  from good silage one needs  
to feed only 2 lb. barley/day  to weanUngs,  3 lb to yearlings  and 
4 lb to heavy stores (Table  4). However,  one has consequential  
reduction  of 10% in silage intake with all these animals.  This  
means that 11 animals  fed concentrates  can be fed on the same 
amount  of silage  that is required  for 10 animals,  if no concentrates  
are fed. So the cattle numbers  wintered  is increased.
These figures  refer to situations  where silage quality  is good. 
When  silage  quality  is indifferent  or poor responses  to barley  feed­
ing are somewhat  greater.
TABLE  4: Barley  requirements  of weanlings,  yearlings  and store  
cattle to support  additional  increasing  increments  of 0.5 and 1.0 
lb per day above  those  obtained  from good quality  silage  fed alone.
barley,  lb, required  to produce  extra —
0.5 lb L. Wt. gain/day 1.0 lb L. Wt.
Weanlings
Yearlings
Stores2
3
47
10gain/day
How much barley does it pay to feed? This is a different  
question.  It depends  on what is intended  for the cattle at the 
end of the winter,  the price of barley,  price  rise and cost of capital.  
In the case of fattening  cattle, it appears  from our results  that if 
barley  costs £31 per ton it doesn ’t pay to feed any barley  unless  
the carcase  price exceeds  2/9d. per lb., or £8-10-0  per live cwt. It 
pays to feed 4 lb. barley  if the carcase  price exceeds  2/10|  per lb., 
or about  £9 per live cwt. If the selling  price is expected  to be £11 
per live cwt., feeding 6-7 lb. barley per day appears  to be 
economically  sound  if the farmer  has housing  accommodation  for 
15% extra animals.  This is unfortunately  only a rough guide. We 
need a more scientific  and accurate  approach  such as the one 
which Mr. Andrew  Conway  demonstrated  to this Association  at 
the winter  meeting  last year. Suffice  it is to say at this stage that
13
there is a lot of physical  data which  could be processed  in the way 
Mr. Conway  demonstrated  last year where barley  price, purchase  
and sale price of cattle and interest  on capital are taken into 
account.  This processing  is needed  immediately.  A ready-reckoner  
can be produced  using a computer  which  can be used by farmers  
and advisors  to determine  optimum  levels of concentrate  feeding 
for each particular  farm situation.
Hay versus silage for beef cattle
Comparisons  between  hay and silage feeding  were studied in 
detail at Grange  during  the past 10 years both in terms of animal  
performance  and composition  of liveweight  gain. We found that 
weanlings  put on wei^it  faster if fed on well-cured  hay than on 
simultaneously  harvested  silage.  On the other  hand,  liveweight  gains 
of store cattle were the same when offered  either hay or silage.  
Where  the hay was not well-made  (i.e. in rainy weather)  then all 
animals,  weanlings  included,  grew faster on the silage. Liveweight  
gain per acre was always  as high or higher  with silage than with 
hay. In conjunction  with these experiments  we looked at the 
composition  of liveweight  gains in terms of lean, fat, bone, non- 
carcase  tissues  and ‘gut fill’. Very big differences  were shown  here. 
For example,  animals  fed hay have heavier  ‘gut fills ’ than their 
mates fed on silage (Table  5). We found that cattle weighing  4^ 
cwt. when slaughtered  had 30 lb. more ‘gut fill’ when fed on hay 
than when fed on silage. Similarly  6 cwt. cattle had 33 lb. extra  
‘gut fill’ when fed on hay and 8 cwt. cattle had 50 lb. extra ‘gut 
fill’ when fed hay than when fed silage cut the same day. Because  
of this extra ‘gut fill’ the killing  out percent  of cattle fed hay was 
lower than that of animals  fed silage.
TABLE  5: ‘Gut fill’ and killing  out % of cattle fed either hay
or silage.
liveweight  of cattle ‘gut fill’ lb killing out %
4^ cwthay silage hay silage
88 58
6 „ 115 82 50.0 52.8
8 „ 167 117 51.4 56.6
The most important  difference  from an economic  viewpoint  was 
perhaps  that 70% of the liveweight  gain was carcase  in silage-fed  
animals  while only 50% was carcase  in hay-fed  animals.  Carcase  
gains per acre were always  greater  from silage  than from hay. It is 
clear from this information  that this information  that silage-fed  
animals  are at a disadvantage  when sold on the hoof relative  to
14
hay-fed  animals.  On the other hand, the silage-fed  animals  can be 
expected  to kill-out  better than those fed hay. Killing  out % of 
silage fed animals  is also improved  by barley feeding.  Feeding  
4 lb. barley  per day to finishing  cattle increases  the killing  out % 
by approximately  1 lb. carcase  per live cwt. Feeding  8 lb. barley  
increases  the killing  out % by an additional  0.5 to 0.75 lb. extra  
carcase  per live cwt.
Effect  of season  of cutting  on silage feeding  value
In 1968 we decided  to investigate  the relative  feeding  values  
of silages  cut at different  seasons  of the year. Eighteen  acres were  
closed  up in Spring  and cut at the end of May, mid-July  and mid- 
September  giving  three silages.  Each silage was fed 0, 4 and 8 lb. 
barley  per day to 8^ cwt. cattle.  The cattle  were valued  at the start 
of the expjeriment  and again at the end by store buyers  and factory  
buyers.  Animals  were then slaughtered  and carcases  were graded  
by five factory  graders.  We were thus able to calculate  the increases  
in value of live and dead animals  brought  about by feeding  each 
silage with and without  barley.
Cattle fed May silage gained 2.1 lb. per day during  the whole 
Winter.  (Table 6). When 4 lb. barley was added, this increased  
to 2.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. barley  they gained  2.8 lb. per day. 
On July silage fed without  grain, they gained  1.6 per day.
With 4 lb. barley added this reached  2.0 lb. per day, and with
8 lb. barley  it reached  2.3 lb. per day. September  silage was made  
in wet weather  and had a lower  feeding  value.  When  fed September  
silage only, the animals  gained only I.l lb. per day. With 4 lb. 
barley  added they gained 1.6 lb. per day and with 8 lb. of barley
they gained 2.1 lb. per day. The net result of this was that
May silage on its own had the same feeding  value as July silage
supplemented  with 4 lb. barley  per day or September  silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley  per day. Again, May  silage
supplemented  with 4 lb, barley  was as good as July silage
supplemented  with 8 lb. barley.
TABLE  6: Effect of season  of cutting  on feeding  value of silage  
fed to 8| cwt. Friesian bullocks  and the value of barley
supplements.
Liveweight  gain, lb.per day
Barley  fed, lb. per day 0 4 8
May silage 2.1 2.6 2.8
July silage 1.6 2.0 2.3
September  silage 1.1 1.6 2.1
July silage following  grazing 1.1
15
On this experiment,  we fed about 20 tons of silage per acre cut. 
This produced  6 cwt. liveweight  gain per acre when fed on its own,  
9 cwt. when fed with 4 lb. barley  per day and almost  11 cwt. live- 
weight  gain per acre when fed with 81b. barley  per day. (Table  7).
TABLE  7: Liveweight  gain per acre and carrying  capacity  per 
acre for 4 months  from 3 silage  cuts, with different  levels of barley
supplements.
lb. barley  fed Liveweight  gain/acre,  lb.
0
4
8678
1,002
1,211No. of cattle/  
acre for 4 month
winter
3^
4
4i
The performances  obtained  from these silages and the output  
per acre obtained  are very high indeed,  much higher  than any of 
us would have thought  a few years ago. There is no reason  why 
these cannot  be equalled  or surpassed  at farm level. Indeed,  the 
results  of the Department  of Agriculture ’s beef recording  scheme 
has shown that farmers  can and do equal these performances.  
There are records  of farmers  getting  almost  2 lb./day  on cattle  
fed silage alone and 2.5 lb./day  on cattle fed silage and 4 lb. 
barley per day. These results  were obtained  on large groups  of 
cattle  up to 80 head per group.  So there is no doubt  that this type 
of performance  can be repeated,  on the farm. The question  is why 
more farmers  don ’t get such results?  The usual answer  is that 
silage quality  isn’t good enough.
Husbandry  and management  of cattle
I believe  that poor husbandry  and management  is often respons ­
ible for reduced  performance.  During  the past five to ten years  
numbers  of cattle wintered  have increased  several  fold on many  
farms. These increases  usually  brought  about a complete  change 
in animal  management  and feeding.  Generally  speaking,  we didn ’t 
scale up the quality  of animal  husbandry  to match  the increase  in 
numbers.  We must pay much more attention  to husbandry  and 
management  in future.  Examples  of poor husbandry  include  having 
the silage face too high or too tight for self-feeding,  or the silage  
barrier  not properly  attended,  resulting  in cattle having  to work  
very hard for their silage and usually  ending hungry. Animals  
treated  this way cannot  express  the full potential  of the silage.
16
Again,  one often sees the situation  where the lying area in loose 
housing  is not properly  bedded  or that cubicle  sizes are too small 
for the animals.  These  factors  result in cattle lounging  around  the 
yard instead  of going  back to lie down as soon as they have eaten.  
Proper  parasite  control  is often neglected.  Indeed,  on many farms  
it is almost  impossible  to look after dosing  and lice control  because  
there are no handhng  facilities  for cattle. I believe  every farmer  
should  have a decent  cattle race, crush and yards with access to 
the race from both sides so that cattle may be sprayed  properly  
for lice. While  on this point, a good cattle scales  is a must on large  
beef farms and the smaller  farmers  might well club together  to 
purchase  a mobile  scales. Perhaps,  some of the farming  organisa ­
tions like Macra  na Feirme  might involve  themselves  in this area.  
It is important  to know how your cattle are doing during the 
winter so that you can adjust your feeding  properly.  The day of 
guessing  is over.
Cattle housing
The most comfortable  housing  is not necessarily  expensive.  The 
work at Grange  and Moorepark  over the past four years has 
demonstrated  this point beyond  any reasonable  doubt.
The first experiment  to compare  housed  with outwintered  cattle  
was conducted  by Michael  Walshe  at Moorepark  during  the 1965-  
66 winter.  As you probably  remember  that was an exceedingly  wet 
winter. In that experiment,  cattle fed outdoors  grew as fast as 
similarly  fed animals wintered  indoors. The experiment  was 
repeated  the following  year at Moorepark  with similar  results.  At 
Grange,  our methods  were somewhat  different  to those used at 
Moorepark.  We compared  weanling  cattle (3| cwt.) wintered  on 
sawdust  pads with and without  wind shelter,  with similar  animals  
wintered  indoors.  Half the animals  on each treatment  were fed 
on a high plane, and half on a low plane. These  experiments  were 
conducted  during  each of the winters  1966- ’67, 1967- ’68 and 1968-  
’69. In every experiment,  weanlings  wintered  on sawdust  pads 
grew as fast as the indoor  wintered animals.  In 1968, we introduced  
the “topless  cubicle ” concept  into this country.  We compared  4 
cwt. cattle wintered  in “topless  cubicles ” with similar  animals  in 
cubicles  in a conventional  house.  Again  there was no difference  in 
performance  between  the two wintering  environments.  Again,  you 
will remember  that the winter of 1968-69  was very wet. The 
topless  cubicle was first used by a New Zealand  farmer  with 
dairy cows and found to be very satisfactory.  Prior to our experi ­
ment, no one had compared  the performances  of cattle wintered  
in topless  cubicles  with animals  wintered  elsewhere  and bullocks  
had never been wintered  in them before.  Since 1968, several  dozen
17
farmers  have set up open silo-topless  cubicle  units with as many 
as eighty  cattle per unit.
This development,  together  with other forms of cheap housing  
such as kennels,  and cheap  silage such as buns, has opened  a new 
door for reducing  costs in cattle  wintering.  The conventional  Dutch  
Barn with silo and lean-to costs £33-£40  per head to erect. A 
walled unroofed  silo with topless  cubicles  costs only about 25% 
of this figure. This means  a net saving of £2.5 per bullock  per 
annum  in housing  costs when repayments  on buildings  over 20 
years, and interest,  are taken into account.  This in turn means  an 
increase  in profitability  of £2.5 per animal  wintered.  This develop ­
ment was badly needed.  It allows  a new category  of farmer  into 
silage  and intensive  wintering,  because  for many  farmers  the capital  
cost of going into silage was previously  prohibitive.
Farming  systems  arising from silage adoption
Of course,  the facility  to make silage allows  for intensification  
of grazing  also. During  the past five to ten years, several  new in­
tensive  cattle systems  have become  popular.  Most of them involve  
either  May silage or autumn  silage or both. None of these systems 
would  be possible  were it not for silage.  Indeed,  some new systems 
such as spring-calving,  once-calved  heifer beef and all-silage 
systems  involve  cutting  at three or four different  periods  during  
the year. Particularly,  in the case of beef systems,  the quality  of 
the winter  fodder  needs to be high. Silage  has made these systems 
possible.
Further  objectives  and research
Despite  the obvious  improvements  which the introduction  of 
silage  has made on many  farms,  we must not delude  ourselves  that 
everything  is perfect  in this area. Indeed,  the position  is still far 
from satisfactory.
After all, silage represents  no more than 20% of conserved  
fodder  and this is concentrated  on less than 15% of farms. The 
benefits  of silage or other improved  conservation  techniques  must 
be got across  to the rest of the farmers.  To achieve  this, silage­
making  and utilisation  must be made more efiBcient.  Even now, its 
costs are too high, and its utilisation  is inefficient.  Improvements  
in these  areas  will increase  the appeal  of good conservation  to many  
more farmers,  and improve  the profitability  of those already  using 
it. The question  is, which areas should  be improved?  the simple 
answer  is, all areas, I feel that researchers  must be fully aware  of 
the costs of each factor  separately  in order to see what economies  
are possible.  Costs of wintering  a store bullock  might be broken  
down as follows : -
18
Purchase  price 8 cwt. bullock  @ £9 per cwt.................
4| tons silage @ £1-13-0  per ton ...........................
Covered  silo + lean-to  @ £33/head repaid  over 20 years
Straw bedding  @ 1/6 per bale ......................................
Transport  and marketing  charges
Vet. medicines ......................................................
Losses  at ...................................................
Interest  on capital  in livestock  @ 9% for 4 months
Labour  at feeding ..................................................
Miscellaneous
4 cwt. 3st. barley @ £1-11-0  per cwt............... ..!
Returns :TOTAL  COSTS : -
lOJ cwt. bullock  @ £10-10-0  per cwt. 
Net return per animal ...,£72
7.9
3.3 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.8
2.3 
1.0 
1.0 
6.16
£100
107.10
7.10
Cost of silage-making
Researchers  must look at the cost of silage. This cost of £1-13-0 
per ton includes  fertilisers,  machinery,  rent and rates and polythene.  
We must look at each of these factors.  In fertilisers  we need to 
know how much phosphate  and potash  is required,  and also the 
limit to nitrogen  response.  None  of these  are clear at present.  Since  
the machinery  for cutting  and handling  was designed,  output  of 
silage at farm level has increased  immensely,  but the basic designs 
of the machines  have not changed.  We need harvesters  with higher  
outputs  to suit present  day conditions.  Furthermore,  too much 
grass IS lost during the cutting  and blowing  operation  and this 
grass IS the most digestible  fraction.  If we could make  5% more sil­
age by eliminating  or reducing  losses  it would  decrease  costs by 1 /6 
per ton which would mean 7/- extra net profit per animal.  If we 
can increase  output  of machines  it would reduce  costs of making  
silage  giving  a further  increase  in net profit.  Machinery  for handling  
grass at the pit is also a bottleneck  when high output cutting  is 
attempted.  We are still mostly  using the buckrake  for this purpose  
—a machine  designed  some 30 years ago by Rex Patterson  at a 
time when the type of outputs  we look for to-day  weren ’t dreamt  
of. There  IS certainly  room for improvement  here. Again the grass  
species  which  we sow today  are basically  the same as those sown  
5L» years ago, at a time when no more than 10-20%  of the farm  
was cut in any year. To-day  the most intensive  beef systems  require  
that the equivalent  of the whole farm is cut two or three times.
It would  be a major co-incidence  if the species  used for the basic ­
ally extensive  pastoral  enterprise  several  decades  ago are still the 
best for our new systems.
Yet we know nothing  about this subject.  The species  needed 
now, are those which  respond  well to nitrogen  fertiliser,  have high 
digestibility  and palatability  and maintain  leafiness over a 
protracted  period.  The work which Vincent  Flynn is initiating  at 
present  in this area is of prime importance.
Management  of grass for silage
Even with the grass species  in use at the moment,  we have a 
lot to learn. We don’t know how to manage  them to produce  high 
quality  silage following  grazing.  In one of our experiments,  July 
silage taken from a pasture  grazed  until the end of May had a 
lower feeding  value than one cut at the same time from an area 
which  had been cut in May. We need studies  of plant physiology 
to help sort out this problem.  There  are several  other problems  of 
this nature  to which  we have no answer.
Reducing  surface  waste in silage
Again  silage  cost is very increased  by waste at the surface  of the 
pit. We need research  to develop  efficient  techniques  for sealing  un­
roofed silos. A foolproof  method  of sealing  an unroofed  pit is 
perhaps  the most pressing  need at the present  time. At Grange,  we 
obtained  promising  results  from the use of bituminous  paints for 
sticking  polythene  to the walls. This must be developed  further.
Cattle  housing  is another  priority  for research.  The development  
of better and perhaps  cheaper  methods  of constructing  topless 
cubicles  and kennels  is very important.  Until the last two years  
this was virtually  an untouched  area. I have no doubt that big 
improvements  can be made. Again, the construction  of walled 
unroofed  silos needs to be looked  at. It might be possible  to use 
pre-fabricated  slabs of some sort slotted into a groove in the 
ground,  and the junctions  between  slabs sealed.  Anyway,  we must  
ask ourselves  whether  materials  other than concrete  might not be 
used in silos.
Methods  of easy feeding  of cattle is becoming  increasingly  im­
portant.  Particularly  on beef farms, the number  of cattle carried  
per farm is increasing  rapidly.  We must ask whether  self-feeding 
is still the best method  of feeding  large numbers  of cattle. We 
need to look at easy feeding  methods.  The design  of cattle  feeding 
units  must be re-appraised  to allow  for such aspects  as easy feeding 
and reduced  labour  feeding.
Future  cattle systems
In cattle housing  it is vital that we think ahead: in the near
20
future, I can visualise  a situation  where two categories  of beef 
farmer  emerge.  One will be a producer  rearer,  the other a beef 
finisher.  The producer  rearer  may be the small  farmer.  The finisher 
is likely to be the bigger  land owner.  He may turn out five cattle  
per acre outside  the E.E.C. and up to 10 cattle per acre within 
access  to the E.E.C.  where  the ratio of cencentrates  to beef prices  
are more favourable.  A 500 aere farmer  would  thus turn out up to 
5,000 cattle a year and require  accommodation  for perhaps  2,000  
at a time. We must re-think  designs for housing  and silage  
accommodation,  and methods  of feeding  for this man. An integ ­
rated approach  is needed.  It is unlikely  that present  day concepts  
wil be suitable.  Perhaps,  something  on the lines of topless  slatted  
floors and mechanical  feeding  of silage, and concentrates  from a 
very large silo is the answer.  It deserves  thought!
We must also consider  whether  silage is the optimum  method  
of grass conservation  for this man. If he is feeding 50% 
concentrates  in the ration,  the amount  of fodder  eaten will be very 
much reduced.  It may well be that some form of artificially  dried  
grass will be desirable  within  the E.E.C.,  particularly  for the beef 
finisher  who is likely to be feeding  12 to 15 month  old bulls or fast 
growing  heifers.
Improving  silage intake
Research  on methods  of increasing  silage intake is also im­
portant. If animals could be encouraged  to eat more silage  
concentrate  feeding  could be reduced  or eliminated.  Recent  results  
from Hurley  suggest  that neutralisation  of the silage juice prior to 
feeding  increases  intake by 20%. This and other areas such as 
using additives  like formic  acid to reduce  fermentation  needs to 
be studied.  The importance  of this point is likely to decrease,  if 
and when we enter the farming  society  within  the E.E.C.
Reduction  in the cost of concentrate  feeding  is another  area 
which demands  research. If we could reduce the cost of 
concentrates  by £4 per ton it would  increase  the profit per bullock  
by £1. We must look at concentrates  other than barley.  
Concentrates  such as feeding  wheats,  which are reported  to yield  
up to 3 tons per acre, and beet pulp are all sources  of enregy  
which might be exploited.
Lastly,  the beast of the future  must be fed and husbanded  with 
well defined  objects  in view. He must be fed for some particular  
trade. It is the duty of the trade to tell the farmer  what they want  
and when they want it. Invariably,  the emphasis  must be on high 
quality,  because  that is the only area where premium  prices will 
be obtained.
The days of keeping  options  open are fading.  If one is to maxi ­
21
mise profits, one must become  committed  to supply a specified  
article  at a specific  time. It won ’t be possible  to play the market.  
However,  before  becoming  committed,  the farmer  must be armed  
with reliable  information  on the trade. This will also mean a 
committment  by the trade to the farmers.
Finally,  I would like to acknowledge  the contributions  of the 
unsung  heroes of Agricultural  Research.  I am referring  to the 
technicians  and men who look after experiments,  keep records,  
feed the cattle and make the winter  feed. The technicians  in the 
Agricultural  Institute  are dedicated  men. To provide  proper  service 
they willingly  give up much of their leisure  time to work in the 
evenings  and at week-ends.  These men and the workmen  have 
always  had a consuming  interest  in the work on hand and act 
well beyond  the call of duty to see to it that everything  is correct.  
When  you visit the station  you seldom  see them or hear them, but 
the situation  which you do see is largely of their making.  The 
research  conducted  by the Institute  would  not be possible  without  
the full co-operation  of these people.  I know that I am speaking  
not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of my 
colleagues  in research  in paying  public tribute  to them for their  
valuable  services.
Again,  I wish to thank the Edwards  Richards  Orpen  Memorial  
trustees  for their invitation  to deliver  this talk.
22
THE IRISH GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION  was 
founded  in 1947 with the aim of promoting  the know ­
ledge of grassland  production.
In 1961, the name of the Association  was modihed,  
in recognition  of the fact that good grassland  husbandry  
is intimately  associated  with, and inseparable  from, good  
livestock  husbandry.
The Association  provides  an opportunity  for those  
interested  in modern  grassland  farming  to gather and 
interchange  views and ideas; it provides  a platform  for 
forward-looking  farmers  and scientists  to expound  their  
ideas;  it fosters  and encourages  research  into the produc ­
tion and utilisation  of grassland,  and it aims to co­
operate  with organisations  which have in common  the 
improvement  of grassland  farming.
If you or your organisation  would like to join the 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association,  the 
Secretary.  24 Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin 2, would be 
pleased  to hear from you. JOURN
