
Activity since last National Council
The National Public Health Emergency Team on 14th May reported:A total of 4,941 COVID-19 related deaths in Ireland. A total of 254,870 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Ireland, 425 new cases were confirmed on the 14th May.  The COVID-19 Dashboard provides the most up-to-date information on the key indicators of COVID-19 in the community. IFA is a COVID Vaccine Partner and part of the Community Network. The vaccination programme continues to be rolled out nationwide as of the 11th May the following had been administered: 
Total 1st Dose VaccinesTotal 2nd Dose VaccinesTotal Vaccines1,408,105514,8081,922,913
This week the vaccination programme has continued with people aged 40 to 44.  Factual up to date information about COVID-19 Vaccine on www.hse.ie/covid19vaccine or you can phone HSE team on 1850 24 1850/01 240 8787 or email [email protected].The following updates relate to Health and Safety:Alma Jordan has come on board to support Health & Safety strategy as IFA National Farm Safety Officer. The IFA Farm Safety Working Group have met to develop 2021 farm safety plan. New monthly presentations titled Farm Safe Focus have been developed to be shared at County Executive meetings, topics covered to date include; silage safety and SunSmart and mental wellbeing. There have been 2 farm fatalities officially recorded by HSA to date. To keep up to date on farm fatalities click here.Farm Safety Week (FSW) will take place from 19th 23rd July. IFA is the lead organisation in Ireland. Activities planned include (i) survivor story, (ii) farm safety and wellbeing events (x2), (iii) development of dedicated farm safety hub on IFA.ie, (iv) safety equipment discount and (v) children safety competition. The activities will be supported by a media campaign to promote the FSW. Quad training and helmets to become mandatory in late 2021. Increase in cryptosporidium outbreaks reported earlier this year, children home from school seen as a factor. Farm Safe Schools pilot programme ended 31st May with accreditations currently underway. IFA, AgriKids and AgriAware were partners in the programme and it was sponsored by the FBD Trust. A total of 488 schools signed up with 21,268 children participating. The following graph shows breakdown per province: 

On the 20th May, Cabinet approved the publication of the Nursing Home Support Scheme (Amendment) Bill 2021, which will place a three-year cap on the financial contributions of family owned and operated farms or businesses when calculating the cost for nursing home care. This will occur where a family successor commits to working the farm or business. Legal advice is pending on the conditions set out in the Bill. National Farm Family & Social Affairs committee meeting took place on 12th May.  A training event for the Macra nominees to National Committees as part of the work of the Diversity Implementation Working Group is planned to brief them on IFA structures and the role of committee. Work is ongoing to finalise composition of the Working Group.   
Upcoming issues
Maintain pressure to secure changes to the Fair Deal legislation. Implement the Farm Safety Week programme of activities. IFA & Safeguarding Ireland to develop a future planning guidance document. 
