Irish Grassland  
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal  
1994
FARMERS
JOURNAL
’M» .()« f ni IMf L ftMi'.  f.'-.OJ  '>t iNtnjstH/The Road  
to Success
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 28 1994
Edited  by
SEAN  FLANAGAN
ISSN 0332-0588
Printed  by Wicklow  Press Ltd., Wicklow
CONTENTS
page
S. Crosse,  K. O’Farrell Why calving  date and compact  calving  are so
and P. Dillon
D. P. Ryan and 
F. Mee
J. Dwyer
P. Dillon  and 
S. Crosse
M. Ryan
P. Walshe
Finn A. Christiansen  
B. Kearney
B. Smyth  and
L. Fitzgerald
P. J. Caflfrey  and
M. J. Drennan
M. Barlow
F. Rath  
S. Flanagan  
J. Elmore  
J. P. Hanrahanimportant  to profitable  dairying
Reproductive  management  and compact  
calving  in the dairy herd
A farmer ’s view of calving  date and compact  
calving
Summer  milk production  - the role of grazed  
grass
Is there money  in extended  grazing?
Profitable  milk production  from grass
The impact  of CAP reform  and GATT  on 
Danish  milk prices
A stocktaking  of the beef market  policy  and 
its medium  term prospects
Options  for beef production  on dairy farms  
Systems  of beef production  and CAP reform19
23
36
43
50
63
69
75
Likely  impact  of CAP reform  and GATT 
agreement  on the income  from beef production  83
REPS  for cattle farmers  93
Extending  the grazing  season  for sheep  97
What Irish farmers  need from EU sheep  policy  103
Evaluation  of crossbred  ewe types  106
COUNCIL  1993/94
President  ; P. O'Kiely  
Past-President  : B. Meade  
Vice-President  : M. Magan
J. Caffrey,  J. Cosgrave,  S. Crosse,  M. Dempsey,  D. Fay, V. Flynn,  T. Grace,  
C. Hurley,  B. Kavanagh,  M. Keane,  K. Mathews,  M. Murphy,  P. O'Keeffe,  
E. O'Riordan,  F. Shinnick,  G. Stakelum,  P. Walshe.
Hon. Secretary/Treasurer  : S. Flanagan  
Irish Grassland  Association,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Why Calving  Date  and Compact  Calving  
are so Important  to Profitable  Dairying
S. CROSSE,  K. O'FARRELL  and P. DILLON  
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Introduction
Calving  date and compact  calving  around  that date is very important  because  
it has a large influence  on farm profitability.  For both summer  and winter  milk  
production  systems,  the selection  of calving  date is one of the most powerful  
tools available  to the dairy  farmer  in order  to target  a high quality  and low cost 
feed (grass)  to the cow during  lactation.
Calving  date  and compact  calving  has also an influence  on the milk  production  
system  in terms  of animal  health,  labour  demand,  cost of feeding  cows  etc. The 
milk supply  pattern  available  to the Food industry  is primarily  influenced  by 
the calving  pattern  on dairy  farms.  This in turn has an influence  on the product  
mix which  can be manufactured  and ultimately  on the milk price paid to the 
dairy farmer.  Optimum  calving  dates for summer  and winter  milk production  
is also influenced  by Quota  constraints  on dairy farms.
Effect  of calving  date on the seasonality  of milk supply
The milk  production  profile  for three  herds  calving  in early  spring,  late spring  
and in the autumn  is shown  in Figure  1.
Calving  date has a large influence  on the seasonality  of milk production.  
Consequently  the quantity  and type of feed required  during  lactation  will vary 
throughout  the year. This will therefore  affect  the yield and quality  of the milk 
produced  as well as the cost of milk production.
Fig 1 - Milk production  profile  for three herds  calving  in early spring,  
late spring  and in the autumn
Calving  date for summer  milk production
In general  terms,  the optimum  calving  date for summer  milk production  is 
dictated  by the fact that there is no differential  in milk price throughout  the 
year for milk  with a given  level of milk  composition.  Farm  profitability  is then 
maximised  by producing  as much milk as possible  from a low cost and high 
quality  feed such as grass. The effect  of calving  date on milk yield per cow 
has also to be considered  as this has a large influence  on receipts.  The effect  
of calving  month  on margin  per gallon  of milk quota  and on the opportunity  
cost of alternate  calving  months  is shown  in Table 1.
Table 1
The effect  of calving  month  on margin  per gallon  of milk quota and on the 
opportunity  cost of alternate  calving  months
Date of 
calvingOpportunity*  
cost £Addition  to margin  (p/gal.)  
of farm milk quota
January -57 -5.4
February -22 -2.1
March ’’ 0 0.0
April -22 -1.1
September -126 -11.7
October -104 -9.7
November -91 -8.5
December -60 -5.6
“The opportunity  cost of capital  and land is included  in the above calculations  
"The optimum  calving  month
The opportunity  cost is the revenue  (margin)  lost per cow by calving  in an 
alternate  month  to the optimum  calving  month.  In Table  1, the optimum  calving  
month  is March.  For every cow that calves  in January  instead  of March,  the 
farm margin  is reduced  by £57. Likewise  for all the other calving  dates. The 
data in Table 1 also show the effect  of calving  date on farm margin  per gallon  
of milk quota.  If the herd calves  in January  instead  of March,  then the margin  
per gallon  of farm milk quota will be reduced  by 5.4 pence  per gallon.  It is 
important  to recognise  that the opportunity  costs and margins  shown  in Table 
1 represent  the independent  effects  for each month.  You cannot  therefore  add 
the values  for a number  of months  together.
The reduction  in margin  from April calving  seems  to be relatively  small.  
This reflects  the interaction  between  the number  of cows to fill the quota  and 
the cost of milk  production.  The performance  of late calving  herds  is very  much 
dependent  on the level of feeding  towards  the end of lactation.  It is evident  
from Figure  1 that a lot of milk (>20%)  is produced  in late autumn/early  winter. 
It is important  therefore  that a high plane  of nutrition  is maintained  during  this 
period.  The detailed  system  of management  is described  in this Journal  (Dillon  
et al 1994).
It should  be noted  that the financial  effect  of calving  date and compactness  
of calving  is also influenced  by the yield level of the herd, the price received  
for the farm output  and the prices  paid for the inputs  used.
Calving  pattern
The calving  pattern  is dictated  by the service  pattern.  High  submission  rates  
are necessary  to achieve  a compact  calving  pattern.  It is important  to recognise  
that calving  pattern  does not follow  a normal  distribution.  Calving  pattern  has 
a skew  distribution  as is illustrated  in Figures  2 and 3. While  mean  calving  date 
is generally  used, it is important  to recognise  that the distribution  of calvings  
is also important.  The use of mean  calving  date and the proportion  of the herd 
calving  in the spring  and autumn  does  not give  enough  information  on the calving  
pattern.  The number  of calvings  per week  over  a particular  period  from  the start 
of the calving  season  is a better  system  for evaluating  a calving  pattern  for a 
particular  milk production  system.
MEAN  CALVING
WEEK  OF YEAR
Figure  2 - Bad calving  pattern  based  on spring  calving
In Figure  2, the calving  season  starts in week 5. The mean calving  date is 
in week 11 by which  time only 65% of the herd have calved.  This coincides  
with the start of the grazing  season  in this situation.  It is evident  that the calving  
pattern  is relatively  scattered  with the result  that a large number  of calvings  
(35%)  are recorded  after the start of the grazing  season.  This reflects  poor  
targeting  of calvings  so as to optimise  grass.
In Figure  3, the calving  season  again starts on week  5 but there is a much  
more  compact  calving  pattern  with 90% of the herd calving  before  turnout  date 
(6 weeks). The mean  calving  date has a different  meaning  in terms  of its location  
on the graph.  The important  issue is that most of the herd has calved  before  
the start of the grazing  season.  The management  issues  in relation  to achieving  
a compact  calving  herd,  are outlined  elsewhere  in this Journal  (Ryan  et al 1994).
The calving  patterns  shown  in Figures  2 and 3 also have implications  for
WEEK  OF YEAR
Figure  3 - Good  calving  pattern  based  on spring-calving
the amount  of grass that can be included  in the diet of the lactating  cow. The 
demand  for grass for the herd illustrated  in Figure  2 will be much less than 
that for the herd shown  in Figure  3 for the early part of the grazing  season. 
Calving  date and compactness  of calving  are important  variables  influencing  
the demand  for grass especially  early and late in the grazing  season.
Calving  date for winter  milk production
The optimum  calving  date for winter  milk production  will depend  to a large  
extent  on the winter  milk  scheme  available.  The main  difference  with  the different  
schemes  operated  by a number  of milk purchasing  companies  is in the bonus  
payment  level  for the winter  months  and the quantity  of milk  quota  which must  
be supplied  during  the winter  months.  The scheme  currently  offered  by Waterford 
Foods  was used  to analyse  the effect  of calving  date  and the effect  of compactness  
of calving  on farm profitability.  The results  are shown  in Table 2.
Table 2
The effect  of calving  date on the opportunity  cost of alternate  calving  dates
Date of 
calvingOpportunity “
cost
January -68
Febmary -42
March 0
April —
September 0
October -2
November -29
December -33
“The opportunity  cost of capital  and land is included  in the above  calculations
6
The optimum  calving  dates to maximise  profit  from this system  is based  
on March  calving  (60%  of herd)  and September  calving  (40% of herd).  Calving  
in April was restricted  for the above  calculation.  The data show that if a cow 
calves  in January  instead  of the optimum  calving  pattern  then farm profit  will 
be reduced  by £68 per cow. The data illustrate  the importance  of compactness  
of calving  as well as having the  correct  calving  month.  This has to be  calculated  
for the scheme  available.  (Correct  means  correct  for the scheme  available).
The effect  of a good calving  pattern  and a poor calving  pattern  for winter  
milk production  relative  to spring  milk production  is shown  in Table 3.
Table 3
The effect of calving  pattern  on the profitability  of winter  milk production  
relative  to a spring  milk production  system
Date of Calving  Pattern  (% calvings  per month)
calving Summer  milk Winter  milk system
system Good Bad
January 0 0 19
February 40 12 13
March 59 51 2
April 1 1 0
September 0 23 0
October 0 12 21
November 0 1 28
December 0 0 17
Addition  to margin  
(P/gallon)0 +4.4 + 2.4
The data in Table 3 show that a good calving  pattern  for the winter  milk 
scheme  resulted  in an increase  of 4.4 pence  per gallon  of milk quota  relative  
to an optimum  summer  milk production  system.  The data also show  that a less 
than optimum  calving  pattern  results  in a reduced  margin of 2.4 pence  per gallon  
of milk quota  relative  to an optimum  summer  milk production  system.
Other  losses  associated  with poor fertility  management
Poor fertility  management  can also result in other losses.  These  include  a 
loss in overall  farm  profit  if the calving  interval  goes  over 1 year.  This is estimated  
to amount  to £3 per cow per day. There  are also losses  associated  with higher  
involuntary  culling  due to poor reproductive  performance.  It is important  that 
compact  calving  is not achieved  by high culling  rates for infertility  as this can 
be very expensive.  A survey  of 5,500  cows in the Munster  region  is shown  in 
Table  4. The average  results  for the years 1991  /92 are shown  and are expressed  
as a % of the cows culled.  The average  culling  rate was 14%.
Table  4
Cow disposal  rates from commercial  dairy farms  by primary  reason  for
disposal
Primary  reason  
for cullingAverage  1991-92  
%
Infertility/late  calving 30.8
TB/Brucellosis 1.7
Abortion 1.8
Low production 6.8
Injuries 5.4
Mastitis 15.7
Surplus 13.5
Other  reasons 24.3
Total 100.0
Infertility  and late calving  was the most important  reason  for culling.  It is 
estimated  that replacement  costs amount  to about  £650  per cow culled  and at 
a 14% culling  rate amounts  to about  £91 per cow in the herd.  Since  about  4.5%  
of the cows  were  culled  for infertility  in this study,  the estimated  losses  for this 
reason  would  amount  to about £30 per cow in the herd. Al costs are now 
important  costs  of production  on dairy farms.  Semen  charges  are now significant  
with sires costing  in the range  of £20 - £90 per straw. It is important  to note 
that the cost of semen  is not always  related  to RBI and careful  selection  should  
be made. The use of additional  inseminations  as a result of poor fertility  
management  will reduce  the margin  per gallon  of milk produced  on the farm.
Calving  pattern  for liquid  milk production
A liquid  milk  quota  is a valuable  asset. It increases  farm  margin  in proportion  
to the size of the liquid  quota.  The optimum  calving  pattern  will be dictated  
by the size of the liquid  milk  quota.  It should,  however,  be concentrated  towards  
the start of the grazing  season.  Many farmers  with liquid milk quotas  have  
calving  patterns  which  result  in significantly  more  milk  being  produced  during  
the winter  period  than what  is required  for the liquid  milk  quota.  While  additional  
bonuses  are often available  during  this period,  it is very debateable  whether  
they result in improved  farm margins.
Summary
Calving  date and compactness  of calving  can have a significant  effect  on 
the profitability  of milk production.  Calving  date along with stocking  rate on 
the farm are some  of the most powerful  tools available  to the dairy farmer  in 
order  to target  high quality  low cost feed (grass)  to the cow during  lactation.
References
Dillon,  P. and Crosse,  S. (1994).  Summer  milk production  - the role of grazed  grass.
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Assoc.  J. 28: 40-45, 1994,
Ryan,  D. and Mee,  J. (1994).  Management  of herd fertility  to achieve  compact  calving.
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Assoc.  J. 28: 46-53, 1994.
8
Reproductive  Management  and Compact  
Calving  in the Dairy  Herd
D. P. RYAN  and J. F. MEE
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Abstract
F ailure  to achieve  high submission  and pregnancy rates in dairy  cows  results  
in a spread  calving  pattern.  The principal  causes  of infertility  are management  
factors,  cow factors,  A.I. factors,  bull factors  and mineral deficiencies.  Research  
developments  in oestrus  detection  and synchronization,  nutritional  modulation  
of reproduction,  sex selection  and in vitro  fertilization,  and the immune  system  
to improve  submission  and pregnancy  rates in dairy cows are discussed.
Introduction
Compact  calving  in the dairy  herd is dependent  upon high submission  rates  
and pregnancy  rates to a single  service.  An analysis  of breeding  records  from  
DairyMis  (unpublished)  for 1993 spring  calving  herds  showed  that submission  
rates  for the first  three  weeks  of the breeding  season averaged  63% with a range  
by farm of 27 to 94%.  In addition,  pregnancy  rates to first service  for the same  
year averaged  55% with a range  from 31 to 71%. Using  a submission  rate of 
90% and pregnancy  rate of 70% to each service,  in excess  of 90% of the herd 
should  be pregnant  after the first six weeks  of the breeding  season.
The objectives  of this paper  are to outline  for the dairy herd 1) the causes  
of infertility,  and 2) research  work to improve  reproductive  performance  and 
compact  the calving  season.
Causes  of infertility
The causes  of infertility  can be listed under  the headings  of management  
factors,  cow factors,  A.I. factors,  bull factors  and mineral  deficiencies.
Management  factors
The principal  management  factors  are heat detection  efficiency,  calving  to 
service  interval,  nutrition  and time of service.  Heat detection  is the single  most  
important  factor in achieving  good reproductive  performance.  The average  
duration  of heat is less than 10 hours  and 33% of heats are interrupted  by breaks  
in standing  behaviour.  In addition,  up to 15% of heats may be two hours or 
less in duration.
As a general  rule, pregnancy  rates to a single service  increase  by 
approximately  1% per day until cows are calved  about 50 to 60 days and 
thereafter  pregnancy  rate remains  constant.  Cows  may have to be bred less than  
40 days post-calving  in an attempt  to maintain  a compact  calving  season  
subsequently.  Pregnancy  rate to these services  may be low but they do not 
compromise  pregnancy  rate to subsequent  inseminations.
Dairy  cows should  calve  down  in a body condition  score of 3.0 or greater. 
As cows  are in a state  of negative  energy  balance  early  post-calving,  it is normal  
for cows to loose body condition.  However,  the sooner  the cows return  to a 
positive  energy  state is correlated  with the resumption  of ovarian  activity  and 
the interval  from calving  to pregnancy.
As a general  rule, cows detected  in heat in the morning  should  be served  
in the afternoon  and those  in heat in the afternoon should be served the following  
morning.  The viability  of sperm  of low fertility  bulls is shorter  than for high 
fertility  bulls and may account  for a small  proportion  of herd infertility.  When  
a bull with low sperm  fertility  is used,  insemination  should be  carried  out closer  
to the time of ovulation,  i.e. 18 hours  after the onset  of oestrus.  However,  the 
use of semen  from low fertility  bulls  can only  be justified  by a very high breeding  
index for these sires.
Cow factors
The cow factors  affecting  reproductive  performance  are calving  difficulty,  
uterine  infection,  intercurrent  disease  and hormonal  problems.
Heifers  have  a significantly  higher  incidence  of stillbirths  than mature  cows  
and where  stillbirths  occur  there is an associated  higher  incidence  of retained  
foetal  membranes,  which  reduces  fertility.  When  calving  difficulty  is moderate,  
pregnancy  rates  can be reduced  by between  5 and 15%,  severe  calving  difficulty  
will reduce  pregnancy  rates by between  25 and 45%. As a general  rule, it is 
advisable  that cows which  retain  the foetal  membranes  be examined  about  20 
days post-calving  to ensure  there are no uterine  infections.
Lameness  can affect  between  5 and 30% of the herd annually.  If the condition  
occurs  during  the breeding  season,  fertility  will be reduced.  Lame  cows  exhibit  
poor signs of heat and rarely  stand to allow mounting  by other cows.
Cystic  ovaries  and inactive  ovaries  are associated with hormonal  dysfunction.  
Cystic  ovaries  generally  develop  within  45 days of calving  and its incidence  
is related  to genetics,  nutrition, milk  yield and season of the year. Inactive  ovaries 
may be associated  with nutrition,  milk production,  difficult  calving  or season 
of the year. Treatments  involve diagnosis  by a veterinarian  and treatment  based  
on the diagnosis.
A.I. factors
The important  A.I. factors  are operator,  time of A.I., handling  facilities  and 
semen  storage.  Problems  have arisen  with the advent  of D.I.Y.  A.I. where  the 
operators  have  not had a retraining  course  prior  to the beginning  of the breeding  
season.  This is essential  to ensure  good  operator  technique  and good  pregnancy  
rates. For the purposes  of A.I., cows should  be properly  restrained  and the 
temptation  to inseminate  cows  in the milking  parlour  avoided.  In cases  of D.I.Y.  
A.I., it is important  that the semen  storage  container  be topped  up with liquid  
nitrogen  at regular  intervals.  Containers  do leak and a lot of expensive  semen 
can be lost if levels of liquid nitrogen  are not regularly  checked.
Bull factors
Semen  quality  varies  between  bulls and there may be up to 15% difference  
in fertility  between  sires.  Contrary  to popular  belief,  pregnancy  rates to natural
10
service  are no better  than to A.I. if heat detection  is carried  out properly.  In 
general,  semen  used for A.I. is evaluated  for viability  characteristics  in the 
laboratory  prior  to packaging.  In contrast,  natural  service  sires may have good  
fertility one year and poor  fertility  the next year  as a result  of some  intercurrent  
disease  or testicular  damage.  When  using  natural  service  it is important  to have  
a semen  evaluation  on the bull prior to conducting  services.
Mineral  deflciencies
Mineral  deficiencies,  particularly  trace  element  deficiencies,  have  been  linked  
with abortion,  stillbirth,  neonatal  death,  retained  placenta,  low immunity  and 
infertility.  The main trace elements  associated  with infertility  are copper,  
selenium  and iodine.  Studies  conducted  at Moorepark  have shown  that 75% 
of dairy herds are  deficient  in one or more  of the above  trace  elements.  However,  
these herds do not necessarily  have herd fertility  or production  problems.
Research  in Reproductive  Management
The current  areas of research  pertinent  to reproductive  management  of the 
dairy herd include  systems  to increase  submission  rates,  nutritional  modulation  
of reproduction,  sex selection  and in vitro  fertilization  and the immune  system  
(Mee et al., 1994).
Increasing  submission  rates
Oestrous  detection
Failure  to achieve  high submission  rates in cows calved  beyond  40 days in 
the first 3 weeks  of the breeding  season  is mainly  associated  with poor heat 
detection.  The average  duration  of heat is less than 10 hours and up to 15% 
of heats may  be less than 2 hours in duration. Up  to 90% of heats  can be detected  
with 5 times a day heat detection  without  tail paint (O’Farrell,  1992),  but a 
figure  closer  to 60%, on average,  is achieved  on farms.  Research  focused  at 
improving  heat detection  has investigated  the use of tail paint, pedometers,  
intravaginal  electrical  impedance  and elevation  in milk temperature.
Tail paint has proven  to be the greatest  aid in heat detection  under Irish 
conditions.  Up to 90% of heats can be detected  with the use of tail paint and 
three daily observations  (O’Farrell,  1992).  However,  the uptake  of this simple  
practice  on many dairy farms has been poor.
Cows  in heat exhibit  increased  walking  activity.  This is the basis of timing  
insemination  by strapping  a pedometer  to the leg of the cow (Redden  et al., 
1993).  This  system  can be as efficient  as four  times  daily observation in detecting  
an overt heat. The development  of electronic  pedometers  has resulted  in one 
study with over 90% of heats being detected  and a similar  accuracy  of heat 
detection  (Cohen  et al., 1990).  This system  has been used elsewhere  as the sole 
method  of heat detection  in automated  computerised  management  systems  
(Carmi,  1987;  Spahr  and Lewis,  1991).  Changes  in electrical  impedance  of the 
vagina  have been measured  using radiotelemetory  with an efficiency  and 
accuracy  of oestrus  detection of 91% and 80%, respectively (Gordon  and Timms,  
1988;  Lehrer  et al., 1991).  However,  under  Irish management  conditions  there
11
is little scope  at present  for use of this high cost technology.  Changes  in milk 
temperature  (Schluensen  et al., 1987; Fordham  et al., 1988) have also been 
used as aids in heat detection.  However,  the detection  rate and accuracy  of heat 
detection  based on the elevation  in milk temperature  is poor.
Hormonal  treatments
The principal hormones  used in reproductive  management  are prostaglandin,  
progesterone  and GnRH.
Prostaglandin  is effective  in inducing  heat in cows with an active  corpus  
luteum  on the ovaries.  Cows  have to be at a specific  stage of their heat cycle  
for this treatment  to be effective.  In the research  programme  in Moorepark  we 
are currently  investigating  the use of prostaglandin in a reproductive  management  
programme  to increase submission rate  of dairy  cows  to first service  and identify 
potential  problem  breeder  cows early in the breeding  season.
Progesterone  can also be effectively  used in heat synchronization  schemes.  
Progresterone  is administered  either  through  an intravaginal  device  (PRID  or 
CIDR)  or an ear implant  (CRESTAR).  In addition, animals  with inactive  ovaries  
can be effectively  induced  to show  heat following  this type of treatment  (Godke  
and Ryan, 1993).  This is of particular  importance  in later calving  cows,  which 
need to  be bred  early post-calving  if a compact  calving  pattern  is to be achieved.  
The loss rate of the PRID  ranges  between 6 and 10% (O’ Farrell,  1984),  whereas  
recent  unpublished  findings  have shown  that the loss rate of the CIDR  to be 
0.8% (Macmillan,  1993, unpublished).  The CIDR would,  therefore,  have a 
distinct  advantage  over the PRID.
Synchronization  programmes  for dairy cows at the onset of the breeding  
season should  incorporate  diagnostics  by ultrasonography  for those  cows  failing  
to be inseminated  during  the synchronization  programme. Furthermore,  breeding 
cows over a short period  at the onset of the breeding  season  facilitates  early  
non-pregnancy  diagnosis  using ultrasound  and short-cycling  of non-pregnant  
cows (Ryan,  1993).
The principal  hormone  treatment  used to increase  pregnancy  rates is 
gonadotropin  releasing  hormone  (GnRH).  Various  studies  have been carried  
out in Ireland  (Ryan  etal., 1994a)  and elsewhere  (Macmillan  etal., 1986;  Ryan 
et al., 1991)  to investigate  the use of GnRH  treatment  either  at Al or on Days  
11 to 13 after Al to increase  pregnancy  rates.  The results  of these  studies  have  
been variable.  At Al, GnRH  was proposed  to reduce  the incidence  of delayed  
ovulation  and improve  early embryonic  development.  On Days 11 to 13 after 
Al, GnRH  was proposed  to increase  the opportunity  for maternal  recognition  
of pregnancy,  which  takes place at this time. In 1992, we conducted  a trial in 
Moorepark  with a GnRH  analogue.  GnRH  was administered  to 1,661 cows  
either at the time of Al, Day 12 after Al, or the cows remained  untreated.  
Pregnancy  rate averaged  61% for all cows and was not affected  by treatment.
Nutritional  modulation  of reproduction
Energy
During  the early post-calving  period  the lactating  cow is in negative energy  
balance.  The interval  to return  to normal  ovarian  activity  is closely  correlated
12
with a return  to a positive  energy  balance  (Butler  etal., 1981).  On this premise,  
the more ovulations  and consequent  oestrous  cycles  prior to the desired  time 
of breeding  results  in a greater  pregnancy  rate assuming  other  factors  are optimal. 
With the emphasis  on production  of 80% of milk from grazed  grass concurs  
the demand  to produce  the peak milk at grass and to re-breed  the cow during  
the same period.  Grazing  management  procedures  to maintain  sward  quality  
and inclement  weather  conditions,  as experienced  in the Spring  of 1993, may 
reduce  dry matter  intake  and place the cow in negative  energy  balance.  In a 
grazing  experiment  conducted  in Moorepark  in the Spring  of 1993,  cows  grazed  
to 4, 6 or 8 cm, (tight,  optimal  and lax grazing,  respectively).  The mean dry 
matter  intakes  for cows grazing  to 4, 6 and 8 cm were 13.5, 14.2 and 16 kg, 
respectively.  There  was evidence  (P < 0.05) of an inverse  linear  relationship  
between  post grazing  height  and the calving  to pregnancy  interval  (Figure  1).
Post grazing height (cm)
Fig. 1 - Effect  of post grazing  height  (cm) on the calving  to pregnancy
interval  (days).
Protein
As a feed, grass is high in degradable  protein  and a grass-based  diet places  
the cow in deficiency  of the essential  amino  acids,  lysine  and methionine.  The 
effects  of protein  degradability  on fertility  are variable  between  studies,  but are  
more related  to the protein  concentration  of the diet and its degradability.  
Attempts  to manipulate  the protein  degradability  of the diet have included  the 
feeding  of fishmeal.  Fishmeal  is high in undegradable  protein  and work  
conducted  in Teagasc,  Belclare  Research  Centre  has shown  positive  effects  on 
fertility  in beef heifers  and cows at pasture  (Diskin  et al., 1993).  The integral  
factors  resulting  in the improved  fertility  have not been delineated.
Lipids
An alternative  approach  to improving  fertility  by nutrition  has been the 
addition  of lipid to the diet. Fat sources  such as soybean  oil, tallow,  fish oil
13
and cottonseed  are rich sources  of lipid. When fed to the cow in poor body 
condition  and under  nutritional  stress,  they have had positive  effects  on fertility  
(Williams,  1989; Hightshoe  et al., 1991; Wehrman  et al., 1991; Ryan et al., 
1992). Furthermore,  linoleic  acid has recently  been identified  as an integral 
factor  in maternal  recognition  of pregnancy.  Therefore,  inclusion  of lipid in the 
diet may not alone  be an energy  rich source  but may also have an additional  
independent  positive  effect  on fertility.
Trace  element  deficiencies
There  are relatively  few published  papers  on the relationship  between  trace  
element  deficiencies  and infertility  in Irish  dairy  herds (Mee and Rogers,  1993).  
Prior  to the mid 1980s,  work conducted  by An Foras  Taluntais  had shown  no 
relationship  between  copper  deficiency  and infertility.  However,  in the late 1980s,  
collaborative  research  work between  U.C.D.  and An Foras  Taluntais  reported  
that while  low copper  status  per se did not adversely  affect  pregnancy  rate, a 
combination  of long-term,  high, dietary  molybdenum  intake  and low copper  
status  may (P>0.05)  reduce  pregnancy  rate in beef  heifers  (Vaughan  et al., 1989).  
This work needs  to be repeated  in dairy heifers  and cows.  No published  Irish 
trial has shown  an improvement  in herd fertility  following  selenium  
supplementation.  Unpublished  data from a recent  large-scale  Moorepark  
DairyMis  experiment  tend to support  this synopsis.  There  are no published  
data  on the effect  of iodine  deficiency  on fertility  in Irish  dairy herds.  Unpublished  
data from  a recent  large-scale  Moorepark  Dairy  MIS experiment  suggest  a poor 
response.  A relationship  between  cobalt  or zinc deficiency  and herd fertility  
has not  been  examined  in Irish  dairy or suckler  herds.  Work  carried  out at Grange  
Research  Centre  and U.C.D.  indicated  that a mixture  of mineral  ‘proteinates ’ 
(Cu, Zn and Mn) and yeast  culture  improved  fertilization  rate in superovulated  
beef heifers  (Fallon  et al., 1993). Effects  on trace element  status were not 
measured.  Recently,  work in dairy heifers  and cows at Moorepark  Research  
Centre  showed a  poor  response  to prolonged  feeding  of ‘chelated ’ trace  elements. 
These  conflicting  data suggest  the need for further  independent  research  on the 
relationship  between  trace  element  deficiencies  and fertility  in Irish dairy  herds.
Sex selection  and in vitro fertilization
Attempts  to predetermine  the sex of children  has been of interest  to man 
for many years. Methods  employed  in the past have included  acid or alkali 
douches  of the vagina  to alter pH, dietary  manipulation  and timing  of 
insemination  (McEvoy,  1992).
In the recent  past, two methods  of sex selection  have  been developed,  which 
have high accuracy.  The first of these  methods  involves  embryo  sexing.  In this 
case, embryos  are sexed prior to transfer  to recipient  cows (Schroder  et al., 
1990).  The  most  accurate  of these  methods  incorporates  DNA  probing.  Accuracy  
is close  to 100%  and there is no reduction  in embryo viability  after  the procedure. 
However,  the efficiency  of producing  offspring  of desired  sex from a limited  
pool of genetic  material  is poor  as the embryos  generated  in vitro  will on average  
be 50 : 50 male to female.
14
The second  approach  is more efficient  and involves  sexing  of semen  prior  
to fertilization  of eggs. Basically,  the method  employs  flow cytometry  and 
staining  of the spermatazoa  with a DNA-specific  fluorescent  dye (Johnson  et 
al., 1987).  The sex chromosomes  termed  “X” and “Y” determine  sex of offspring. 
Spermatazoa  carry either  one “X” or one “Y” chromosome.  An egg fertilized  
with a spermatazoa  carrying  an “X” chromosome  will result  in a female  and 
“Y” will result in a male. The “X” chromosome  is larger  than the “Y” 
chromosome  and will fluoresce  more  after  staining.  It is the degree  of fluoresence  
which  enables  the sorting  of spermatazoa  by flow cytometry  into male and 
female.
The technology  to date can only sex small numbers  of sperm  in a given  
period  (400,000  sperm per hour), which limits application  for use in A.I. 
However,  only  small  numbers  of spermatazoa  are required  for in vitro  fertilization  
(IVF) of oocytes.  It is from this aspect  that the technology  has developed  to 
date (Johnson  et. al., 1994).  Developments  in ultrasonography  now enable  
oocytes  to be collected  from the ovaries  of the cow on a weekly  basis by 
transvaginal  needle  guided  ultrasonography  (Pieterse  et al., 1992). From an 
application  perspective,  oocytes  can be collected  from non-pregnant  (Pieterse  
et al., 1988)  and pregnant  cows (Ryan  et al., 1993),  which  are then fertilized  
in vitro with sexed  semen,  cultured  in vitro for seven  days and then transferred  
to recipient  cows.
Sex selection  will transform  the industry  as we know it today.  We will be 
able  to produce  females  for replacement  purposes  from  the best  genetics  available  
and to produce  animal  protein  more  efficiently  by using male spermatazoa  to 
produce  male offspring  using the rest of the herd as recipients.
Parity
Fig. 2 - Effect  of parity  on pregnancy  rate response  in dairy cows bred  
< 55 days post partum  to either  bovine  trophoblast  vesicle  (bTV)  transfer  
or carrier  medium  alone (control)  between  days 5 and 7 after Al
(ab Within  parity grouping,  columns  with different  superscripts  are different  (P<0.05))
Immune  system
An area of research  that has recently  gained  increased  attention  is the 
relationship  between  the immune  system  and reproduction.  The developing  
embryo  in the cow  can be regarded  as foreign  material and can undergo  rejection. 
The embryo  prevents  this from taking  place by causing  an immune  response  
which  prevents  rejection.  The trophoblast  surrounding  the embryo  proper  must  
produce  a sufficient  signal  by Day 14 of pregnancy  for maternal  recognition  
of pregnancy.  It is this signal which sets in train the events  that prevent  the 
cow from returning  to heat.
Based  on this signalling  system,  we conducted  trials on Dairy Mis farms  
and Moorepark  in 1993.  We generated  bovine  trophoblast  vesicles  (bTV)  from  
Day 13-14  embryos.  The bTV  were  frozen  in straws  and transferred  to the uterine  
horn of cows  on Days  5 to 7 after  Al. The cows  were either  less than or greater  
than 55 days calved  at the time of Al. The pregnancy  rate to Al among  cows  
calved  less than 55 days was 31% compared  with 52% for cows  calved  greater  
than 55 days. Among  cows calved  less than 55 days and in third or greater  
lactation,  the transfer  of bTV increased  pregnancy  rate by 25% (Figure  2).
This research  has shown  that insufficient  embryonic  signalling  to maintain  
pregnancy  can account  for some of the lower  pregnancy  rates in older cows  
bred less than 55 days post-calving  (Ryan  et al., 1994b).  Further  research  is 
required  to identify  the reasons  for this problem  and to develop  a system  to 
prevent  the embryonic  loss.
References
Butler, W. R., R. W. Everett and C. E. Coppock.  1981.  The relationships  between  energy  
balance,  milk production  and ovulation  in postpartum  Holstein  cows. J. Anim.  Sci. 
53:742-748.
Carmi,  S. 1987.  Automatic  computerized  herd management:  heat detection,  mastitis  and 
health monitoring.  Proc. 3rd Symp.  on ‘Automation  in Dairying ’, IMAG,  9-11 
September,  1987, Wageningen,  Netherlands,  pp. 18-27.
Cohen,  T., M. Eisenberg,  M. Amir,  M. Etam and E. Aizinbud.  1990. Estrus  detection  
in dairy cows by a computerized  system  using pedometry  and milk recording.  
Hassadeh  Q., 1:21-23.
Diskin,  M. G., A. P. Moloney  and J. M. Sreenan.  1993.  The effect  of protein  or energy  
supplementation  on cow fertility  during  the Spring-early-summer  period.  IGAPA, 
19th Annual  Research  Meeting,  April 1993, pp.87-88.
Fallon,  R. J., R., Mantovani,  J. F. Roche  and M. P. Boland,  1993. Effect  of proteinated  
minerals  and yeast culture  on fertilization  in superovulated  heifers.  Ir. J. of Agric. 
and F. Res. 32, 111.
Fordham,  D. P, P. Rowlinson  and T. T. McCarthy.  1988.  Oestrus  detection  in dairy  cows 
by milk temperature  measurement.  Res. Vet. Sci. 44:366-374.
Hightshoe,  R. B., R. C. Cochran,  L. R. Corah,  G. H. Kiracofe,  D. L. Harmon  and R. 
C. Perry. 1991. Effects  of calcium  soaps of fatty acids on postpartum  reproductive  
function  in beef cows. J. Anim. Sci. 69:4097-4103.
Godke,  R. A. and D P. Ryan. 1993. Synchronization  of oestrus.  In: Current  Veterinary 
Therapy  - Food Animal  Practice.  Ed. J. L. Howard.  W. B. Saunders,  Philadelphia,  
U.S.A.,  pp. 776-779.
16
Gorden,  P. and L. L. Timms.  1988.  Evaluation  of a vaginal  conductivity  probe,  and milk  
progesterone,  from calving  to conception.  J. Dairy Sci. 71 (Suppl.  1);228.
Johnson,  L. A., J. P. Flook  andM.  V. Lx)ok.  1987.  Flow  cytometry  of X and  Y chromosome ­
bearing  sperm  for DNA using  an improved  preparation  method  and staining  with 
Hoechst  33342.  Gamete  Res. 17:203-212.
Johnson,  L. A., D. G. Cran and C. Polge. 1994. Recent  advances  in sex preselection  
of cattle:  flow cytometric  sorting  of X and Y-chromosome  bearing  sperm  based  on 
DNA to produce  progeny.  Theriogenology  41:51-56.
Lehrer,  A .R., G. S. Lewis  and E. Aizinbud.  1991. Electrical  resistance  of genital  tissues  
during  reproductive  events  in cows,  and its possible  on-farm  applications:  A review. 
Wien.  Tieraerztl.  Monatsschr.  78:317322.
Macmillan,  K. L., V. K. Taufaand  A. M. Day. 1986.  Effects of an agonist  .of gonadotropin  
releasing  hormone  (buserelin)  in cattle.  III. Pregnancy  rates  after  a post-insemination  
injection  during  metoestrus  or dioestrus.  Anim. Reprod.  Sci. 11:1-10.
McEvoy,  J. D. 1992. Alteration  of the sex ratio.  Animal  Breeding  Abstracts  60 (2):97-  
111 .
Mee, J. F. and P. A. M. Rogers,  1993. Prevalence  and relevance  of trace mineral  
deficiencies  on Irish  dairy  farms.  Proceedings  of the Irish  Grain and Feed  Association,  
pp 1-29.
Mee, J. F., K. J., O’Farrell,  and P. A. M. Rogers.  1994, Base-line  survey  of blood  trace  
element  status  of 50 dairy herds in the South  of Ireland  in the Spring  and Autumn  
of 1991. Ir. Vet. J. (In press).
O’Farrell,  K. J. 1984,  The control  of dairy  herd fertility.  In: Moorepark  25th  Anniversary  
publication.  Part II: Animal  health  and machine  milking.  Ed. J. O’Shea, pp. 1-36.
O’Farrell,  K. J. 1992. Management  factors  affecting  the reproductive  performance  of 
spring  calving  dairy  cows in Ireland.  Ph.D.  thesis  - Trinity  College  Dublin,  Ireland,
Pieterse,  M. C., K. A. Kappen,  Th A. M. Kruip  and M. A. M. Taverne.  1988.  Aspiration  
of bovine  oocytes  during  transvaginal  ultrasound  scanning  of the ovaries.  
Theriogenology  30:751-756.
Pieterse,  M. C., Vos Plam,  Th A. M. Kruip,  Y. A. Wurth,  Th H. van Beneden,  A. H. 
Willemse  and M. A, M, Taverne.  1992. Repeated  transvaginal  ultrasound-guided  
ovum pick-up  in EGG treated  cows. Theriogenology  37:273  Abst.
Redden,  K. D., A. D. Kennedy,  J. R. Ingalls  and T. L. Gilson,  1993. Detection  of estrus  
by radiotelemetric  monitoring  of vaginal  and ear skin temperature  and pedometer  
measurements  of activity.  J. Dairy Sci. 76:713-721  .
Ryan,  D. R, E. Kopel,  M. P. Boland  and R. A, Godke.  1991. Pregnancy  rates in dairy  
cows following  the administration  of a GnRH  analogue  at the time of artificial  
insemination  or at mid-cycle  post insemination,  Theriogenology  36:367-377.
Ryan,  D. P, R. A. Spoon  and G. L. Williams.  1992. Ovarian  follicular  characteristics,  
embryo  recovery  and embryo  viability  in heifers  fed high-fat  diets and treated  with 
follicle-stimulating  hormone.  J. Anim. Sci. 70:3505-3513.
Ryan, D. P.,E. G. Blakewood,  W. F. Swanson,  H, Rodriguez  and R. A. Godke.  1993.  
Using  hormone-treated  pregnant  cows as a potential  source  of oocytes  for in vitro  
fertilization.  Theriogenology  40:1039-1055.
Ryan, D. P. 1993. Ultrasound  for non-pregnancy  diagnosis.  Ir, Farm. J. 45(32):25.
Ryan, D. P. S. Snijders,  T. Condon,  M. Grealy,  J. Sreenan  and K. J. O'Farrell.  1994a.  
Endocrine  and ovarian  responses  and pregnancy  rates in dairy cows following  the
17
administration  of a gonadotrophin  releasing  hormone  analog  at the time of artificial  
insemination  or at mid-cycle  post insemination.  Anim.  Reprod.  Sci. 34:179-191.
Ryan,  D. P., L. D’Hoore,  S. Snijders  and K. J. O’Farrell.  1994b.  Intrauterine  transfer  
of bovine  trophoblast  vesicles  during  dioestrus  after  breeding  to increase  pregnancy  
rates in dairy cows. Anim.  Reprod.  Sci. (Accepted).
Schluensen,  D., H. Roth,  H. Schoen,  W. Paul and H. Speckmann.  1987.  Automatic  health  
and oestrus  control  in dairy husbandry  through  computer  aided systems.  J. Agric.  
Eng. Res. 38:263-279.
Schroder,  A., J. R. Miller,  P. D. Thomsen,  K. Roschlau,  B. Avery,  P H. Poulsen,  M. 
Schmidt  and M. Schwerin.  1990. Sex determination  of bovine  embryos  using the 
polymerase  chain  reaction.  Anim. Biotech.  1:121-133.
Spahr,  S. L. and G. S. Lewis.  1991. Computer  aided reproduction  control.  Proc. 23rd 
Int. Dairy  Congress,  8-12 October  1990, Montreal,  Canada.  Int. Dairy Federation,  
Ottawa,  Ont., pp. 543-551.
Vaughan,  L., D. B. R. Poole,  F. H. Smith,  M. P. Boland and J. F. Roche.  1989.  The effect  
of molybdenum-induced  copper  deficiency  on fertility  in heifers.  Proc. of the 40th 
Annual  Meeting  of the European  Association  of Animal  Production.  1, 263.
Wehrman,  M. E., T. H. Welsh,  Jr., and G. L. Williams.  1991.  Diet-induced  hyperlipidemia  
in cattle modifies  the intrafollicular  cholesterol  environment,  modulates  ovarian  
follicular  dynamics, and hastens  the onset  of postpartum luteal  activity.  Biol. Reprod.  
45:514-522  .
Williams,  G. L. 1989. Modulation  of luteal activity  in postpartum  beef cows through  
changes  in dietary  lipid. J. Anim. Sci. 67:785-793.
A Farmer ’s View of Calving  Date and 
Compact  Calving
J. DWYER
Moneymore,  Borris-in-Ossory,  Co. Laois.
Introduction
The essence  of all good  systems  of production  is simplicity  and in my view  
calving  date and compact  calving  are the two key issues  that will allow  us to 
achieve  this goal.
Compact  calving  need not be a complicated  matter  and I outline  the steps  
that we have taken to achieve  this.
What  is Compact  Calving
Compact  calving  is the combined  effect  of high submission  rate and high 
conception  rate.
1. Why do we have Compact  Calving  
i Our aim is to calve cows as closely  as possible  to spring  grass. Cows  
calving  too early are costly  in terms of winter  feed; cows calving  too 
late miss out on early cheap  grass and on lactation  days,  
ii Compact  calving  increases  labour  demand  in the short  term but reduces  
it over the long term.
Compact  calving  enables  the farmer  to concentrate  on one very important  
specific  job at a time. First the calving  of the cow and second,  getting  
the cow back in calf.
In spring  calving  herds  compact  calving  will enable  the farmer  to have  
a break  between  very intensive  calving  and very intensive  breeding.  Also  
in spring  calving  herds the farmer  can take a break from milking  for 
about  one month  each year. This enables  him to face each specific  task 
that is, calving  and breeding  with vigor and enthusiasm.
Our Breeding  Programme  for Compact  Calving  
Our breeding  programme  can be broken  up into the following  areas.
i Calving
ii Pre-Breeding  
ii Heat Detection
Insemination  
Replacement  Heifers  
Targets 
Results
Future  of Breeding  
A word on Embryonic  Deaths  
X Summary  
i Calving
(a) Type of bull
We have already  decided  on how compact  next year's  calving  will be by111
IV
IV
V
vi
vii
viii 
ix
19
the type of bulls we have used. For example  using continental  bulls on 
cows  that go two to three  weeks  over  time and then result  in a very difficult  
calving  will reduce  the time they come back in heat by 6/8 weeks.  This 
is time you cannot  afford  to loose if you want compact  calving
(b) Bulls within  breeds
Even using  breeds  where  cows  calve  to time such as Friesian  on Friesian;  
Hereford  on Friesian;  Belgium  Blue on Friesian,  some  bulls within  these  
breeds  will result  in difficult  calvings.  When  choosing  bulls, select  bulls  
with high RBI and easy calving  rates,  also select  the bull to suit the cow. 
Do not inseminate  a small cow with a bull that will bring big calves.
(c) Hygiene  at calving
Always  use plastic  gloves  when calving  a cow, also have calving  boxes 
clean and well bedded  down.  This reduces  the level of infection  that can 
be introduced  into the cow at calving.  Calving  is a natural  process  and 
should  not lead to infection.
We seldom  have to wash out a cow due to infection,  infections  mean  that 
cows are slower  to go back in heat. Remember  90% of cows will calve  
without  assistance.
ii Pre-Breeding
(a) Tail paint
24 days before  start of breeding  season  tail paint  all cows with matt vinyl  
emulsion  paint. Tail painting  is essential  and must be done for optimum  
efficiency.
(b) Vet in
At the end of 24 days intensive  heat detection  the Vet is called  in to handle  
any cow over  40 days calved  and not seen  in heat. Prostaglandins  are used 
on cows with cysts,  non uterine  involution  and cows  possibly  not seen in 
heat. Progestagens  are used on cows not cycling.
It is very important  to have good records  for the Vet before  he handles  
a cow. He can then make  a diagnosis  with as much  information  as possible.  
These  records  should  include  calving  date, calving  difficulties  if any, 
whether  placenta  was retained  or not and also breeding  problems  in the 
past. The Vet is brought  in every three weeks  until all cows have been 
served.
(c) On  the day before  the start of the breeding  programme,  all the cows are 
painted  again and subsequently  the colour  is changed  after each  
insemination
iii Heat Detection
(a) The signs of standing  heat are standing  to be mounted,  clear mucus,  
cows off milk, not letting  down  milk, agitation  and swollen  vulva.  All the 
above  will be confirmed  by the paint being removed.
(b) Cows that are mounting  the cows in heat or cows that are agitated  
when a cow is in heat will invariably  come in heat in the next 3/5 days.
(c) Studies  have shown  that in spring  calving  herds  some  cows will stand
20
in heat for up to 30 hours.  The average  is 9 hours  and 'h of all heats may 
be less that 6 hours duration.  Some may be as low as 2 hours.
(d) The best time to observe  cows in heat is when they are at rest. It can 
be difficult  to observe  heats around  yards.
(e) When  bringing  in cows for milking  in the morning  in particular,  watch  
cows for 5/10  minutes  before  opening  the paddock  or shouting  at the cows.  
Always  have a note book to record  cows in standing  heat or even cows  
that you may be suspicious  that are coming  in heat. This can be confirmed  
later. Remember  40% of cows  are in standing  heat at 7.00 a.m. and 30% 
of cows are in standing  heat at 10.00 p.m.
(f) Cows should  be observed  for heat between  3/5 times per day.
iv Insemination
(a) Conception  rate is highest  by inseminating  cows 12/18 hours after  
observed  heat onset.
BASIC  RUTH
Morning  in heat - Inseminate  in evening  
Evening  in heat - Inseminate  in morning
(b) If you are inexperienced  at D.I.Y.  A.I. never inseminate  too many  cows  
together.
(c) Handle  semen  carefully,  once thaw-out  starts, it starts to die.
(d) Once an animal  is inseminated  tail paint with a new colour.
(e) Record  insemination
NB The less stress at insemination  the better.
V Replacement  Heifers
(a) Our target is to have replacement  heifers  at 330 kg at mating  (14/15  
months)  and 550 kg at calving.
(b) Breed  to high RBI bulls consistent  with easy calving.
(c) Inseminate  heifers before  or at least  at the beginning  of the cow breeding  
season.
(d) Heifers  stand  in heat  for shorter  periods,  but they are easier  to inseminate.
(e) The bull goes in once all the heifers  have been inseminated  usually  in 
three weeks.  The bull is out after 4 weeks  and into the cows. The same  
pre-breeding  routine  and tail painting  applies  to the heifers.
NB Heifers  are kept near the house  as we have found  that tail painting  is not 
as successful  with heifers.
vi Targets
Our targets  are as follows:
(a) 90% submission  rate
(b) 65/70%  conception  rate
(c) Start breeding  season 1st May - Finish 10th July
(d) Bull  into heifers  after three weeks  breeding  to A.I. and bull out of heifers  
after four weeks.
21
vii Results  
YEAR SUBMISSION  RATE CONCEPTION  RATE
1992
199389%
89%66%
66%
Total No. Date Finish
Year Calved Jan. Feb. Mar. April Calving
1990 95 56 28 8 3 5th April
1991 95 27 46 17 5 12th April
1992 95 14 52 21 8 27th April
1993 89 57 21 11 28th April
1994 102 73 25 4 10th April
viii Future  of Breeding
The following  is an outline  of how we hope to keep our calving  compact  
in the future.
(a) Heat detect  as normal  day - 24 days to 0 i.e. 1st May
(b) Record  all cows in heat - 24 days to 0 day.
(c) Inseminate  as normal  from day 1 on.
(d) On day + 6 inject  all cows  that were in heat from day -10 to day 0 with 
prostaglandin.
(e) Inseminate  these  cows  as they  come  in heat.  These  cows should  conceive  
10 to 11 days earlier  than would  otherwise  be the case.
(f) On heifers  by using Prids or Crestar,  we can induce  heat response  of 
85/95%  with the majority  80% in heat between  24/60  hours  after  treatment.  
About  10% of animals  fail to  synchronise  but come  in heat  within one week.
ix Embryonic  Deaths
I think  it is important  that we fully understand  the impact  embryonic  deaths  
can have on compact  calving.  It is an area that little is known  about and 
where  further  research  is needed.
(a) Most embryonic  deaths  have occured  by day 18 after breeding.
(b) Embryo  deaths  before  day 16/17 result in normal  18/24 day repeat  
intervals.
(c) Embryo  deaths  after  day 16/17  result  in long and irregular  repeat  intervals.
(d) From day 50 to term the incidence  of foetal death is 5/8%. 
Conception  failure  in most  instances  is almost  synonymous  with embryonic  
death.
From  the above  it can be seen that if we want  compact  calving, it is important  
to have plenty  of replacement  heifers.
X Summary
In my opinion,  the key to profitable  spring  milk production  is calving  close  
to grass  with compact  calving.  Compact  calving  can be achieved  with good  
heat  detection  allied  to tail painting  and proper  animal  husbandry.  This  should 
lead to high submission  rates  and high  conception  rates which is COMPACT  
CALVING.
22
Summer  Milk Production  - The Role of 
Grazed  Grass
P. DILLON  and S. CROSSE  
Teagasc,  Moorepark  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Introduction
Traditionally,  milk production  systems  in Ireland  (pre quota)  were driven  
by the achievement  of high  output/acre  and generally  resulted in a highly  seasonal 
milk supply  pattern.  With  the introduction  of milk quotas,  the decision-making  
process  to devise  the optimum  system  on dairy farms  became  more  complex.  
There  is less emphasis  now on very  high  stocking  rates.  To achieve  the maximum  
return  from  the milk  quota  available  on the farm,  the dairy farmer  has to consider  
the milk  supply  and milk  quality  requirement  of the food industry.  High margins  
can be achieved  by maximising  the receipts  from  the farm  as well as controlling  
costs. Receipts  will be dependent  on milk yield/cow,  milk price and a high 
price for calves  and cull cows. Costs (variable,  fixed and depreciation  costs)  
are also very important  and need to be continuously  reviewed.  Care must be 
taken in the drive to reduce  costs so as not to reduce  the receipts/cow  on the 
farm too much.  The goal should  be to maximise  net margin  from the farm.  
Losses  due to reproductive  wastage,  animal  health,  etc. need to be controlled.  
The milk production  system  will need to be sustainable  economically  and in 
terms  of its impact  on the environment  and on the quality  of life for the farm  
family.
Calving  date
Calving  date has a large influence  on the seasonality  of milk  supply,  on the 
costs of milk production  and on farm profit.  The spread  of calving  pattern  is 
also very important.  A comparison  of 2 different  calving  dates at an overall 
stocking  rate of 0.85 acre/cow  is shown  in Table 1. Delaying  the calving  date 
from January  to March  reduced  milk yield per cow by 92 gallons.  However,  
later calving  increased  milk fat and protein per cent. This resulted  in 
no difference  in yield of fat or protein  per cow. Concentrate  was reduced  by 
435 kg/cow  on average.  Later calving  reduced  receipts  per cow by £39 and 
variable  costs by £64/cow.  This resulted  in an increase  of £25/cow  in gross  
margin  due to later calving.  In terms  of a milk quota  situation  on dairy farms,  
delaying  calving date increased  the gross margin by 8p per gallon of 
milk quota.
Later  calving  allowed  a closer  match  of the milk supply  pattern  to the 
grass  growing  year. This allowed  a greater  amount  of milk being  produced  
from  grazed  grass  (72%  vs 85%)  (Fig. 1). However  a closer  match  of calving  
date to grass  supply  is very much  dependent  on compact  calving  just prior  
to turn-out  to grass. Calving  should  start 4 weeks prior to the expected  
turn-out  date to grass.
23
Table 1
Comparison  of 2 different  caiving  dates over 3 years
January  
Calving  (A)March  
Calving  (B)Difference  
(A - B)
Calving  date (MCD) 21/1 15/3
Concentrate  input (kg/cow) 620 185 -435
Silage/cow (t) 7 7 0
MiDc yield/cow (gal.) 1253 1161 -92
Fat (%) 3.60 3.76 -1-0.16
Protein (%) 3.20 3.37 -1-0.17
Receipts/cow (£) 1387 1348 -39
Variable  costs/cow (£) 300 236 -64
Gross margin/cow (£) 1087 1112 -h25
Margin*  per gallon  of quota  (p/gal)  88 96 -1-8
♦ Gross margin  plus adjustment  for opportunity  costs for capital  and land
Stocking  rate
Delaying  calving  date resulted  in lower  milk  yield  per cow.  This was mainly  
due to inadequate  feed supply  in the autumn.  The objective  of lowering  the 
stocking  rate would  be to increase  the supply of grass  from  mid-season  onwards  
and to a limited  extent  in the spring  period  (Fig. 1). Two stocking  rates (0.85  
and 0.95 ac/cow)  were evaluated  over three years (Table  2). Reducing  the 
stocking  rate by 0.1 acres  per cow increased  milk yield per cow by 35 gallons  
on average  over the three years.  There  was slight increase  in fat and protein
CD K >- z U O (L > u
UJ < a < 3 3 3 UJ o o UJu. S < S•>< (0 o z o
Fig. 1 - The feed demand/grass  supply  for both mid-January  and 
early-March  spring-calving  dairy  cows at both 0.85 and 1.0 acres/cow
24
concentrations.  The financial  results  show  that milk receipts  increased  by £45/ 
cow. Variable  costs were reduced  by £4/cow.  This resulted  in an increase  of 
£49 per cow in gross  margin.  In terms  of a milk  quota  situation, reducing  stocking  
rate increased  the margin  by Ip per gallon  of milk quota. There were large  
differences  between  years in this study. In the first (1990)  year (which  was a 
more  typical  year in terms  of grass  production)  there  was a large improvement  
in milk yield per cow (86 gallons)  in favour  of the lower  stocking  rate. The 
second  year (1991)  was a poor grass-growing  year. The high stocked  herd had 
to be fed concentrates  during  the grazing  season  whereas  no concentrates  were  
necessary  at the low stocking  rate (silage  was used as the supplement).  In 1992  
the grass  growth  rates  were  well above  normal  in the autumn  period.  This  reduced  
the necessity  to supplement  the lower  stocked  herd until the end of October.
Table 2
Comparison  of 2 different  stocking  rates over 3 years for cows calving  in
March
High S.R. (B) 
(0.85 ac/cow)Lower  S.R, (C) 
(0.95 ac/cow)Difference  
(C - B)
Concentrate  input (kg/cow) 185 80 -105
Milk yield (gal.) 1161 1196 -1-35
Fat (%) 3.76 3.87 -rO.ll
Protein (%) 3.37 3.38 -1-0.01
Receipts/cow (£) 1348 1393 -(-45
Varialjle  costs/cow (£) 236 232 -4
Gross margin/cow (£) 1112 1161 -1-49
Margin*  per gallon  of quota (p/gal.) 96 97 -1-1
* Gross margin  plus adjustment  for opportunity  costs for capital  and land
The decision  to allocate  extra land to the dairy enterprise  will depend  on 
the opportunity  costs of the extra land. The opportunity  cost of the land has 
been considered  in the present  calculations.  If the return from alternative  
enterprises  in general  are relatively  low, then it makes  sense  to reduce  stocking  
rate on highly  stocked  farms.  A lower  stocking  rate facilitates  a greater  proportion  
of silage  coming  from first cut and a large supply  of grass in early spring  and 
autumn  period.  The relationship  between  nitrogen  input  and stocking  rate should 
also be recognised.
Feeding  value of early spring  grass
Winter  feeding  of silage and concentrates  can amount  to a significant  
proportion  of the dairy  cow ’s feed bill. Since  grazed  grass is the cheapest  feed 
available on  the farm,  therefore  the provision  of early spring  grass  is important  
for the spring-calved  cow. As we have seen, the matching  of calving  date to 
the start of the grazing  season  is important.  However  the provision  of early
25
spring  grass is still important  in that it will influence  the length  of the grazing  
season  and the target  calving  date. Due to the low growth  rates in early spring  
period,  grass  supply  will not be adequate  to meet  the dairy  cow’s demand  when 
first  turned  out to grass.  This  will be influenced  by overall  stocking  rate,  previous  
autumn  grazing  management,  prevailing  grass growth  conditions  and calving  
pattern.  The grass available  in spring  is as a result  of the grass carried  over 
from the previous  autumn  plus that which  grew over the winter.  Data from  
Johnstown  Castle  and Moorepark  have shown  that the loss in yield in spring  
by grazing  up until early December  is not balanced  by the grass consumed  
previous  to late autumn.  Delaying  closing  by six weeks  in autumn  1993 (22 
October  - 2nd December)  reduced  grass yield by 620 kg DM in late January  
for a removal  of 320 kg DM the previous  autumn.  The option  of grazing  the 
whole  farm is available  to most dairy farmers  (as well as the area available  
for grazing  in the April-June  period,  the area  that will be cut for first cut silage).  
Grass  production  data  from  Moorepark  have  shown that  a grazing  in late March  
resulted  in a reduction  of 13% (1500  kg DM/ha)  in silage  yields  cut on 25th 
May (McCarthy,  1984).  However  when the yield taken as grazing  was added  
to the first and second  cut silage  yields,  no loss in dry matter  production  was 
recorded.
The results  of a recent  study in Moorepark  where  grass silage was 
supplemented  with  concentrates  and early  spring  grass  is shown  in Table  3. The 
objective  of the study was to (1) quantify  the effect  of including  up to 50% 
of the diet as grazed  grass  as compared  to silage  only,  (2) to establish  the response  
to level of concentrate  feeding  when silage  and early spring  grass are part of 
the diet. The first group  were indoors  full-time  on ad lib silage  (72 DMD)  and 
6 kg of concentrates.  The other  three  groups  were turned  out to grass  from  27th
Table 3
Intakes,  milk yield and composition
Treatment
Indoors  Silage -Grazing+Silage  Grazing+Silage  
+ 6 kg Cone. + 6 kg Cone. + 4 kg Cone.Grazing+Silage  
+ 2 kg Cone.
Silage  intake (kg DM) 8.5 5.0 5.7 6.2
Grass intake (kg DM) - 6.6 6.2 6.3
Concentrate  intake (kg DM) 5.3 5.3 3.5 1.8
Total intake (kg DM) 13.8 16.9 15.4 14.3
Milk yield  
(gal/cow/day)4.7 5.3 5.0 4.7
Fat % 3.63 3.60 3.75 3.69
Protein % 3.06 3.17 3.15 3.12
Lactose % 4.63 4.55 4.61 4.53
Liveweight  change -0.7 +0.2 -0.4 -0.2
Experimental  period:  8 weeks  (27 January - 24 April)
26
February  from about  9 am. to 3 p.m. each day given an allowance  of 7-8 kg 
DM (> 4 cm). The three groups  were fed the same silage  overnight  and 6, 4 
and 2 kg of concentrates  respectively.
Dry matter  intakes  were increased  substantially  by supplementation  with 
grazed  grass (13.8 vs 16.9). Silage  intakes  were reduced  and grass intake  was 
similar  for all three groups.  Cows  fed 6 kg of concentrates  outdoors  by day 
and indoors by night  produced  0.6 gal/cow/day  extra  with  higher  protein  content  
(0.1%)  than the comparable  group which was indoors  full-time  on 6 kg of 
concentrates.  Cows  fed 2 kg of concentrates,  grass by day and silage  by night  
produced  similar  milk yields  and composition  as the cows indoors  full-time  
on 6 kg of concentrates.
In a milk quota  situation  where  quota  is not limiting  the optimum  system  
was grazing  by day, silage  by night and fed 4 kg of concentrates.  Margin  per 
gallon  of milk quota  was increased  by 2p/gallon  over the group  indoors  full­
time on 6 kg of concentrates.  Therefore  the availability  of early grass for the 
spring-calving  cow is critical.
Spring  grazing  management
Grass growth  and grazing  conditions  can be erratic  in the late April-May  
period  depending  on climatic  conditions.  Grass intakes  of 15-16 kg DM per 
cow per day have been measured  in Moorepark  with spring-calving  dairy  cows  
over this period  under  good grazing  conditions  (1990  and 1992).  This period  
also coincides  with the start of the breeding  season.  To obtain  good fertility  
performance,  cows  need  to be in a positive  energy  balance  at this stage.  Therefore  
in periods  of poor growth  rates/difficult  grazing  conditions,  supplementation  
may be required.  A supplementation  study was carried  out in Moorepark  over 
this period  in 1993,  which was a period  of poor  grass  growth  and difficult  grazing  
conditions  (Fig. 2). The intakes  and milk yields  are shown  in Table  4. The milk 
yields  are the average  daily milk yields  over the 9 weeks  of the experiment.
and 1993
27
Table  4
Intake,  milk yield and composition
Grass only Grass-t-2  kg Cone. Grass-(-4  kg Cone.
Grass intake (kgDM) 13.3 13.2 12.8
Cone, intake (kgDM) - 1.8 3.5
Total intake (kgDM) 13.3 15.0 16.3
Milk yield (gal/cow/day) 5.2 5.5 5.6
Fat (%) 3.66 3.54 3.60
Protein (%) 3.35 3.36 3.34
Experimental  period;  9 weeks  (10 April -12 June)
while  the intakes  represent  just two weeks  when  grazing  conditions  were  poor.  
The cows were stocked  at 0.45 acres per cow with an allowance  of 18-19  kg 
DM (> 4 cm) per day. The intakes  of the grass only group  was much lower  
than measured  previously  where  intakes  of 15-17  kg DM have been measured.  
The substitution  rate of grass for the concentrate  supplement  was very low 
(almost  no substitution  at the 2 kg level and only 0.14 kg of grass/kg  of 
concentrate  at the 4 kg level).  The milk yield responses  shown  in Table  4 are 
lower  than that obtained  in the two weeks  that intakes  were measured.  The 
results  indicate  that in situations  of poor  grass  supply  and poor  grazing  conditions  
in early spring  that supplementation  is required.  Supplementation  should  be 
introduced  swiftly  and be large  enough  in quantity  to maintain  milk yields  and 
then taken out when grass supply  returns  to normal.  For later calving  herds,  
particular  attention  needs  to be paid to the feeding  of the animals  during  the 
breeding  season.
Mid-season  grazing  management
With a compact  spring-calving  herd with a mean  calving  date of March  1st, 
45-50%  of total production  will be produced  in the months  of May to August. 
Given  that grazed  grass  is the main component  of the diet of the lactating  cows  
over this period,  grazing  management  will have a large influence  on milk  
production.  The main factors  in achieving  high performance  from dairy cows  
on grazed  pastures  have already  been described  (Stakelum,  1993).
Autumn  supplementation
The autumn  period  on dairy farms  coincides  with large  changes  in the type 
and quantity  of forage  available  for dairy  cows.  The milk supply  pattern  at this 
time of year can vary widely  depending  on calving  pattern  of the herd and 
feeding  level. Table  5 gives the expected  milk yield per cow for early spring ­
calving  cows,  late spring-calving  cows  and a  supply  pattern  for herds  with 40% 
autumn-calving  (Sept./Oct.)  and 60% spring-calving  cows.
28
Table 5
Expected  milk supply  pattern  per cow for early Spring,  late Spring  and 
Autumn/Spring-calving  cows (gal/cow/month)
Month  of
YearEarly Spring-  
CalvingLate Spring-  
CalvingAutumn/Spring-
Calving
September 79 92 65
October 57 79 82
November 33 60 90
December 20 50 85
Yield level of 1,100 gallons  per cow with a good system  of management
The potential  milk production  for early to mid March  calving  herds at this 
time of the year should  be noted.  Table  6 shows  the effect  of two different  feed 
allowances  as measured  by stocking  rate on milk yield from September  to the 
end of the year. The considerable  improvement  in milk yield was due to the 
availability  of extra grass and the availability  of extra silage which was fed 
when  grass supply  was less than the requirements  of the herd. No concentrate  
was fed in these situations.
The supply  of grass  from September  onwards  will depend  on current  grass  
growth  rates,  stocking  rates,  previous  grazing  management,  calving  pattern  and 
nitrogen  application.  Figure  3 shows the feed demand/feed  supply  available  for 
a March-calving  cow stocked  at 0.85 acres/cow  using average  growth  rates  
1982/92.  The rapid  reduction  in growth  rates  from  the end of September  onwards  
results  in feed supply  being  less than  feed required  to sustain  target  milk yields.  
The grazing  management  over  the spring/summer  period  will affect  the quantity  
and quality  of grass available  for grazing  going  into the autumn.  An objective  
for dairy farmers  is to have a good farm cover  of high quality  grass in mid-  
September.  The timing  of last application  of nitrogen  will depend  on the response  
in terms  of dry matter  production,  the demand  for grass,  soil type and the milk 
production  potential  of the animals  to be fed. In Moorepark  the last nitrogen  
is applied  by the end of September  (based  on a response  of 8.5 kg DM per kg 
of N).
Table 6
Milk production  profile  for 2 herds with a mean calving  date in mid-March  
but with two different  stocking  rates (gal/cow/day)
Month  of
Year 0.85 ac/cowStocking  Rate
0.95 ac/cow Difference
September 3.82 3.82 0.00
October 2.49 3.11 0.62
November 1.89 2.68 0.79
December 1.54 2.13 0.59
29
Fig. 3 - The feed available  under  grazing  at a stocking  rate of 0.85 ac/ 
cow and the feed demand  of an early-March  calving  dairy cow using  
average  growth  rates 1982-1992
The response  to concentrate  supplementation  has been shown  to vary over 
the grazing  season. A better  response  is usually  recorded  in the autumn  (Crosse  
and Gleeson,  1987). Shortages  of grass can result in large responses  to 
concentrates.  Forages  (silage  or hay) may be used to supplement  grazing,  
particularly  when herbage  is in short supply,  and usually  have the benefit  of 
being cheaper  than concentrate.  The results  of a recent  trial carried  out in 
Moorepark  where  autumn grass  was supplemented  with  concentrates  and silage  
is shown  in Table 7.
Grass  supply  was considered  not to be a significant  limiting  factor  in this 
experiment  as the cows were  not allowed  to graze  below  6-7 cm. The  concentrate
Table 7
Supplementation  of autumn  grass with silage and concentrates  (Spring-calving
cows)
Grass
onlyGrass+2  kg 
Silage DMGrass+4  kg 
Silage DMGrass +2 kg 
ConcentratesGrass+4  k 
Concentrate!
Milk yield (Gal/cow/day) 2.39 2.50 2.31 2.80 2.99
Response (Gal/cow/day) 0.0 +0.11 -0.08 +0.41 +0.60
Fat (%) 4.29 4.12 4.02 4.07 3.91
Protein (%) 3.76 3.68 3.67 3.74 3.81
Experimental  period: 10 weeks  (14th September  - 23rd November,  ’92).
30
fed was 25% maize  distillers  and 75% beet pulp.  First  cut silage  was fed (72%  
DMD)  and it was well preserved.  Supplementation  with silage  gave little or 
no response  in milk  yield. It also had a very negative  effect  on milk  composition.  
Supplementation with  concentrate  had a very positive  effect  on milk  yield.  The 
response  was 0.4 gallons  of milk for 2 kg concentrate  and 0.6 gallons  milk for 
4 kg of concentrate.  Concentrate  feeding  had a negative  effect  on the fat content  
of the milk but it had a slight  positive  effect  on the milk protein  and fat yield.
Autumn  supplementation  would  have to be economically  beneficial  within  
the overall  milk  quota.  Systems where  additional  concentrates  are fed and which  
result  in increased  milk  yield  per cow will have  the effect  of reducing  the number  
of cows  in the herd.  In a low cost system  of production  (which  has high  margins),  
then the cost of displacing  a cow will be higher.  This is illustrated  in Table  8. 
Table  6 shows  the effect  of feeding  2 kg of concentrates/cow/day  on margin/  
gallon  of milk quota. In order  to obtain  a margin  of 0.5 p/gal of quota  with 
a milk  price of 120 p/gal last autumn,  concentrates  should  not cost more than 
£ 120/tonne  when  the farm costs are £500/cow,  while if concentrate  cost was 
£150/tonne  then you would  get a similar  margin  at a farm cost of £7(X)/cow.
Table 8
Effect  of feeding  2 kg of concentrates/cow/day  on additional  margin/  
gal of milk quota  (p/gal)  in the autumn
Farm Costs Cone. Milk Price
£/cow Cost £/t 100 120 140
500 120 0.0 -1-0.5 -1-1.0
150 -0.4 H-O.l -1-0.6
180 -0.8 -0.3 -1-0.2
700 120 -1-0.4 -1-0.9 -1-1.4
150 0.0 -1-0.5 -Hl.O
180 -0.3 -1-0.2 -1-0.6
However,  in many farm situations  grass supply  will not be adequate.  In a 
previous  experiment  carried  out in Moorepark,  a milk yield response  of 0.7 
gallons/cow/day  was recorded  over a six week  period  for a silage  input  of 8.5 
kg silage  DM/cow/day (Crosse  and Gleeson,  1987).  It had however  a detrimental  
effect  on milk  composition.  It should  be noted that grazing  conditions  were  not 
as good in this case and grass  supply  would  also have  been  limiting.  Obtaining  
target  milk  production  over  the autumn/early winter  period  will depend  on getting  
the correct  blend  of grass,  silage  and concentrate  into the diet of the milking  
cow.
Autumn  grazing  management
Autumn  grass in terms of feeding  value is not as high as primary  spring  
grass;  however,  it is still better  in feeding  value than grass silage  (average  to 
good  quality)  and is cheaper  to produce.  Therefore, strategies  that would  increase
31
Table 9
Stocking  rates (acres/cow)
System
PeriodA
(0.65-0.85)B
(0.65-1.0)C
(0.55-0.85)D
(0.55-1.0)
1 (26/6 - 20/8) 0.65 0.65 0.55 0.55
2 (21/8 - 6/12) 0.85 1.00 0.85 1.00
the proportion  of grazed  grass  in cows  diet in the September  - December  period  
would  be desirable.  A study  was carried  out in Moorepark  in the autumn/winter  
of 1993 (26/6  - 6/12) to investigate  strategies  on how this could  be achieved.  
Two approaches  could  be used to do this. The first approach  was to adjust  the 
proportion  of the farm allocated  to second  cut silage.  The standard  stocking  
rate during  this period  is 0.55 acres/cow.  Reducing  the stocking  rate during  this 
period  (0.65  ac/cow)  would  allow  less feed  to be fed  on the form of grass  silage  
(approximately  0.7 t/cow)  and a greater  proportion  as grazed  grass.  The second  
approach  would  be an overall  stocking  rate adjustment,  the two stocking  rates  
used in this experiment  were  0.85 and 1.0 acres/cow.  The four systems  of milk 
production  are shown  on Table  9. All pastures  were grazed  to a post-grazing  
sward  height  of 6-7 cm. Rotation  length  was maintained  at 21 days or greater. 
When grass supply  was not adequate  to maintain  the desirable  post-grazing  
surface  height  then grass  silage  was used  as a buffer  feed.  The experiment  ceased 
when the grass  supply  in all grazing  treatments  was used up (6/12/93).  Nitrogen  
levels  (units/acre)  were similar  for the four systems.  Figure  4 shows the weekly
Fig. 4 - The average  weekly  rotation  lengths  (days)  for the four 
grazing  systems
32
Week-ending
Fig. 5 - The digestibility  (OMD)  of the grass  on offer (>4 cm) 
available  for grazing  in the four grazing  systems
rotation  lengths  in days over the experimental  period.  Rotation  length  was 
maintained  at about  21 days at the higher  stocking  rates (during  the second  cut 
silage period)  up until  the end of August,  while  at the lower  stocking  rate (0.65 
ac/cow)  during  the second  cut silage  period rotation  length  had reached  40 days 
by early September.  Rotation  length  reached  a maximum  in early October  (49 
days) and early  November  (52 days)  mid September  (33 days),  early November  
(47 days),  for treatments  A to D respectively.  The digestibility  of the grass on 
offer  (> 4 cm) was lower  at the lower  stocking  rates  during  the second  cut silage  
period  (0.65 ac/cow)  up until mid-September  (Figure  5). Where  the overall  
stocking  rates  were 1 acre/cow  the digestibility  of the grass  on offer  was generally  
higher  during  the month  of November.  The cows  in systems  A and C consumed  
0.7 and 1.5 tonnes  of silage  per cow, respectively;  no silage  was fed in systems  
B and D.
Table 10 shows  the milk production  data for the four herds.  Lowering  the 
stocking  rate during  the second  cut silage  period  (i.e. systems  A and B) resulted  
in lower  milk  yield (29 gal) fat yield,  protein yield and protein  content. Lowering  
the overall  stocking  rate from the end of August  onwards  (System  D) gave  
slightly  higher  milk yield  (-i- 13 gals/cow)  and slightly  higher  milk composition  
than the standard  system  (C). However,  it also resulted  in a saving  of 1.5 tonnes  
of silage/cow.
The results  of this study  showed  that going  to rotation  length  of 30-35  days 
during  July and August  (i.e. lower  stocking  rates during  second  cut silage)  will 
result  in reduced  milk yield and protein  content.  This resulted  in a reduction  
in margin/gallon  of milk quota  of almost  2p. Going  to a long rotation  length  
starting  in early September  (lower  overall  stocking  rates)  will result  in slightly  
higher  milk yields  and reduced  silage  feeding  with spring-calving  dairy cows
3."^
Table 10
Performance  of the four systems
PeriodSystem
A
(0.65/0.85)B
(0.65/1.0)C
(0.55/0.85)D
(0.55/1.0)
Milk yield (gal) 491 502 519 532
Fat (%) 4.04 4.07 4.10 4.19
Protein (%) 3.54 3.58 3.60 3.66
Lactose (%) 4.38 4.43 4.48 4.47
Liveweight  change 0.60 0.68 0.60 0.71
up until early December.  In this situation  when the extra land and reduced  
supplementation  are considered  the margin  per gallon  of quota  was increased  
by l-2p/gal.
Conclusions
Compact  calving  just prior  to the start of the grazing  season  increased  profit  
from the farm quota  even though  there was a considerable  drop in milk yield  
per cow. Most of the loss in milk yield was due to an inadequate  feed supply  
in the autumn.  The increased  margin  came  from reduced  costs (4p/gallon)  and 
increased  milk value (4p/gallon).  The reduction  in cost was associated  with 
lower  concentrate  feeding.  Later  calving  allowed  for a closer  match  of the milk  
supply  pattern  to the grass growing  year. This allows  the maximum  amount  
of milk to be produced  from grazed  grass.  Calving  should  start 4 weeks  prior  
to the expected  turn-out  day to grass.
Compact  calving  just prior  to the start of the grazing  season resulted  in lower  
milk yield per cow, mainly  due to an inadequate  feed supply  in the autumn.  
The objective  of lowering  the stocking  rate in this study was mainly  reflected  
(in terms  of feed supply)  for the grazing  cow from mid-season  onwards.  The 
higher  milk yield for the lower  stocked  cows (35 gallons  on average)  was as 
a result of a greater  supply  of grass in the autumn  as well as the use of the 
extra  silage  produced  as a supplement,  from mid-September  onwards. Lowering  
the stocking  rate increased  the margin  per gallon  of quota  by Ip per gallon.
Our current  grazing  season  extends  from  early March  to mid-December.  At 
high stocking  rates (0.8 - 0.9 ac/cow)  grass  growth  is not adequate  to meet  the 
full feed requirements  of a dairy  cow in early  spring  and in the October/December  
period.  In spring  the supply  of grass is a major  determinant  of the level of 
supplementary  feed which  needs  to be fed in order  to support  a high level of 
milk production  with spring  calving.  Therefore  spring  grass at the start of 
lactation  is far more important  than grass at the end of lactation.  The extent  
to which,  and how much,  grazed  grass will be used in spring  and autumn  will 
depend  on overall  stocking  rate, calving  pattern  and soil type.
34
In the past, spring-calving  cows dried off in the autumn  due to insufficient  
feed to maintain  milk yield. To allow late spring-calving  cows to have long 
lactation  lengths  of (300 days),  additional  feed will have  to be introduced  into 
the system in  the autumn.  This  feed may be in the form  of grass  (lower stocking  
rate), grass silage or concentrates,  or a combination  of all three.
Good  autumn milk  production will depend on getting  the right  blend of grass,  
silage and concentrates.  Where  adequate  quantities  of high quality  grass are 
available  high milk production  can be obtained.  In this situation  little response  
will be obtained  in terms  of milk production  in using silage  as a buffer  feed.  
In a creamery  milk situation  with spring-calving  cows it will generally  be 
economic  to feed 2 kg of concentrates  in the autumn;  however,  overall  milk  
quota situation  will have to be considered.
Lowering  the stocking  rate during  the second  cut silage  period  and allowing  
rotation length  to extend  to 30-35  days will result  in lower  milk  yield and protein  
content. Going  to long  rotation length from  early September  (i.e. lower  stocking  
rates) tended to increase  milk  production  and allowed  a large  reduction  in silage  
requirement  up to early December.  It also emphasises  that at lower  stocking  
rates (less than 1 acre/cow)  there is large potential  for extended  grazing  both 
in spring  and autumn/winter  provided  soil conditions  allow.
References
Crosse,  S. and Gleeson,  P. (1987).  Supplementation  of autumn  grass with silage  and 
concentrates  for grazing  dairy cows in late lactation.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  
Research,  26; pp.69-75.
McCarthy  (1984).  Milk production  from grassland.  Moorepark  25th Anniversary  
Publication,  Part 1: Milk Production,  An Foras Taluntais,  pp.3-60.
Stakelum,  G. (1993).  Achieving  high performance  from  dairy  cows  on grazed  pastures.  
Irish Grassland  & Animal  Production  Assoc.  J. 27: 9-18.
35
Is There  Money  in Extended  Grazing?
M. RYAN
Teagasc,  Nenagh,  Co. Tipperary.
The theme  question  to this paper  could  be asked  another  way, viz, “Is there  
money  in grazing  animals  later in autumn  and earlier  in springtime?  But it is 
too long a heading,  however,  it better  explains  to all of us what “extended  
grazing ” is about.
More than anything  “Extended  Grazing ” is an attitude  which involves  a 
commitment  to providing  grass so that the letting  out date in springtime  can 
be moved  forward  by so many days. In the autumn  it involves  having  grass  
while  animals  are “out”. In North  Tipperary  cows  are “out ’ until 20th  November,  
approximately;  they are then taken  off the pastures  and housed.  Unfortunately,  
most of these pastures  are as bare as the floor from early to mid October,  so 
we must endeavour  to have grass while they are “out”.
In the springtime  extending  the grazing  season  means  different  times to 
different  farmers.  It may mean moving  the “letting-out ” date from 1st May to 
20th  April for one man or moving  from  a “letting-out ” date of 1st April  to 15th 
March  or earlier  for another  farmer.  Similar  targets  should  be set for the autumn. 
Reducing  the cows  silage  requirement  by one tonne  and replacing  with grazed  
grass increases  milk profits  by 0.75 pence  per gallon.
The other arm of this concept  is utilisation  of grass.  As animals  are going  
to be grazing  fields  at marginal  times,  that is, early and late in the year when 
ground  conditions  may vary from very wet to fairly wet, grazing  techniques  
must  be practiced  to limit  poaching  damage  and maximise  animal  intakes  while  
at the same time utilising  80-100%  of the growing  grass. These  utilisation  
techniques  for grazing,  widely  discussed  in the farming  press and covered  by 
other speakers  today,  can and should  be applied,  at anytime  during  the year.  
For instance  some  farmers  had to use them  in the wet  June of 1993,  and farmers  
on wet land will always  have to use them to varying  degrees.
Answer  the question!
If meal is five times more expensive  and silage  is nearly  three times more  
expensive  than grazed  grass  then there  must  be more  money  in extended  grazing. 
Moorepark  have shown  that grazed  grass increases  protein  levels.  But what if 
some  progressive  farmers  who were  managing  their grass  well decided  to push 
out the limits further?  Over the last few years I have monitored  two groups  
of farmers,  let us call them  a “Conventional  Group ” and an “Extended  Group ”. 
All these farmers  are excellent  and highly  motivated  as reflected  by a milk 
yield per cow of 1155 gallons  and 1070 gallons  from 12.9 bags and 8.6 bags 
of meal for the Conventional  and Extended  groups  respectively.
Table  I shows  the changes  in Margin  over Feed and Fertiliser  (MOn")  per 
cow, per acre and per 1000 gallons  that have taken place from 1992 to 1993,  
having  adjusted  1992 to 1993 milk price and allowing  for protein  change.
36
Table 1
Change  in MOFF  per cow, per acre and per 1000 gallons  from 1992 to 1993 
(1992 Milk Price adjusted  upwards  for 1993 price)
Change  in MOFF Conventional  Group Extended  Group
Per Cow -£12 -£19
Per Acre +£44 -£46
Per 1000 -£11 +£27
MOFF  = Margin  over Feed and Fertiliser
It may seem surprising  that MOFF  per cow decreases  for both groups,  £12 
and £19 for the Conventional  and Extended  Groups  respectively.  But it does 
reflect  the difficult  year  we had. Per cow performance  is important  where  a farmer  
has insufficient  cows  to fill  quota  and if he is selling  pedigree  stock.  Where  land 
and buildings  are also limited  this measure  is also important.
The Conventional  Group  increased  MOFF  per acre by £44 because  they 
increased  stocking  rate from 1.08 to 1.13 livestock  units per acre. While  the 
Extended  Group  decreased  MOFF  per acre by £46 because  their stocking  rate 
decreased  from 1.18 to 1.15 livestock  units  per acre.  The margin  MOFF  per acre 
was £1181 and £1164  for the Conventional  and Extended  groups  respectively  
in 1993. MOFF  per acre is important  where  the land surplus  to the dairy area 
is giving  a good return  or where  land has to be rented  for the dairy enterprise.
It must  be the target  of most  expanding  dairy farmers  to produce  their quota  
as cheaply  as possible,  and MOFF  per 1000 gallons  measures  that. The 
Conventional  Group  allowed  the MOFF  per 1000  gallons  decrease  by £11 (1.2%)  
in 1993 while  the Extended  Group  increased  it by £27 (3%).  In other  words  the 
Conventional  Group  depended  on a milk price rise (7p per gallon)  to increase  
the Margin  from their quota  but put no improved  management  efficiencies  into 
operation.  This has to be worrying  if it is widespread.  However,  the Extended  
Group,  who adopted  new grassland  management  techniques  reaped  financial  
gain from  those  practices  - an extra  £ 1350  from a 50,000  quota,  because  of lower  
meal and fertiliser  inputs  plus increased  price  for milk because  of higher  protein  
levels.
Where  extra quota is not available  or where a farmer  has leased a high 
proportion  of his milk, MOFF  per 1000 gallons  (or gallon)  is very important.
Changes  in Milk Yield
Table 2
Changes  in milk yield per cow (gallons)  by Conventional  and Extended  Groups
from 1992 to 1993
Conventional Extended
January-March -20 -36
April-September -18 -29
October-November + 13 -12
Total Change -25 -53
37
It was a difficult  year (1993)  to manage  grass and this was reflected  in a 
drop in milk yield per cow by both groups  of farmers,  25 and 53 gallons  per 
cow by Conventional  and Extended  Groups  respectively.  Was it an over-reliance  
on the quality  and quantity  of grass  early in the year by the Extended  Grazing  
Group  that caused  28 gallons  extra to be lost? Or was it due to the fact that 
cows had a lower  body score  at calving  resulting  in a greater  decrease  in peak 
milk  yield?  Milk  yield  divided  by peak milk  yield per day (April  in both groups)  
gave 256 and it indicates  excellent  management.  The peak milk yield drop of 
0.08 and 0.14 gallons  would  account  for 20 and 30 gallons  decrease  per cow 
per year for the Conventional  and Extended  group  respectively.  Appendix  1 
gives the changes  in daily milk yield by month  from 1992 to 1993.
Changes  in milk quality
Butterfat  levels  did not change  for either  group  while  protein  % increased  
by 0.03%  and 0.06%  for the Conventional  and Extended  groups  respectively  
(Appendix  2).
Input  costs
Table 3
Comparing  meal and fertiliser  cost per cow for two groups  of farmers
Costs/Cow Conventional
1992 1993 Change 1992Extended
1993 Change
Meal £95 £104 +£9 £70 £63 -£7
Fertiliser £67 £55 -£12 £72 £63 -£9
Meal + Fertiliser £162 £159 -£3 £142 £126 -£16
“The  higher  the milk price,  the more  is spent  on inputs to produce  that milk, 
whether  such inputs  are necessary  or not”. So said Dr. Terry Hughes,  Lincoln  
University,  New Zealand  when putting  some rationale  to his suggestion  that 
he hoped  milk price would  not increase  beyond  55 pence  per New Zealand  
gallon  of milk.  He said the higher  their  milk  price  the more  uncompetitive  would 
be their dairy produce  for export.  As long as our milk price  remains  high and 
the lower we keep our costs of production  the higher  will our profits  be.
The Conventional  Group  achieved  a 7% increase  in milk price in 1993 but 
instead  of holding  on to it they spent  £9 more  (or 9.5%)  on meal costs per cow 
- doing  exactly  what  Terry Hughes  said would  happen.  The recommended  level 
of meal feeding  is 0.7 to 0.8 lbs per gallon  and these farmers  are feeding  in 
1.23 lbs per gallon,  nearly  50% above  recommended  levels.  Even though,  the 
Extended  group  were on low meals  (now 0.88 Ibs/gallon)  they reduced  them 
further  by £7 per cow, maintaining  meal costs of 6 pence  per gallon.  These  
farmers  meal costs ranged  from 2 pence per gallon  to 9 pence per gallon,  
indicating  the scope  for cost savings  even within  this group.  The Conventional  
Group ’s meal costs ranged  from 6 pence  per gallon  to 12 pence  per gallon.
38
Return  on money  invested
What is the return by the cow on each £1 spent on meals and fertiliser?  
Table  4 gives  the return (MOFF  per cow)  for every  £1 spent  on meal and fertiliser. 
It is calculated  by dividing  the total meal and fertiliser  costs per cow into the 
MOFF  per cow. For example,  the meal and fertiliser  costs for the Extended  
Group  in 1993 was £126 per cow and each of their cows gave a total MOFF  
of £1,006  for those inputs.
Table 4
Return  (MOFF/cow)  for every £1 spent on meal and fertiliser
1992 1993 % Increase
Extended  Grazing  Group £6.63 £8.00 20.7%
Conventional  Grazing  Group £6.06 £6,55 8%
The Extended  Group  is getting  a return  of £7.98  MOFF  per cow compared  
to £6.55 for the Conventional  Group  for each £1 spent on meal and fertiliser  
- a 22% difference.  The difference  was only 9% in 1992. Meal and fertiliser  
represent  80% (approx)  of all variable  costs associated  with milk production.
Total cost savings
Some  of the Extended  Group  have reduced  total costs from 45 pence  to 35 
pence  per gallon  over the last 2 years.  Because  meal and fertiliser  accounts  for 
only 1.6 pence  out of the 10 pence,  this further  confirms  that Extended  Grazing  
is more than just about grazing  - it is an attitude.
With a yield of 1070 gallons  per cow the savings  in total costs would  be 
£107 per cow but 28 gallons  per cow in milk was lost leaving  a net benefit  
of £79 per cow for the “hardship ” of increasing  the availability  of grass to the 
cow both in the autumn  and in the spring.  The 28 gallons  is the difference  
between  what the Extended  Group  lost, 53 gallons,  and that which the 
Conventional  Group  lost - 25 gallons  per cow. I have no doubt that this 28 
gallon  decrease  will not occur  again because  of the experience  gained.  In fact 
30% of this group  increased  milk yield.
Of course  these levels  of efficiencies  are now required  by expanding  dairy  
farmers.  For instance,  a farmer  who has 60% of his milk leased  at 25 pence  
per gallon  (too much)  ends up with a net price  for all his milk of 85 pence  per 
gallon when the creamery  price is £1 per gallon.  Are there many farmers  in 
this position?  Will there  be many  farmers  in this position  in 5 years  time?  How 
long can they survive?  How long will they tolerate  it?
Health  / Fertility
Animal  health,  mastitis,  lameness  etc., appear  to be good  on farms  practising  
extended grazing.  Cow fertility  improved  greatly  on those  farms.  See Appendix  
4 where  all fertility  parameters  for 1992 are compared  with 1993. Apart  from
39
a concerted  effort  to improve  fertility  on these  farms,  had the fact that the cows  
were out to grass early and well climatised  have any influence?
Questions
* How do we limit poaching  damage?
* How soon will reseeding  have to be done?
* Will subsoiling  be necessary?
* Will animal  type/size  change?
* If winter  is only 2-3 months  long what  type of housing  or wintering  facilities
will become  necessary?
* How much grass must the cow be fed and what quantity  of meal does it 
replace?
* Can nitrogen  be applied  later  and earlier  in the year  and what  is the response?
* Is the grass growth  curve different  for extended  grazing?
* Can the benefits  accruing  be achieved  without  a decrease  in annual  milk 
yield per cow?
Summary
I am convinced  that the extended  grazing  concept  and utilisation  techniques  
can be recommended  to each farmer  no matter  where  he is on the management  
scale. The only proviso  is his commitment  to learn and apply the principles  
to his own  individual  situation.  Of course,  that goes for every  new management  
concept  that arises in farming.
Over  the last 2-3 years  this extended  grazing  concept  has gone  through  much 
refinement  and it, no doubt,  will still need to be refined  further.  The promotion  
of Ireland ’s most valuable  resource,  grass, to produce  better  quality  beef and 
milk (higher  protein)  must be the target  of farmers  and agricultural  scientists.
Appendix  1
Changes  in daily milk yield (gallons)  from 1992 to 1993 by month  for 
Conventional  and Extended  Groups
Conventional Extended
January -0.24 -0.39
February -0.38 -0.69
March -0.05 -0.14
April -0.08 -0.14
May -0.18 +0.10
June -0.27 -0.18
July -0.08 -
August +0.01 -0.10
September +0.11 +0.01
October +0.10 -0.03
November +0.14 +0.23
December +0.17 +0.19
40
Appendix  2
Changes  in fat and protein  percentages  by month  from 1992 to 1993
Conventional Extended
Fat Protein Fat Protein
January +0.03 +0.01 +0.07 +014
February -0.01 -0.02 -0.07 +0.06
March +0.02 +0.04 -0.03 +0.13
April -0.01 - -0.11 -0.01
May -0.01 +0.06 -0.03 -0.02
June +0.02 +0.02 +0.04 +0.05
July -0.02 +0.02 -0.10 +0.06
August -0.08 -0.01 -0.02 +0.01
September -0.03 -0.04 -0.04 +0.01
October -0.01 +0.03 +0.09 +0.08
November -0.09 +0.02 +0.02 +0.11
December -0.01 -0.01 +0.18 +0.18
Year Zero +0.03 Zero +0.06
Appendix  3
Various  efficiency  factors  (1993)  for two groups  of farmers  and in brackets
change  from 1992
Conventional
1993Extended
1993
MiDcYield  per cow 1155 (-2.1%) 1070 (-4.7%)
% Fat 3.61 (N.C.)* 3.72 (N.C.)
% Protein 3.23 (+0.03) 3.30 (+0.06)
Average  Calving  Date 3 Feb (+4 days) 14 Feb (+5 days)
Meals per gallon 1.231b  (+20%) 0.881b  (-14%)
Meal Costs per gallon 9 pence (+lp) 6p (no change)
Meals  per cow (bags) 12.9 (+1 bag) 8.6 (-1.6 bags)
Stocking  Rate (LU/ac) 1.13 (+0.05) 1.15 (-0.03)
% 1st Cut 47.8%  (-3.9) 46.6%  (-6.3)
% 2nd Cut 22.8%  (-9.8) 29.3%  (-7.0)
Units N 197 (+8) 275 (-9)
per P 15 (-2) 21 (+2)
acre K 49 (-5) 61 (+2)
MOFF  per cow £1041 (+£59) £1006  (+£62)
MOFF  per acre £1181 (+£122) £1164  (+£53)
MOFF  per 1000 gallons £903 (+£71) £940 (+£108)
*N.C. = No Change
41
Appendix  4
Comparing  1992 and 1993 fertility  data for the Extended  Grazing  Group
1992 1993
Fertility  Index 50 61 Improvement
Pregnancy  Rate to 1st service  (%) 62 58 Disimprovement
Service  per Conception 1.67 1.67 —
Calving  to Service  (days) 73 71 Improvement
Calving  to Conception  (days) 88 83 Improvement
Submision  Rate (%) 41 55 Improvement
Non Detected  Oestrous  (%) 47 34 Improvement
18-24 Day Returns  (%) 48 60 Improvement
Infertility  Rate (%) 8 8 —
Heat Detection  Rate (%) 77 83 Improvement
42
Profitable  Milk Production  from Grass
P. WALSHE
Bishopwood,  Durrow,  Co. Laois.
I started  farming  in 1983 when  my father  transferred  the 75 acre family  farm  
to my wife Ella and myself.  We set about  running  this as our sole means  of 
livelihood.  We had 50 cows  plus 30 followers  and 8 acres  of barley  were  grown  
each year for feeding.  We found our involvement  in Macra  very beneficial  
because  it kept us in touch with the outside  world  and also kept us in touch  
with what was happening  politically.  My wife and I set ourselves  objectives  
and decided  that in order to achieve  them that we had to expand.
We kept extra stock  and increased  nitrogen  level to cater  for them.  We also 
rented  conacre.  The following  year a neighbour  outbid  us on the conacre  and 
I vowed  never again  to get involved  in the 11 month  system  as you cannot  plan  
or farm properly  on that. This forced  me to look for a long term lease and I 
got one with a substantial  quota  attached.
When  I finished  my term as Macra  President  in 1989 a few friends  in Macra  
and I decided  to form a discussion  group.  This group  has met about once a 
month  since 1989 and it has been a terrific  motivator  for us ever since. We 
criticise  one another  constructively  and we also have a forum  to thrash  out 
problems  as they arise.
We are now farming  120 acres carrying  190 L.U.s at present  and I expect  
average  stocking  rate to be less than 0.7 acre per L.U in the future.  It was 0.75 
L.U. in 1993.
We have increased  our net worth  by an average  of over 10% per year since  
1993 (valuing  land and quota  at £3,000  per acre) and in the 3 years  up to April  
1993 we have  reduced  overall  farm  costs  by 7% while  at the same  time  increasing  
our output  by 25%.  I never  miss  an opportunity  to visit another  farm as I believe  
that is how I learn most.  Likewise  I never  refuse  other  farmers  access  to mine.
In order to achieve  the goals that we have set for ourselves  we need to 
maximise  profitability  on the farm and we believe  the best way to do this is 
to concentrate  on grass based production.
At the outset  I would  like to clarify  that I do not believe  that grass based  
production  is the only way to dairy  farm  profitability  - far from  it, but nevertheless  
it is the most  profitable  way to produce  milk  in this country. Continuing  research  
has shown  this. Neither  am I disappointed  that milk prices  are not lower,  as 
has been  said,  but I do believe that organisations  like the Grassland  Association  
and others  should  show all farmers  how to maximise  their incomes.
To prove  the point that grass is the most profitable  way to produce  milk I 
quote  from recent  Farmers ’ Journal  and Teagasc surveys  on costs  of production.
The accepted  Irish average  cost is around 58p  at the moment  and if we match 
the costs of production  graph  to the percentage  grazed  grass as done by Con 
Hurley,  we see that these farms  have roughly  50% grazed  grass in the diet of 
the cow (See Figure  1). The typical  Moorepark  recommended  system  of the
43
USADEN.
Fig. 1 - Impact  of grazed  grass on total production  costs
past comes  out at overall  costs  of 40p and 60% grass  in the diet. The one point  
which  the graph  emphasises  is that the more  silage  and concentrates  and other  
feeds used the more the costs tend to rise.
I have calculated  that over the last three years  on my farm I have increased  
the percentage  of grazed  grass  in the diet of the cow from  60% in 1991 to 77% 
in 1993 and that is in a winter  milk situation.  I have not reduced  stocking  rate 
to achieve  this - in fact stocking  rate has increased.  I believe  it is possible  in 
a spring  calving  herd to increase  this percentage  to over  80%.  In fact it is already 
being done in this country.
On wet farms  there is less than 40% grazed  grass in the total diet. These  
farmers  can never hope to achieve  what I am achieving  on a dry farm but 
nevertheless  they should  be aiming  for 60%. These  figures  are based  on Table 
1 which is derived  from work conducted  in Langhill  in Scotland.
So, what are the factors  that influence  the percentage  of grass in the diet 
of the dairy cow? In my opinion  there are two major  factors:
1. Calving  date and pattern
2. Grazing  management
Feed Demand  - Feed Supply  Patterns  are shown  in Figure  2.
If we look at feed supply  versus feed  demand  patterns  taken  from  work done  
at Moorepark,  we see how calving  date regulates  demand.  If we switch  calving
44
Table 1
Typical  cow Feed Intake  
Tonnes  DM
Milking  300 days @ 15 Kgs DM/day  
Dry 65 days @ 8 Kgs DM/day  
Total
Costs are based on: Grass
Silage  (2 cuts)  
Concentrates4.5
0.52
5.02
£25/tonne  DM 
£70/ ”
£170/ ”
date we can manipulate  the cows  peak  demand  for feed  to match  the peak  growing  
season.  It is seen from the graph  that the late spring  calving  herd matches  the 
supply  pattern  best of all.
The January  calving  herd  has a large  demand  for feed before  grass  is available  
while  the 50% autumn  50% spring  calving  herd has a large demand  for feed 
all winter  which  leads to expensive  milk production.  This herd also has a low 
demand  for feed in the August/September  period  which  has resulted  in third  
cut silage  on a lot of farms including  mine in the past.
I can meet my winter  milk requirement  with 30% of the herd calving  in 
October/November  and the rest calve  now in February,  March  and early  April.  
I have eliminated  December  and January  calving  from my herd and we finish  
calving  by April 10 at the latest. I believe  calving  date to be the single  most  
important  decision  a farmer  can make  to increase  grass in the diet of the cow 
and therefore  profitability.
FEED DEMAND  FEED SUPPY  PATTERNS
Fig. 2
45■A * “I*
Analysis  of my own milk price  on cows  calving  in different  months  in 1992  
has shown  the following:
Average  milk price for year (p)
93.4
93.5
90.1
91.1
92.5 
98.9Date cow calved  
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
This price does not take account  of winter  milk bonuses.  If bonuses  were 
included  the difference  would  be greater  as December  or January  calvers  
contribute  very little to winter  milk at either  end of lactation.
Grassland  management
In increasing  the percentage  of grass in the cows ’ diet through  better  grassland 
management,  there are two main components:
1. Grass supply
2. Utilisation
1. Grass Supp ly:
Grass supply  is affected  by
a. Soil fertility:  It is essential  that P & K and lime levels  are correct
b. Nitrogen:  The level of N is totally  dependent  on stocking  rate but I believe  
more  strategic  use of N - particularly  early N  - could  improve  grass  supply 
dramatically.
c. Drainage:  Research  has shown  that proper  drainage  is desirable and it can 
be maintained  under  good management.
d. Pasture  quality:  A high percentage  of ryegrass  is desirable  and it can be 
maintained  under good management.
e. Long rotation  when grass is in its vegetative  stage: Work done by E. 
O’Riordan  at Grange  over the last two autumns  has shown  an increase  
in DM available  from a long rotation  in autumn.
f. Protect  regrowth:  I and many  other  farmers  are finding  that when  regrowth  
is protected,  grass  supply  is improved.  Research  in New  Zealand  has shown 
a 30% difference  measured  after  40 days  in a paddock grazed  for one day 
and one grazed  continuously  for 5 days.
2. Utilisation
a. Stocking  rate: Some  poorly  stocked  farms use too much N for the level  
of stock carried  and therefore  there is grass wastage  leading  to poor  
utilisation.
b. Drainage:  Again,  proper  draining  will improve  utilisation  in poor  
conditions.
c. Farm structure:  The investment  in roadways  and fencing  is small  
compared  to buildings  and machinery  and will give a much  better  return.
46
I AON I IdasLV
e sidi
I. 9unr I. Jdv V “Br
:s:5>d SS31 ■£ 
Xjjn|s ssaq 'z 
snjd smuoui  z - pouad  joopui  jayoqs I
snoiaiunu  ajB
pjai) /(ui JO jaip aip ui s s b j3 j o aSBjuaojad  aip Su i s e s j o u i  u i o j j sjijauaq  aqx
suiJBj Xjicp uo uBqj Suissajd  
3JOIU SI paau aqj ajaijM suijbj >jDojs/(jp  uo XiJBinoijJBd  ‘snouijoua  si uosuas  
3ui2bjS aqj Suipuajxa  joj [Bijuajod  aqj auiui uBip sajBJ Suijjoojs  j3mo[ jy
■{p sjngy)  e66l “! n i/sa-ioB  gi Q oj i66l ui n'T/saJOB  £8 0
UIOJJ ajBJ gui>(DOJS  8uISB3J3UI auilj 3UJBS  aip JB apilM  UIJBJ y(ui uo ?(30JS 3qj 1|B 
JOJ qonuj siqj Xq j3juim aqj pauajjoqs  3ABq j jojuim  aqj jo pu3 qoBO jb 3uo - 
sqjuoui  z OJ dn /(q uosb 3S Suizbj S jno puajxa  puB sqjuoui  j3JU1 m aqj jnoqSnojqj  
/([ddns  3SB3J3UI  UB3 3M ‘sjB3/( JU333J  UI ujjou 3qj U33q SBq UBqj J3jB| punojS  
3gB[is  asop  puB guuds  aqj puB uujnjuB  aqj ui uoijbjoj  aqj uaqjgua]  3m ji ‘mg
(g 3jngig)  [udy jsj oj jaquiaAOjj  js[ jo
J3JUIA\  3gBJ3AB  UB pBq 3A\ ‘JSBd 3qi UI qjA\Ojg  UO p3JBJ)U33U03  3A\ 3SnBD3g
■JlJOjd  3SB3J3UI  UIBgB 1[IA\ 3M qOJBUJ  OJ
puBuiap  ajBindiuBui  oj Xjj puB X[ddns  ssBjg  ajBindiUBui  3m ji ‘jng MOjg  ji sb ji 
guisqijn  puB qjAvojg  ssBjg  uo pajBJjuaouoD  3ABq 3a\ jSBd aqj uj jaip ^SA\oa  aqj 
UJ ssBjg  JO agBjuaojad  aqj asBajaui  Xubdijbuiojub  iiia\ aq jqgij uiaqj guijjag  uo 
guijBjjuaauoa  Xg jauiJBj  aqj jo jojjuoa  aqj japun  3jb sjuiod  aAoqB  aqj jo gy 
■pajinbaj  uaqM >(dojs Xjjbo oj 3[qB jajjaq qanuj punojg  
aqj s3ab3| uoijbjoj  guo[ b jBqj guipuij  3jb sjoujjbj  Xubjaj iuoijbjoj  guoq a
jaAai UIJBJ JB ii3a\ gui>(jOA\  ajB
suoijipuoa  jood ui spouad  yoqs  puB auiij  b jb guizBjg  auo joj s>iDO[q  [[buis 
puB guiouaj^ioBq  3>(ii puBjBaz  Majq ui padojaAap  sanbiuqaax  ;s3nbiuqaax  p
5. Less reseeding  - better  pastures
6. Less machinery  and building  maintenance
7. Milk Protein  + 0.2%
8. Better  herd health
9. Better  lifestyle  - less labour.
Profit: + £100 per cow.
We can all increase  the percentage  of grass in the diet of our animals  - whether  
it be from  40% to 60% on wet land  or 60% to 80% on dry land, or even higher  
at low stocking  rates. It is all within  the control  of the farmer  but he/she  needs  
to know how  to manage  the factors  I have mentioned.  The time spent  educating  
yourself  will give a good return.
In the ongoing  debate  on what I and other  farmers  are achieving  - much  is 
spoken  in contradiction  about  the needs  of the animals  and how to achieve  the 
maximum  amount  of early  grass  in spring,  but both tend  to be spoken  by different  
commentators  in isolation.  What we are doing may be sacrificing  a little bit 
in one area in order to maximise  the gain in another  - and increase  overall 
profit.
P. Dillon ’s work in Moorepark  has shown  that it is desirable  to have more  
grass in the diet of the cow. Farmers  have felt for years now that grass silage  
is not a good enough  supplement  for the high yielding  cow; hence  the search  
for a substitute  in maize,  fodder  beet etc. But unfortunately  these alternatives,  
while  good,  tend to introduce  other  indirect  costs.  I believe  that we should  exploit 
grass to its full as a cheaper  option.
Research  has shown clearly  over  the years  how to achieve  early  spring  grass 
and I know that if I were to strip all my farm of stock in early November  I
48
would  have plenty  of early  grass.  But, if I strip the farm in November,  I would  
need  a lot of silage  to do so. Therefore,  I would  need to conserve  large  amounts  
of silage.  For years farmers  and scientists  have striven  to increase  the quality  
of silage  and also to increase  the bulk of first cut silage  to reduce  costs,  so they 
closed  silage ground  earlier  and earlier,  thus reducing  the amount  of grass  
available  for early grazing.
Because  there was less ground  available  for early grass,  stock  were let out 
later, so more  silage  was needed  - the vicious  circle! We don’t need early  grass  
on all the farms  - especially  if we do not use it. The reason  we have grass in 
the first place  is to feed animals.  The research  on grass  has been excellent,  but 
unfortunately  the needs of the animal  have not been sufficiently  matched  to 
this research.  The animal  scientists  and botanists  must marry  the two. If we 
sacrifice  early grass on part of the farm we can feed the animals  later in the 
autumn/winter  thus reducing  the need  for supplements. If we close  silage  ground  
later we increase  the supply  of early grass.  To do this a better  system  of on- 
farm measurement  is needed  to help the farmer  make  decisions  and respond  
to situations  as they happen.  We now have a young,  well educated,  agricultural  
community,  thanks  to Teagasc.
Let us give the technology  to farmers  so that they can make their own 
decisions.  The old blueprints  were suitable  for the 60’s and 70’s but not the 
90’s.
In summary  I believe  it is important  for farmers  to set their objectives  and 
then set about  achieving  them. Every  investment  should  be questioned  in the 
context  of achieving  these goals.
In our case  I believe  that the farm  will only give  a living  to one of our children  
so it would  be foolish  to invest  everything  in the farm. We must plan now to 
invest  outside  the farm. Too many farmers  expect  the next generation  to do 
what they were never about  to do themselves.
I believe  the exploitation  of grass  based  production is the key to Irish livestock  
farmers  achieving  their  goals.  In the past too much as been  invested  in expensive  
systems  to cater  for the least productive  time of the year. This re-focusing  on 
grass can only be good for Irish livestock  producers.  The investments  which  
have given me the best return have been roadways  and fencing.
49
The Impact  of CAP Reform  and GATT  
on Danish  Milk Price
FINN  A. CHRISTIANSEN  
Executive  Director,  MD Foods, Denmark.
Introduction
The Danish  dairy  industry  hails the conclusion  of the seven  year long GATT 
negotiations  as an important  break-through  that may give the stimulus  to the 
world economy  that is so badly needed  at the present  moment.
In the dairy  industry, few  would  benefit  more  from  a world without  subsidies  
and without  trade  barriers  than the Danes.  We are a country  that produces  three  
times  as much  milk as we can  consume  ourselves,  and the two remaining  parts 
are being  exported,  one part to the EU  and one part  to the third  country  markets.
We feel that it was a mistake  to reform  the CAP before  the result  of the 
GATT  negotiations  was known.  Inevitably,  adjustments  must now be made, 
and more uncertainty  will be created,  which  will affect  both farmers  and the 
industry.
The present  paper  consists  of three  parts,  where  the first part deals  with the 
CAP  reform,  the second  part deals  with the effect  of the GATT agreement,  and 
the final  part proposes  ways  to implement  the GATT  agreement  with minimum  
damage.
The Common  Agricultural  Policy
The reform  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy  introduced  by Mr. MacSharry  
was kind to the milk sector,  which  of course  should  have made  us suspicious!
Furthermore,  Mr.MacSharry  insisted  that the CAP  was compatible  with the 
expected  result  of the GATT  negotiations.  Having  seen what came out of the 
Blair House  negotiations,  we still believe  that the CAP reform  should  have  
awaited  the GATT  result. Instead  we are putting  the cart before  the horse.
We estimate  that the reduction  of milk quotas  needs  to be 4-5% instead  of 
the 2% stipulated  in the CAP reform.  On top of that, milk prices  within  the 
Community  must be cut by 8-10%. If not, the imbalance  of the milk market  
will become  dramatic  and we may see a renationalisation  of the farm subsidies.  
This will hit Danish  farmers  particularly  hard, as we do not have any great  
tradition  for farm subsidies  in Denmark.
Ever  since  World  War  II, Denmark has invested  in the development  of markets  
for dairy  products  in North  America,  in the middle  East, in Japan  and, of course,  
also in Europe.  Millions  and millions  of ECU  have  been shaved off the farmer ’s 
milk price  to secure  our strong  position  in those  markets.  The fact that we did 
not get into the EC when  we first applied  in 1963 made  it even  more  necessary  
to intensify  our efforts  in those areas.
50
Since  our entry  into the EC in 1973,  we have been subject  to the EC export  
policy  and have generally  found  it coherent.  Not that we have always  agreed,  
and not that we have not complained  now and again,  but not dramatically.
That picture  has now changed  completely.  The budget  for 1994 indicates  
a change  of policy  away  from  market  orientation  that will have  dire  consequences  
especially  for our cheese  exports.
Other  measures  introduced  by the European  Commission,  notably  the working  
group  discussing  nomenclature  and protein  standardisation,  make  us fear that 
the Commission  is moving  more  and more  away  from  reality  and into a dream  
world  where  a computer  can replace  the Management  Committee ’s discussions  
on market  trends.
We fail to understand  why the Community  will voluntarily  give up its share  
of the world market  at a time when  unemployment  is running  at an unacceptably  
high level. The EU faces hard competition  from Japan and from the United  
States in many other fields,  why not fight for what we have?
The impact  of the GATT  Agreement  on the Danish  and 
EU dairy industry
The following  is an analysis  of the impact  of the GATT  agreement  on the 
dairy industry  in the EU and Denmark.
The main  elements  of the part of the agreement  on reduction of the agricultural  
subsidies  imply that over the period  1995-2000  the countries  are required  to 
carry out the following:
- 21 % reduction  of the subsidised  export  volume  and 36% reduction  of the 
budgetary  export  subsidies.  In both cases the reference  period  is 1986-90.
- Opening  of minimum  import  access  equal to 3% increasing  to 5% of 
consumption  in 1986-88.
- Tariffication  of the import  barriers  and an average  reduction  of 36% on the 
figures  of 1986-88.
- 20% reduction  of the internal  subsidies.  However,  premium  schemes  under  
the EU farm  reform  from 1992  and the  US deficiency  payments  are exempt.  
The reference  period  is 1986-88.
The agreement  will probably  be implemented  on 1 July 1995.
The final GATT  agreement  is thus mainly  identical  with the Blair House  
accord  of November  1992. Thus, quotas  as well as prices in the EU will be 
under strong  pressure  as a consequence  of the requirements  of the GATT  
agreement.
On the basis of an overall  estimate,  it is realistic  to expect  reductions  in 
quotas  of 4-5% and reductions  in milk prices of 8-10%  over the six-year  
implementation  period.
The quota  reduction  is the result  of the fact that in year 2000  the EU market  
will otherwise  face a surplus  of 4 billion  kg because  of the quantitative  
restrictions.
One of the consequences  of increased  access  of imported  dairy products  at
51
low tariffs  is that the EU prices  have to be reduced  to be able to compete  with 
imported  dairy products.
Moreover,  as a result  of the reduction  in the general  import  barriers  prices  
will come under  severe  pressure.
Exports
The impact  of quantitative  export  reductions  on the EU:
As described  in the introduction,  up to year 2000 subsidized  exports  are to 
be cut by 21% with 1986-90  as the reference  period.
Non-subsidized  exports  are not included  in the GATT  agreement.
In the final negotiation  round  the situation of the dairy  industry was improved 
considerably  compared  to that of the Blair  House  accord  of November  last year 
as the gradual  reduction  in subsidized  exports  has been made  more flexible.
Whereas  the Blair  House  accord  required  exports  in the first  year  to be reduced 
by 3.5% compared  with exports  of 1986-90  and in the subsequent  years be 
subject  to a linear  reduction,  the requirement  has now been eased  by changing  
the reference  period  for cheese  and “other products ” to 1991-92.
In year 1 exports  are to be reduced  by “only” 'k of the difference  between  
the 1991 /92 average  and the year  6 target  and in the balance  of the period  exports 
are to be reduced  evenly.
In the EU the original  model  for skimmed  milk powder  is maintained  being  
the most flexible.
In reality  the change  has the greatest  impact  on cheese  exports  as in 1995 
the EU will be able to export  407,000  tonnes  of cheese  with subsidies  whereas  
the Blair  House  accord  required  cheese  exports  to be reduced  to 373,000  tonnes. 
Accumulated  over  all 6 years  it means  that the EU will be able  to export  102,000  
tonnes  of cheese  more  than what  was permitted  by the Blair House accord.  For 
“other products ” the figure  is 44,000  tonnes.
Tables  1 and 2 illustrate  the consequences  of the agreement.  The figures  are 
the Commission ’s official  export  figures.  The two rightmost  columns  show  the 
percentage  reduction  in EU exports  in 1995 and 2000  compared  with the 1992  
level.
Table 1
EU permissible  subsidized  exports  to third countries  (1000 tonnes)
1986-
19901991-
1992 1992 1995 20001995/
19922000/
1992
Cheese 386 427 421 407 305 -3% -28%
Butter 463 273 236 447 366 +64% +55%
SMP 308 264 335 297 243 -11% -27%
Other 1,188 1,206 1,201 1,161 939 -3% -22%
products*
*whole  milk powder,  condensed  milk and fresh milk/cream
52
Table 2
Annual  permitted  levels of EU subsidized  exports  over 6 years (1000 tons)
1992 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
Cheese 421 407 386 366 346 325 305
SMP 335 297 286 276 265 254 243
Other  products* 1,201 1,161 1,116 1,072 1.027 983 939
* whole  milk powder,  condensed  milk and fresh miUc/cream
The impact  of the quantitative  export  reductions  on Denmark
The quantitative  export  reduction  is still distinctly  a Danish  problem.
It has not yet been decided  how the EU obligations  to reduce  exports  are 
to be administered.  Thus,  it is not possible  to estimate  how the reductions  will 
affect  the export  potential  of the Danish  dairy industry  in the years to come.
Being  the largest  cheese  exporter  in the EU and the third among  exporters  
of whole  milk  powder  to third  countries,  the Danish dairy  industry will no doubt  
face a heavy burden.
In proportion  to production  Denmark  is the largest  EU exporter  of dairy  
products  to third countries.
Moreover,  the products  affected  are growth  products  on the export  markets,  
and these very products  are the Danish  flagships.
To illustrate  the extent  of the export  reductions  Table  3 assumes  that Danish  
exports  were to be reduced  proportional  to the EU exports  in 1995 (cheese  by 
3%, other products  by 3%) and in 2000 (cheese  by 28%, other products  by 
22%). In Table 3 these figures  are compared  with exports  in 1992.
Table 3
Denmark ’s obligations  to reduce  exports  up to year 6 (1000 tonnes)
Danish Danish Reduction Danish Reduction
exports exports 1992-95 exports 1992-
1992 1995 2000 2000
Cheese 132 128 4 95 37
Other  prod. 117 113 4 91 26
Denmark ’s share of EU exports  of butter  and skim-milk  powder  to third  
countries  amounted  in 1992 to 6.0 and 1.5% respectively.
Butter  exports  are not affected  by the export  reductions  because  of a 
quantitative  decline  in exports  compared  to the base period  1986-90  whereas,  
as it appears  from the figures,  SMP plays a minor  part in the third-country  
exports  of the Danish  dairy industry.
Budgetary  reduction  in export  subsidies
Besides  the quantitative  reduction  in exports,  the requirement  of a 36% 
reduction  in budgetary  expenses  for export  subsidies  has to be taken into  account.
53
The figures  in Table 4 show  that cheese  exports  in particular  may  encounter  
difficulties.
If the requirements  of the quantitative  export  reductions  are met, the refund  
expenses  will also automatically  decline,  but far from enough.
However,  the scope  of the problem  depends  on the development  in the need 
for refunds  after  the fluctuations  in the world  market  price  and the internal  EU 
prices which  the GATT  agreement  may involve
As to the first year ’s reduction  a solution  parallel  to that of the quantitative  
reductions  has been found:  In this way export  subsidies  may also be reduced  
at a slower  pace than was originally  proposed  in the Blair House  accord.
Table 4
EU permissible  export  refunds  (million  ECU)
1986-90 1991/92 1992 1995 2000Change  
1992-  
Year 6
Total 3,142 2,151 2,056 3,032 2,011 -2%
Of this:
Cheese 439 550 568 521 281 -51%
Butter 1,325 460 308 1,279 848 +175%
SMP 370 183 241 357 237 +2%
Others 1, 008 959 940 973 645 -31%
The considerable  figure  for butter  in the reference  period  is due to the fact 
that the former  East Germany  is included.
In the commitment  lists the Commission  has tackled  the problem  of the 
unification  of the two Germanies  by including  reference  amounts  and volumes  
of the former  East  Germany  in the EU figures.  However,  it is uncertain  whether  
it has been accepted  in the agreement  with the US.
Market  access
The GATT  agreement  will mean a radical  change  in the conditions  of 
importing  dairy products  into the EU.
As to imports,  the GATT  agreement  thus includes  a quantitative  minimum  
market  access  and a requirement  of a reduction  of the general  tariff rates.
Minimum  import  access  - Impact  on the EU
As a minimum  import  quotas  shall be opened  at-“low” tariffs,  in the first 
year equal  to 3% of the average  annual  consumption  in the base period  1986-  
88. The quota is to be increased  to 5% during  the six-year  period.
According  to the EU interpretation  of the requirement,  the minimum  import  
access  quota  shall only secure  low- tariff  imports  of the difference  between  on 
one hand the 3 and 5% of the 1986-88  consumption  and on the other  hand the 
actual imports  in the base period.
54
Table 5
EU minimum  import  access  obligation
Base
consumption
1986-883% of 
base-
consumption5% of 
base
consumptionImport
1986-88Low-
quota
1995Low-
quota
2000
Cheese 4,300 129 215 111 18 104
Butter 1,800 60 90 80 0 10
SMP 1,430 43 71 2 41 69
(Exclusive  of consumption  in the former  East Germany)
In the EU a tariff  which  constitutes  32% of a calculated  average  tariff  for 
the base period  1986-88  has been imposed  on the quotas  under  the minimum  
import  access.
However,  in the final negotiations  concessions  were granted  for cheese,  i.e. 
15,000  tonnes  of cheddar  and 5,000 tonnes  of mozzarella  which could be 
imported  at particularly  low tariff  rates.
As to butter  a consequence  of the GATT  agreement  will probably  be that 
New Zealand ’s UK butter  quota  in 1995 can be brought  back to the level of 
the base  period  which was 78,000  tonnes.  New  Zealand  has proposed  a voluntary  
reduction  of this figure  against  a reduction  of the import  levy, but negotiations  
have not been concluded.
Tariffication
The second  main requirement  concerning  imports  is that all import  barriers  
in the base period  are tariffed  (converted  into tariffs)  and subsequently  reduced  
by 36% on an average  over the six-year  period.
The reduction  of this theoretically  calculated  tariff cannot  be expressed  
generally as a percentage  of the present  import  duties  as these  are fixed  according  
to the actual market  situation.
Moreover,  the impact  of the new tariff  rates cannot  be predicted  precisely  
either  as it will be decisive  how the market  prices,  which are often stated in 
USD, will develop  .
However,  the point  is that a ceiling  is now imposed  on the EU import  duties,  
which  have been variable  up till now, and that they cannot  longer  be adjusted  
freely.
The result  may be that the EU is forced  to reduce  the internal  price level 
to maintain  a prohibitive  tariff level.
At best the world  market  prices  will increase  as a consequence  of a GATT  
agreement  which will relieve  the pressure.
But a decline  in the world  market  prices  will create  a considerable  problem.  
Combined  with a low USD exchange  rate such a decline  may have serious  
consequences  for the price level in the EU.
55
Internal  Subsidies  
Product  specific  subsidies
The requirement  of a 20% reduction  in internal  subsidies  with 1986-88  as 
reference  year will hardly  be of any significance  for future subsidies  to the 
dairy industry  in the EU.
The agreement  makes  a distinction  between  product  specific and non-product  
specific  internal  subsidies.  Every  category  has a trifle limit of 5% of the 
production  value which  is not subject  to restrictions.  As regards  non-product  
specific  subsidies,  the EU is below  the trifle limit.
Thus, the  reduction  has to be made  only  as far as the product  specific  subsidies 
are concerned  in terms of AMS (Aggregate  Measurement  of Support).
AMS  is calculated  as the difference  between  the internal administrative  price  
(the intervention  price in the case of EU) and an external  reference  price (EU 
has used IDA ’s minimum  prices)  for the base period  which  is then multiplied  
by the quantity  produced  .
To the EU this means  the following  AMS for the reference  period 1986-
88 .
Table 6
Product  specific  AMS for EU 1986-88
Interv.  price  
1986-88  
ECU/tonnesIDA price  
1986-88 
ECU/tonnesProduction  
1986-88 
1000 tonnesAMS 
1986-88 
m ECU
Butter
SMP
Total3,549.90
1,972.60943.30
684.702,220
1.8105,773.80
2,328.70
8,102.50
(EU ’s 1992 commitment  list)
Consequently,  the AMS  of 8,102.5  m ECU  is to be reduced  by 20% to 6,482  
m ECU.
The development  from the base period 1986-88  to 1992 shows,  however, 
that the EU is even now significantly  below  this requirement.  The reason  is 
that the production  of both butter  and skimmed  milk powder  has decreased  
strongly.
Table 7
Product  specific  AMS for EU 1992
Interv.  price  
1992
ECU/tonnesDA price  
1986-88  
ECU/tonnesProduction
1992
1000 tonnesAMS
1992  
m ECU
Butter 3,364 1,205 1,648 3,558
SMP
Total2,042 1,072 1,266 1,228
4,786
(own calculations)
56
Tables  8 and 9 are two examples  showing  the maximum  threshold  prices  
which  the EU will be able to operate  with in year 2000  given  the present  world  
market  prices  but different  USD exchange  rates. In table  6 the USD rate is the 
present  (0.89 ECU) and in table 7 the USD rate is lower 10.72 ECU).
Table 8
Threshold  prices  in year 2000 after tariffication  in case of unchanged  USD 
rate (all values  stated  in common  ECU/ton)
Intemat.
prices
1993Threshold
price
1993Max.  
tariff  
year 2000Max.
threshold
price
year 2000Threshold
1993/2000
Butter 1,268 3,775 1,896 3,164 119%
SMP 1,068 2,294 1,188 2,256 102%
WMP 1,157 2,891 1,304 2,461 117%
Cheddar 1,691 3,719 1,671 3,362 111%
USD/  Ecu = 0.89 (December  1993).
Table 9
Threshold  prices  in year 2000 after tariffication  in case of a decline  in the 
USD rate of approx.  20% (all values  stated  in common  ECU/ton)
Intemat.
prices
1993Threshold
price
1993Max. 
tariff  
year 2000Max.
threshold
price
year 2000Threshold
1993/2000
Butter 1,026 3,775 1,896 2,922 129%
SMP 864 2,294 1,188 2,052 112%
WMP 936 2,891 1, 304 2,240 129%
Cheddar 1,368 3,719 1,671 3,039 122%
USD/ECU  = 0. 72, which  under  the present  ECU rate is equal to 1 USD = 5.48 DKK.
It appears  from the tables  that with a stable  USD/ECU  exchange  ratio the 
present  threshold  price level is up to 19% above  the maximum  permissible  
threshold  prices  in year 2000. With a lower  USD rate the gap is even larger.
In addition  the tariff  rates of butter  and SMP  in year 2000  will be 33% and 
18%, respectively,  lower  than the present  import  duties  on these products.
Safety  clauses
In case of drastic  decline  in the world  market  prices  the agreement  includes  
a possibility  of imposing  extra duties  on imports.
The mechanism  is triggered  off when the price of goods  imported  into the
57
EU decreases  by more than 10% compared  with the level of the base period  
1986-88.
It is immediately  difficult  to assess  how efficiently  this clause  works  as we 
do not know the exact contents  of it. As the import  price in this connection  
is stated  in national  currencies,  there is a sort of protection  against  drop in the 
USD rate.
As to internal subsidies in general  only subsidies  defined  as directly  distorting  
trade are subject  to the requirement  of a 20% reduction.
In reality,  this means  that unlimited  subsidies  may be granted  by way of 
direct  income  subsidies,  if only the size of the subsidies  does not depend  on 
the extent  of production  or performance  of factors  of production.  In the GATT 
jargon  these kinds of subsidies  are called  green subsidies.
Both the  EU hectare  and animal  premiums  of the common  agricultural reform 
and the US deficiency  payments  are regarded  as green subsidies  in the Blair  
House  accord.
Conclusion:  The impact  of the GATT  Agreement  on EU milk quotas  
and prices
The quantitative  restrictions  in exports  and the minimum  import  access  
requirement  mean that, everything  else being equal, the EU market  will be 
provided  with extra milk quantities  equal to approx.  4% of the present  quota.
Below,  a calculation  of milk equivalents  has been made  on the basis of the 
conversion  factors  previously  applied  by the Commission  in connection  with 
GATT  feasibility  studies;
Table 10
Milk equivalent  coefficients  (Commission)
Cheese 10.00
Butter 21.00
Skimmed  milk powder 0.15
Other  products 4.85
This  translates  into  the following increase  in milk quantities  on the EU market:
Table 11
ME Export import 1000 t
coefficients  ireduction increase ME
Cheese 10.00 166 104 2, 200
Butter 21.00 0 30 630
SMP 0.15 0 62 9
Others 4.85 262 0 1271
Total 4,110
58
As indicated, the  GATT  agreement  means  that considerable  quantities  of dairy  
products will be given  access  to the EU market  at tariff  rates  that are significantly  
lower than the present.  Partly as a result of the minimum  import  access  
requirement  and partly because  of the generally  lower  tariff rates.
Thus, prices of products  manufactured  in the EU will undoubtedly  be 
squeezed,  especially  the price  of cheese  and butter  as EU imports  of these  products 
may increase  by 80% and 50% respectively  as compared  with the 1991 level. 
At the same  time,  the price  gap between  the EU and the world  market  is largest  
in relation  to these products.
As mentioned,  the future  import  protection  with fixed tariff rates depends  
to a high degree  on the development  in world  market  prices  and especially  on 
the USD rate.
However,  on the basis of an overall  estimate,  a reduction  of the milk price  
in the EU of 8-10%  over the six-year  implementation  period  is to be expected.
Implementation  of the GATT-Agreement
The present  position  of EU dairy products  on third country  markets  is the 
result of many years of hard labour,  sizeable  investments  in technology,  
manufacturing  and marketing  expenditure,  several  acquisitions  of distribution  
facilities  and the accumulation  of a wealth of know-how  and market  intelligence  
by EU dairy companies  and exporters.
Whilst  the GATT-agreement will have very little effect  on commodities  like 
skim  milk  powder  and butter  and whilst  it will not endanger  the exports  of butter  
in retail packs,  the negative  consequences  for the group  “other products ”, but 
especially  for cheese, will be completely unsustainable, unless  orderly marketing  
can be maintained.
The purpose  of this part of the report  is to discuss  ways and means  that can 
safeguard  the equity  of the EU dairy industry  under a GATT  regime,  where  
export  quantities  for cheese  have to be cut by 40% and subsidies  by 50% from 
the 1993 levels.  For the group  “other  products”  the reductions  will be 20% and 
30% respectively,  based  on the totals, but aggregation  within  this group  may 
alleviate  the problems  somewhat.
Today  the EU dairy industry  is a world  player,  and its future,  also after the 
turn of the century,  must  be planned  now. For Denmark ’s cheese  industry  planning  
is absolutely  vital, as Denmark  is the largest  supplier  to the world market.
The basis of orderly  marketing
Anyone  dealing  in perishable  goods will recognise  the importance  of 
production  planning,  proper  stock rotation,  continuation  of supply,  seasonal  
variations  in turnover  as the basis for orderly  marketing.  A future  EU system  
for allocation  of export  subsidies  must necessarily  make allowance  for these  
requirements.  Any system  that prevents  the EU dairy industry  from using its 
normal  regular  service  as a parameter  must be rejected.
Production  planning
The basis for the continued  development  of the EU dairy industry  must be 
a sound planning  background.  Long term planning  of capacity  is a condition
59
for the utilisation  and profitable  running  of plants.  An EU export  system  must  
make  allowance  for this, or the EU dairy industry  will be unable  to compete  
on the world  markets.
Securing  the income  of the dairy  farmer
The EU dairy farmers  depend  upon their industry,  be they privately  owned 
or cooperatives,  to convert  their  milk  into saleable  products  and to find markets  
for them. The GATT-agreement  prevents  the maintenance  of the export  markets  
under  present  conditions,  and unless suitable systems  are found,  the excess  milk 
will find its way into the EU markets  and depress  the internal  prices  to the 
detriment  of the dairy  farmers.  Whilst  this in the short  term might  be appreciated  
by the consumers,  they will in the long term as taxpayers  have to foot the bill 
for the costs of intervention  and the ultimate  disposal  of stockpiles  of dairy  
products,  as we have seen it at the end of the seventies  and at the beginning  
of the eighties.
The former  commissioner  for agriculture,  Mr. MacSharry,  maintained  that 
the result  of the GATT-agreement  could  be contained  within  the reform  of the 
CAP  and that no further  cuts than the 2% milk quota  cut already  agreed  would  
be necessary.
The previous  calculations  made  by the Danish  Dairy Board  in association  
with the advisory  services  of the Danish  farmers ’ organisation  show that the 
reductions  of the export  quantities  and subsidies  will necessitate  a quota  cut 
of 4-5% and a price cut of 8-10%.  This calculation  was based  on an organic  
growth  of the cheese  market  within  the EU of 2% p.a. Recent  forecasts  indicate  
that the annual  growth  rate has dropped  to 1% only.  Therefore  milk quotas  will 
need to be cut by more than the 4-5% to maintain  an equilibrium.
Just as much as the industry  needs economies  of scale to compete  
internationally,  so does the dairy farmer.  A quota cut must therefore  be 
accompanied  by a comprehensive  cessation  scheme  that will help rationalise  
the primary  production,  possibly  combined  with a pension  scheme  for older  
farmers  and with other social measures.
Changes  of the quota  system
In order  to secure  the dynamism  of the industry,  changes  must be made in 
the quota  system  to allow  the EU to capture  new markets  and obtain  their  share  
of the growth  of the emerging  markets,  especially  in Asia. Whilst  these  markets  
are characterised  by rapidly  growing  economies,  it is unrealistic  to expect  them  
to cover  their demands  for dairy products  from the EU when alternatives  are 
available  much  more  cheaply  from  Oceania. South  America  likewise  is a growing 
market.
World  market  prices  for dairy products  are expected  to rise as a result of 
the GATT-agreement,  but only slowly and  probably  not until 1998 at the earliest.  
To enable  the EU dairy industry  to participate  in new market  access,  it will 
be necessary  to sell part of the production  at world market  prices without  
benefitting  from the EU export  aids.
The solution  to this problem  will be to introduce  two different  types  of milk 
quotas,  “A” milk and “B” milk.
60
The “A” quota  comprises  all milk consumed  on the internal  market,  aided  
or not, plus the milk equivalents  of the exports  permitted  under  the GATT-  
agreement.
The “B” quota  is agreed  between  the milk farmer  and his milk buyer  as a 
quantity  produced  at marginal  costs  and being  paid at marginal  prices  to enable  
the processor  to compete  on the world markets  without  subsidies.
A system  must  be set up to regulate  the amount  of milk  that can be produced  
under  this scheme  to secure  that “B” milk  is not being  used to squeeze  the price  
for “A” milk. The Farm Council  will fix the annual  ceilings.
A scheme  of the above  nature  will secure  the livelihood  of the remaining  
dairy  farmers  and will enable  the EU dairy industry  not only to maintain  their  
present  world  market  positions,  but also to participate  in the market  access  that 
has been one of the positive  results  of the GATT-agreement.  But these  
opportunities  do not come  automatically,  they must  be planned  for and fought  
for.
In connection  with the introduction  of “B” milk, it should  be examined  
whether  certain  countries  with a high price level and a correspondingly  high 
import  protection  would  be prepared  to enter  into bilateral  agreements  with the 
EU. The purpose  would  be to eliminate  export  subsidies  and import  levies,  but 
it would  have to be a commitment  on the EU to maintain  minimum  export  
prices  that would  not undercut  the importing  country ’s price level. The WTO  
could be used to police  such agreements.
Allocation  of export  licences
The administration  of the export  licence  system  will necessarily  have  to take  
into account  the present  market  positions  of the EU dairy  industry. At the same  
time, it must  be dynamic  and make  room  for structural  changes  in the industry.
It is therefore  proposed  to allocate  the greater  part of the export  quantities  
and subsidies  to the individual  countries  on the basis  of their  actual  production  
of each of the four groups,  cheese,  SMP, WMP,  and other products,  during  
1993.  A reserve  must be kept for new-comers.  The individual  countries  must  
then allocate  the export  rights  to the producers  also on the basis of their 1993 
third country  export  production.
This will immediately  lead to complaints  from the exporters  that they are 
the rightful  owners  of the export  quotas.  The argument,  however,  is that there  
can be no exports  if there is no production,  and since  milk quotas  are national,  
so must production  quotas  be.
Exporters,  on the other  hand, may be located  in a different  country  or may 
choose  to export  from  yet another  country.  Therefore,  the “birth  certificate ” of 
the product  must be the deciding  factor.  We must make  sure that trade will be 
in products,  not in licences.
Furthermore,  it is the producers  who will carry  the burden  of capacity  costs  
and securing  the farmers  an outlet  for their milk production.
A producer  who does not possess  his own sales force or who cannot  sell 
his entire production  relies on an exporter,  and the exporters  in turn rely as 
much on the producers.  This will be just as true in the future  as it has been
61
in the past, so there can be no grounds  for complaints,  apart from exporters  
who have been used to shop around  for their supplies.
An annual  review  must take place to reflect  changes  in the structure,  both 
on a national  level and among  the EU countries.  Likewise,  a country  may 
surrender  its export  quota  for the last quarter  of a GATT-year  for reallocation  
among  other countries  without  losing  it, whereas  unused  quotas  would be 
forfeited.  The system  must be so flexible  that no opportunities  are lost.
Naturally,  the Commission  must  be prepared  to spend  the money  on export  
subsidies  that are allowed  under  the GATT-agreement  and which  is necessary  
to fulfil the target  quantities  and not just use the agreement  as an excuse  for 
budget  cuts.
Conclusion
It is by no means  an easy task to introduce  measures  that will, on the one 
hand, safeguard  that the international  commitments  are being respected,  and 
on the other  hand,  secure  the dynamic  development  of a competitive  EU dairy  
industry.
That means  that neither  the European  Commission  nor the national  
governments  may be allowed  to shy away from it by introducing  “non-  
bureaucratic ” solutions  like fixing  export  subsidies  through  a tender  system  or 
similar  “easy” solutions.  This will disrupt  trade,  farm incomes  and employment  
within  the shortest  possible  time frame.
Likewise,  a system  based on a first come,  first served  basis would  make 
orderly  marketing  impossible  and make a mockery  of production  planning.
The basic principles  of the Treaty  of Rome  must still be respected  and 
defended:
- to ensure  stability  on the EU market  for dairy products
- to secure  farmers/producers  against  drastic  income  losses
- to ensure  development  in productivity  and industry  structures.
In an era of unemployment  and recession  in Europe,  the EU must fight for 
its rightful  share of the world  market  and not give up markets  that have been 
developed  through  generations.  We must remain  aggressive  and fight for our 
positions,  others  are out there to grab what we have if we are not being  bold.
62
A Stocktaking  of the Beef  Market  Policy  
and its Medium  Term Prospects
B. KEARNEY
Kearney  and Associates,  Dublin.
As a starting  point, let us recall the main features  of CAP reform  for the 
beef  regime  which  were operational  from  July 1 1993.  First,  intervention  prices  
were programmed  to be reduced  by 5% in each of the three marketing  years  
1993/94,  1994/95,  and 1995/96.  The ceiling  on intervention  intake  was to be 
reduced  from 750,000  tonnes  to 350,000  tonnes  over  the period, and the buying-  
in or safety net threshold  was also to be reduced,  to 60% of the intervention  
price.  Subsequent  to the reform,  the Commission  decided  to reduce  progressively  
the carcase  slaughter  weights  of animals  eligible  for intervention  and from last 
July that stands  at 340kg.
On the positive  side, existing  premia  were  to be progressively  increased  and 
new premia  introduced.  However  support  provided  under  the existing  premia  
was restricted  to a maximum  stocking  density  per hectare  of forage.
The maximum  densities  are:
- 1993: 3.5 LU/ha  (*) of forage  area
- 1994: 3 LU/ha  of forage  area
- 1995: 2.5 LU/ha  of forage  area
- 1996 onwards:  2 LU/ha  of forage  area
(*) LU = livestock  unit.
The maximum  stocking  density  does not apply  to small holdings  with less 
than 15 livestock  units.
Producers  can now benefit  from four different  premia:
1 The existing  Special  Beef Premium  (for not more than 90 animals  per 
holding)  was maintained  and scheduled  to rise from 60 ECU in 1993 to 
90 ECU in 1995. The premium  is payable  twice in the life of each animal  
at 10 months  and 22 months;  the premium  is not subject  to individual  limits  
but subject  to a maximum  national  limit for a given  reference  year. Ireland  
chose  1992  and returned  1,540,000  animals  for that year,  but this was reduced  
to 1,286,521  in the July 1994 price agreement.
2 In order  to deseasonalise  slaughterings  of steers,  an additional  premium  of 
60 ECU per head for animals  slaughtered  from January  1 to April 30 was 
introduced  where  the number  of animals  slaughtered  during  the period  
September  to November  exceeds  40% of annual  slaughterings.
3 Entitlement  to the Suckler  Cow Premium  is restricted  to the number  of 
premiums  paid in 1990, 1991 or 1992 and again Ireland  chose 1992. The 
premium  payments  were agreed  to rise from 60 ECU in 1993 to 120 ECU
63
in 1995.  An additional  premium  of 20 ECU,  financed  by FEOGA,  was agreed 
for certain  parts of the EU including  Ireland.
4 With  a view  to encouraging  environmentally-friendly  production,  the special 
beef and suckler  premia  were increased  by 30 ECU, where  the stocking  
density  on holdings  is less than 1.4 LU per hectare  of forage.
Finally,  Member  States  could  introduce  a processing  premium  for calves  or 
special  intervention  for lightweight  carcases.  These  options  have however  not 
been taken up by Member  States.
The present  situation
Even  though  CAP  reform  only took  place  about  18 months  ago, the situation  
to date has turned  out very differently  to what  was anticipated.  The main factor  
in the new equation  was the devaluation  of the Green  Punt in January  1993 
and the subsequent  adjustment  of July 1993.  This  boosted  farm  prices  including  
beef prices  significantly,  but the beef market  remained  stronger  also due to 
lower  than anticipated  supplies.
Table 1
Rates of premium
(1992)
1R£1995
Suckler  cow 68.54 136.70
Special  beef 35.15 87.88 (x 2)
Extensification — 29.28
Deseasonalisation — 58.58
The rates of premium  for the base  year 1992  and the final  year of the reform  
are shown  in Table 1. The increase  in the levels  of payment  for the existing  
premia  are very significant,  and especially  in the case of the Special  Beef  
Premium  when the double  payment  is taken into consideration.
Table 2
Premium  payments  1995 (’000)
Suckler  cow 920
Special  beef 1,950
Extensification
- Suckler  cow 750
- Special  beef 1,100
Deseasonalisation 220
Table 2 shows  the estimated  number  of premium  payments  in respect  of 
1995. The numbers  qualifying  for the suckler  premium  seem to be less than
64
the numbers  estimated  in official statistics  but it does not appear  as if significant  
numbers  are excluded  by the stocking  density  restriction.  About  two-thirds  of 
the animals  in the appropriate  categories  will qualify  for the extensification  
premium  and about  220,000  animals  for the deseasonalisation  premium.
Table 3
Returns  to the cattle sector  IR£m
1992 1995
Market 1,265 1,328
Headage 98 103
Premia 117 363
TOTAL 1,480 1,794
Direct  Payments  (%) 14 26
The aggregate  returns  in the beef sector,  inclusive  of market  revenue  and 
direct  payments,  are shown  in Table  3 for 1992 with an estimate  in respect  of 
1995. As indicated  earlier,  the outturn  in 1995 will probably  be considerably  
greater  than expected,  with total returns  over 20% greater  than in 1992. This 
largely  follows  from  an expected  higher  price  in 1995 than in 1992,  when  most  
estimates  at the time of CAP reform  were budgeting  for a 15% decline.  Even  
if the same cattle  prices  are realised  in 1995 as in 1992, total revenue  would  
still be up by over 15%.
The changed  situation  in the cattle market  over the past two years is no 
better  illustrated  than in the developments  with  respect  to intervention.  As shown 
in Table  4, there were no intervention  purchases  in 1994, in contrast  with the 
very high levels in the preceding  years.
Table 4
Intervention  trends  (’OOOt)
IRLPurchases
EU IRLStocks
EU
1991 267 1,027 247 950
1992 246 890 251 1,090
1993 58 165 166 474
1994 — — 30 100
This dramatic  reversal  in the situation  has greatly  eased  the pressure  on the 
beef  market  and with export  prices  remaining  reasonably  firm there have been  
significant  savings  in the budget  for the beef regime  in 1994.
65
Table 5
Supply  situation  in EU (M. Tonnes)
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
8.723 8.396 7.850 7.850 8.050
The level of supplies  in recent  years is shown  in Table 5. After the peak  
in 1991,  production  has fallen  off sharply  and  only a small  expansion  is envisaged  
for 1995. The surge  in supply  is somewhat  less than expected  with a cyclical  
high expected  in 1996 and reducing  somewhat  thereafter.
Table 6
GATT  and exports  (’000 Tonnes)
Actual Allowable
1992 1,325 -
1993 1,225 -
1994 1,000 -
1995 - 1,119
1996 - 1,058
1997 - 998
1998 - 936
1999 - 877
2000 - 817
The beef situation  and GATT
As for CAP reform,  the impact  of GATT  on the beef sector  may not be as 
severe  as feared  earlier.  As shown  in Table  6, beef exports  from the EU were  
reduced  to about 1 million  tonnes  in 1994 and allowable  exports  under  GATT 
are of this magnitude  for the next  two years. We further  do not have  the massive  
overhang  of intervention  stocks  which  existed  during  the end of the GATT  
discussions  and the supply  situation  looks somewhat  easier  also as indicated  
in Table 7 for the next three years. Much depends  however  on the trend in
Table 7
EU (12) beef balance  sheet (’OOOt)
1995 1996 1997
Consumption 7,500 7,500 7,500
Imports 500 500 510
Exports 1,119 1,058 998
Production 8,050 8,150 8,100
Surplus/Deficit - 69 92 112
66
consumption.  Perhaps  I am showing  an optimistic  trend for this parameter  in 
the Table but with that assumption,  the balance  sheet  would  show  only a small  
surplus.  To the extent  that consumption  could  weaken  from that shown,  then 
the surplus  would  be greater.  In any event we would appear  to be facing  a 
market  situation  less threatening  than we thought  only a year ago.
Output  trends  in Ireland
Cattle  output  in Ireland  declined  somewhat  in 1994 and on the assumption  
of some increase  in stocks,  as indicated  in Table  8, output  will fall by about  
5%. However  we have  the lowest  level  of total disposals  and export  slaughterings  
in 1994 in a decade.
The lower  disposals  is due to some  extent  to export  of calves  and weanlings  
in the two preceding  years while  the steer kill, the lowest  also since 1983,  has 
been severely  affected  by the increase  in live exports.
Table 8
Output  of cattle in Ireland  (’000)
1992 1993 1994
Live exports 187 384 390
Export  slaughterings 1,512 1,417 1,260
Domestic  consumption 202 190 190
Disposals 1,901 1,991 1,840
Imports 5 10 5
Stock  changes 99 39 90
TOTAL 1,995 2, 020 1,925
Arising  from the fluctuations  in the level and components  of cattle  output,  
it is instructive  to examine  the productivity  of the national  cow herd over  recent  
years.  As shown  in Table 9, while total cow numbers  has increased  by 17%
Table 9
TVend  in cow numbers  (’OOOt)
Dairy Beef Total Productivity*
1988 1,481 482 1,963 89
1989 1,478 558 2,036 88
1990 1,463 624 2,087 91
1991 1,331 817 2,148 89
1992 1,288 886 2,174 92
1993 1,281 979 2,261 89
1994 1,292 1,010 2,032 84
1988 = 100 87 210 117
= Output/cow  numbers  (%)
67
since 1988,  there  has been a small  decline  in dairy  cows,  but beef  cow numbers  
have more than doubled.  However,  productivity  of the total cow herd has 
oscillated  to some extent,  but peaked  at 92% in 1992. Given  our estimates  of 
output  shown  in Table  8, it seems  as if productivity  declined  sharply  in 1994,  
which  might  suggest  that official  beef  cow numbers  are somewhat  exaggerated  
or some cows are being retained  without  producing  calves  in the interests  of 
keeping  up numbers  for premium  purposes.  Having  said that, statistics  on the 
cattle  sector  can be  quite  volatile,  and in predicting  supplies,  cohort  coefficients  
can be very unstable  and thereby unsuitable  as predictors.  Nevertheless  we expect 
disposals  to be somewhat  greater  in the next two years than in 1994.
Conclusion
While  the beef  situation,  and particularly  supply  and prices,  have turned  out 
somewhat  differently  than expected  and in consequence  eased  our fears about  
the future,  the situation  can alter quickly,  as we know  only too well from the 
past. Factors  such as the Gulf  War, oil induced  depressions  or BSE can wreak  
havoc  on predictions  relating  to price levels  and supply/demand  balances.  But 
for the moment  there is optimism.  Intervention  stocks  have been eliminated,  
having  been off-loaded  at a rate of over 0.5 million  tonnes  per year for the last 
two years,  and this should  ease the pressure  on the market  situation  somewhat.  
We also have scope  for expanding  steer  numbers  towards  the permitted  ceiling  
of 1,286,000  while  the stocking  density  measure  gives  an advantage  to Ireland  
against  intensive  Continental  production.
But there are threats  also. The increasing  tendency  towards  super veal 
production  could enhance  supplies  at a rate somewhat  faster than projected,  
while  further  concessions  towards  Eastern  Europe in the form  of increased  access 
could reinforce  the process  and ultimately  pose more of a threat  than GATT.
We also have the issue of what will happen  at the end of CAP reform.  We 
are in the second  of the three-year  CAP  reform  phase  and the final adjustment  
will be effected  for the 1995/96  marketing  year. While  provision  is made  for 
the budgetary  cost of the reforms,  it is not clear  what  will evolve  in policy terms  
when  the 1992 reforms  expire  in less than two years  from now. Will the policy 
and budgetary  framework  in place  at the end of the reforms  be rolled-over,  or 
will any significant  adjustments  be made in the light of prevailing  market  or 
institutional  circumstances?
From the point of view of supporting  consumption,  it probably  would  be 
better  to reduce  institutional  beef prices further,  provided  there would  be 
offsetting  compensation  in the form of increased  premia.  But it is unlikely  that 
full compensation  will be conceded,  and with  growing  pressure  towards  further  
trade  liberalisation  some  further  decoupling  of support  from  production  cannot  
be ruled  out. We cannot  however  allow  the price  competitiveness  of beef  against  
that of white meats to deteriorate  further,  otherwise  consumption  could be 
seriously  affected.  Finally,  while the outlook  is less foreboding  than one would 
have thought  a year ago, when it comes  to the beef industry  the word caution  
should  not be exorcised  from the vocabulary.
68
Options  for Beef Production  on 
Dairy  Farms
B. SMYTH
Teagasc,  Ballyhaise,  Co. Cavan  
L. FITZGERALD  
Teagasc,  Athenry,  Co. Galway
Since the introduction  of milk quotas  in 1983 dairy farmers  have been  
restricted  in expanding  milk output.  Individual  farmers  have increased  milk 
output  through  the purchase  of additional  quota  under  restructuring  schemes,  
temporary  leasing,  leasing  land and quota,  purchase  of land and quota  and/or  
by just producing  over quota  and hoping  to avoid superlevy.
Expanding  milk  output  has generally been the  most  profitable  farming  option  
for efficient  dairy farmers  where  the farm business  was able to carry the extra  
investment  costs associated  with expansion.  The benefits  from  expanding  milk 
output  were lost in some cases where  significant  extra capital  investment  in 
buildings,  quota and stock had to be funded  totally with extra borrowing.  
Problems  with repayment  difficulties  were compounded  in such cases due to 
high borrowing  levels  before  expansion  combined  with increasing  income  tax 
liabilities  as capital  allowance  and stock relief  claims  decreased.
The advantage  of the relative  profitability  of dairying  compared  with cattle/  
sheep  since 1983 is largely  responsible  for the benefits  gained  from  expanding  
milk output  despite  having  to lease or purchase  the extra quota.
Objective
Presently,  many  dairy farmers  may ask: will dairying  continue  to maintain  
or increase  its relative  advantage  over beef  production  after the effects  of CAP  
reform  and the GATT  agreement  on both enterprises?
In this paper  the options  of continuing  with beef production  with progeny  
from the dairy herd or replacing  the beef enterprise  with milk produced  on 
leased quota  are examined.  The exercise  is based  on a case  study  for an efficient  
dairy  and beef  farmer  that rears  all the progeny  to 2 years  for own replacements,  
with surplus  cattle sold as beef In this exercise,  the Teagasc  computerised  
farm planning  system  - FINPACK  - was used.
CASE  STUDY  DETAILS
Farm  140 acres  (very  good) with 81,000  gallons  usable  owned
quota. Fully  developed  with slatted  accommodation  for 
all stock.
Stock  72 Dairy cows @ 1125 gallons  per cow.
14 Replacement  heifers.
20 Beef heifers  for sale @ 20/24 months  @ 520 kg. 
34 Beef  bullocks  for sale @ 24/25 months  @ 600 kg. 
Existing  borrowings  £50,000  Term loan over 7 years @ 12%.
£35,000  Average  working  captial/stocking  loan.
69
Annual  interest  costs
Other  fixed costs excluding  depreciation  
Depreciation
Production  costs
Grazing  
£60/Acre  
£2/AcreFertilizer  
Herbicides  
Silage  cutting ^ 
Additive  —
Polythene  —
First cut silage 57% of farm  
Second  cut silage  50% of farm(£70/acre)
£20,500  (146/Acre)  
£5,600  (£40/Acre)
Silage
£72/acre
£3/acre
£45/acre
£ 1.20/tonne
£0.35/tonne
I.IVR.STOCK  INPUTS
Purchased  Feed (kg)Dairy Cows Replacement
HeifersBeef
HeifersBeef
Bullocks
Milk replacer — 30 30 30
Calf ration — 150 130 130
Weanling  ration — 200 150 150
Beef ration — — 350 600
Dairy ration 750 — — —
Silage  (tonne/unit) 8 9 9 10
Vet (@ AI) Costs £45 £40 £20 £20
Marketing/Other £7 — £15 £20
Farm  income  in 1992  is established  for the case study  farm,  based  on a milk  
price of 92p per gallon  nett of levies  and transport  and a beef price of £2.20  
per kg as used by M. Barlow  in his paper in this Journal.
Effect  of CAP reform
In order  to determine  the most  profitable  enterprise  mix in future,  assumptions  
on the impact  of CAP reform  and the GATT  agreement  on both dairying  and 
beef  are required.  In his paper  M. Barlow  concludes  that spring beef  prices will 
suffer  a reduction  from 1992 levels  of between  10 and 20%. For the purpose  
of this exercise  we have assumed  a spring  price fall of 10% compared  with 
1992 levels i.e. spring  beef at 198p per kg after impact  of GATT.
The effects  of GATT  on dairying  is based  on a report  from the Production  
Economics  Unit, Teagasc,  published  in March 1994 and also personal  
communication  with W. Fingleton  in that Unit.
Assumptions  on a combination  of quota  and price cuts were made for the 
purpose  of this exercise.  A milk  quota  cut 4% is assumed  so that EU milk  output  
will comply  with GATT reductions  in “surplus ” export  volumes  and allow  for
70
increased  access  to imports into  the EU. In addition, a  price  cut of 8% on average  
’92, ’93 and ’94 milk prices  (approx.  5.5% on ’92 price)  is assumed  to cope  
with conditions  on the world  market.  On the cost side  the only  change  assumed  
is a reduction  in concentrate  prices of 15%.
Replacing  beef enterprise  with extra  cows
In the examination  of profit  projection  for all-dairying  compared  with the 
existing  dairy/cattle  combination,  the following  assumptions  were made;
Capital  costs
Livestock - No nett financial  cost or saving  as cows replace  cattle on a 
livestock  unit basis.
Buildings - Winter  Housing  - £100  per extra  cow for modifications  to the
cattle housing.
Total £5000  (72 to 117 cows)
Milking  Parlour  - No new investment  required  or 
£30,000  on new parlour.
Equipment  - Extra bulk tank capacity  £8000  
All extra investment  costs bear interest  at 11/12%.
Quota  leasing  costs
Leased  quota @ 25p per gallon.
Cost  of land leased  with  quota  assumed  to be recovered  with alternative  enterprise  
as this land will not be required  for milk production.
Sale of surplus  calves  from “All-Dairy ” enterprise
90% calving  with 20% replacement  rate and surplus  calves  sold at an average  
of £135 per head.
Extra  fixed costs with All-Dairying
Assumed  @ £3500  (i.e. £25 per acre)
PROFITABILITY  OF OPTIONS
Taking  the 140 acre dairying  and cattle  farm and using  the assumptions  set 
out above,  the output,  costs and profit  margin  are shown  in Table 1 for the pre 
GATT  situation  (1992),  and with two options  in the post GATT  situation:
(i) continuing  the present  farming  system  of dairying  plus finishing  progeny  
to beef and
(ii) concentration  on total dairying  by leasing  extra quota and selling  all 
calves  not needed  for replacements.  The systems  are operated  at a high level  
of efficiency.
Where  there is no change  in system  or level of efficiency,  the changes  in 
market  conditions  as a consequence  of GATT  results  in a 5% fall in income  
on dairy and cattle farms. If the finishing  cattle system  is discontinued  and 
replaced  by more  dairying  the income  is improved  by 5% from the 1992 base 
year.
In the post GATT  situation  the income  from all-dairying  is 11% or £3,922  
better than the dairying  and cattle finishing  system.
71
Table 1
Output,  costs and profit  from “milk and cattle ” or “all milk ” pre and post
GATT  (£)
System1992
Milk & CattlePost GATT
Milk & Cattle All Milk
Output
Milk sales 74,520 70,470 114,514
Cattle  sales including  
Culls 42,058 37,852 9,903
Calf sales — — 11,768
Premiums 1,190 5,976 —
Total Output  (A) 117,768 114,298 136,185
Costs
Variable  costs 43,888 41,533 39,912
Quota  leasing — 810 13,466
Interest 9,850 9,850 11,280
Other  fixed 20,500 20,500 24,000
Depreciation 5,600 5,600 7,600
Total costs (B) 79,838 78,293 96,258
Farm profit (A-B) 37,930 36,005 39,927
Efficiency
Both  the dairying  and cattle  systems are  operated  at a high  level  of efficiency. 
It is likely  that only a small  proportion  of livestock  farmers  operate  their  farms  
at this level.  Relatively  small  changes  in efficiency  can have substantial  effects  
on profits.  (Table  2)
Table 2
Effect  on farm profit  of 5% lower milk yield and cattle finishing  weight  post
GATT
Higher Lower Difference
Efficiency Efficiency
Farm profit (£) 36005 30693 5312
Relative  % 100 85 15
A 5% lower  milk yield and 5% lower  cattle  finishing  weight  reduces  farm 
profit  by 15% when other factors  are kept constant.  Not for the first time it 
indicates  that greater  improvement  in income  can be obtained  from raising  
efficiency  rather  than changing  systems.
Premiums
The slaughter  premium  has not been included  in the calculation  of farm 
profits  in Table 1 and 2. In the dairying  and cattle system  the 10 month  and
72
22 month  premium  is included  on all male animals  sold at finished  weights.  
The stocking  rate (0.8 LU/acre)  allows  the payment  of these  premiums  provided  
the farmer  operates  official  milk recording.  If milk recording  is not carried  out 
there will be a loss of £3188  in cattle premiums.
Investments  for extra milk
Since  stocking  rate is being  held the same  in the change  from dairying  plus 
cattle to all-dairying  the disposal  of cattle will fund the investment  in extra  
dairy cows. In Table 1 only minimum  investment  in facilities  was envisaged  
to handle  the extra milk, i.e. £13,000  to provide  extra  cubicles  and bulk tank 
storage.  Where  a farmer  must  build  a new parlour  and provide  a new bulk tank 
an extra  investment costing  about  £30,000  would  be required.  This reduces  the 
attractiveness  of moving  to all-dairying  compared  to staying  with the present  
system.  Table  3 shows  the relative  farm  profits  for various  situations  of premium  
payments  and investments  required  to handle  extra milk.
Table 3
Income  post GATT  relative  to 1992 income  for milk and cattle at £37929  (100)
System Milk & Cattle Milk Only
No Slaughter
PremiumSlaughter
PremiumMinimum
InvestmentNew
Parlour  & 
Bulk Tank
Milk  No
Recording  RecordingMilk
Recording 13,000 43,000
Relative
Income95 87 100 105 84
Sensitivity
The above  analysis  is based  on conditions  obtaining  in 1992 and estimated  
market  conditions  post GATT implementation.  Possible  changes  in the relative  
profitability  of dairying  and cattle will have a large influence  on which  path 
to follow.  The effects  of the main  factors  that could alter  farm  profits  are shown  
below.
Sensitivity
FactorChange  +\- Dairying  & 
CattleDairying
Only
Milk price 5p/gal 4050 6581
Milk yield 50 gals/cow 3132 5090
Quota  leasing  cost 5p/gal 162 2693
Cattle selling  price £5/100kg 1565 555
Cattle  sale weight 25kg/head 1408 -
Calf price £20/head - 1740
73
Milk price change  has the greatest  effect  on profitability  for both dairying  
plus cattle and dairying  only systems,  followed  by milk yield.
Where  farmers  have higher  milk yields  at similar  costs  there  is considerable  
income  advantage  from moving  towards  extra milk production.  The cost of 
leased  quota  is an important  factor.  In the ‘dairying  only ’ system  a 5p change  
in quota leasing  cost results  in a change  in profit  of £2,693.  In the event of 
quota  leasing  increasing  from  25p/gal to 33p/gal  all the extra  income  of changing  
to dairying  would  be lost in paying  for the extra quota  required.
Not all farmers  will operate  dairying  and beef at comparable  levels of 
efficiency.  In situations  where  the cattle  enterprise  is the ‘poor relation ’ there  
would  be a bigger  advantage  in changing  to dairying.
Conclusions
1. On a well stocked  efficiently  operated  dairying  and beef farm, profit  post 
GATT  is implemented  is envisaged  to fall by 5% from the base year of 
1992.
2. Efficiency  is vital to good incomes  and is the priority  on raising  income  
on cattle/dairy  farms.
3. Changing  to “dairying  only ” provides  11% better  income  than the current  
system  when extra quota is leased  at 25p/gal  i.e. an extra £3923  can be 
earned  on a 140 acre farm.
4. If the leasing  cost rises to 33p/gal  there is no extra income  from moving  
to all-dairying.
5. Major  investment  in facilities  for extra milk will make switching  to all­
milk less attractive.
6. If the slaughter  premium  remains  in place,  incomes  can be maintained  at 
1992 levels.
Other  factors  which  influence  the direction  to follow  are the preference  of 
the farmer  and the layout  of the farm.
Given  the small  differences  between  systems,  the improvements  that can be 
obtained  from raising  efficiency  and the large  influence  of the sensitivity  factors,  
individual  farmers  should  examine  the scope for income  improvement  with 
their present  system  before  contemplating  any change.
The benefits  of changing  to dairying  will depend  on:
1. The relative  profitability  of dairying  and beef
2. Farmers ’ management  efficiency  of both enterprises.
3. Cost of leased  quota.
4. Extra investment  required  and method  of funding.
Acknowledgements
W. Fingleton,  Teagasc,  Production  Economics  Unit, Dublin.
M. Barlow,  Teagasc,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
74
Systems  of Beef Production  and CAP  
Reform
P. J. CAFFREY'  and M. J. DRENNAN^
'Faculty  of Agriculture,  University  College  Dublin,  Belfield,  Dublin  4.
^Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Introduction
The last ten years  have  seen  massive  changes  in the cattle  industry  in Ireland.  
These  include;
- increase  in total cow numbers  to record  levels.
- development  of the suckler  herd to be numerically  almost  on a par with 
the dairy herd.
- restriction  on cow numbers  for both milk and beef as a result of CAP  
changes.
- ‘Holsteinisation ’ of the dairy  herd and increased  ‘continental ’ genes  in the 
‘suckler ’ herd.
- replacement  of Herefords  by Continentals  for crossing  in both dairy and 
suckler  herds.
- move from ‘Intervention ’ to market  place as the main outlet  for steers.
- recognition  that the ‘Green ’ image  should  be a marketable  commodity;
- the introduction  of the Rural  Environment  Protection  Scheme  (REPS)  should 
enhance  profitability  on participating  beef farms.
- the substantial  premia  now available  means  that premia  now  make  a major  
contribution  to the incomes  from beef production.
- All  of the above,  with the exception  of ‘Holsteinisation ’ might  be considered  
positive  developments  for the Irish beef producer.  Some  of the changes  
in production  practices which  the authors  feel are appropriate  are considered  
in this paper.
Current  position
Cattle  slaughterings  in the EU are summarised  in Appendix  1. The breed  
composition  of animals  available  in Ireland  is given  in Appendix  2, and carcass  
data for steers,  heifers  and cows for 1992 and 1993 are given in Appendix  3.
From the data in Appendix  1 it is obvious  that Ireland  deviates  from the 
overall  EU situation  in the following  aspects;
- lower replacement  rates in Ireland  and thus relatively  more heifers  
slaughtered.
virtual  absence  of veal and bull production  in Ireland.
- steer (bullock)  beef relatively  more important  in Ireland  than elsewhere.
The returns  from different  systems  in Ireland  and how these are likely to
change  in the coming  decade  are reported  by M. Barlow  in this Journal.  We 
will consider;
75
i) production  practices  appropriate  for new or altered  production  systems
ii) biological  efficiency  and implications
iii) input/output  targets  for a variety  of production  options.  There  may  or may
not be a reliable  market  for the options  considered.
i) Production  practices
Many  of the good  husbandry  practices  essential  for efficient  “Grass  to Beef ” 
systems  are well documented  and will not be discussed  here. However,  it is 
felt that the following  considerations  must  be addressed  as a matter  of urgency  
if we are to remain  competitive  in the short term.
* high growth  potential  and relatively  low forage  intake  capacity  of 
continentals.  The implications  for indoor  feeding  are obvious  but 
implications  for grazing  are not defined.
* Should  be possible  to maintain  high performance  throughout  the grazing  
season with a minimum  of supplementary feeding.  The specific  management  
strategies  which  will achieve  high performance  particularly  towards  the 
end of the grazing  season  requires  further  research.
* In theory  parasite  control  should  be simple  in the spring  calving  suckler  
herd  -in practice  no information  is available  on critical  management  factors. 
In particular,  there is an absence  of information  on the parasite  control  
measures  required  during  their  second  grazing  season  for both suckled  and 
artificially  reared  animals.
* What  is “quality  beef ’ to the consumer  and what  premium  will it command  
at the farm gate?
Biological  efficiency
In biological  terms  beef  is costly  to produce.  The unique  role of the ruminant  
allows  the utilisation  of fibrous  foods by virtue  of its large fermentation  
chamber  - the rumen.  However,  feeds such as concentrates  (which  can be 
digested  by Mammalian  enzymes  in the monogastric)  are “downgraded ” 
by at least 30% relative  to the monogastric.  This “downgrading ” is mainly  
due to:
- maintenance  costs of microbial  population;
- methane  losses;
- the fact that products  of fermentation  such as volatile  fatty acids  
are used less efficiently  at tissue level than the corresponding  
sugar from which  they are derived.
White  veal production  which  accounts  for some six million  calves  in the 
EU is also costly  to produce  (despite  the fact that the calf is maintained  
in a pre-ruminant  state on a milk-type  diet), due mainly  to the high cost 
of milk and milk replacers.  White  veal is the term used for calves  raised  
on high milk levels.  Milk is deficient  in iron and as a result when calves  
are fed for extended  periods  with milk  as the total diet the myoglobin  content  
of the muscles  is reduced  - thus the pale meat colour.  Traditionally,  the 
“best” veal came  from  suckled  calves  slaughtered  at 3-4 months  of age but 
since the 1950 ’s the pre-dominant  source  of veal in Europe  has been bull 
calves  from the dairy herd.ii)
*
76
Table 1
Input/output  targets  for a number  of systems
Breed
Sex1. HxF
SteerA. IVaditional  Systems
2. CxF 3. HxF 4. CxF
Steer  Steer  Steer5. F
Steer6. CxF
Heifer
Age at Slaughter  (M) 29 29 24 25 24 24
Carcase  (Kg) 340 430 300 380 320 310
INPUTS
Milk Replacer  (Kg) 25 25 25 25 25 25
Concentrates  (Kg) 300 400 700 1000 800 800
Silage  (Kg DM) 2200 2200 1800 2000 1800 1800
Forage  Acres 1.5 1.8 1.0 1.2 1.1 1.1
B. Young  Bull and Veal
Breed 7. CxF 8. CxF 9. CxF 10. CxF 11. F 12. F
Sex Bull Bull Bull Bull Bull Bull
Diet All silage Grass/ Barley Barley Veal Veal
Silage Beef Beef (white) (pink)
Age at Slaughter  (M) 17 17 12.5 11.5 6 7
Carcase  (Kg) 320 330 290 250 150 150
INPUTS
Milk Replacer  (Kg) 25 25 25 25 410 50
Concentrates  (Kg) 1400 1300 2150 1950 None 850
Silage  (Kg DM) 1800 1000 'None 'None None 'None
Forage  Acres 0.4 0.5 None None None None
'Source  of roughage  needed
C. Suckler  Systems  (L xF cows; Charolais  sires)
Breed 13 14 15
Sex Bull Heifer Steer Heifer Steer Heifer
Age at slaughter  (M) 16 20 24 20 29 20
Carcase  (Kg) 360 300 400 300 450 300
Inputs  per cow unit
Concentrates  (Kg) 800 600 350
Silage  (Kg DM) 2600 3000 3100
Forage  acres 1.6 1.9 2.2
77
“Pink Veal”, “Alternate  Veal”, “Baby Beef ’ are terms which  have come  to 
describe  veal produced  on solid diets. Intensive  research  on these systems  is 
currently  underway  in many European  countries  and a system  has also been 
developed  in Australia  (Moran  et ai, 1991).  As it is evolving  in Europe,  calves  
are fed high concentrate  diet post-weaning  until slaughter  at about  7 months  
of age. The feed costs  for “White  Veal”, “Pink  Veal ” and “Barley  Beef ’ relative  
to the pig per kg carcase  are given below.  The input/output  assumptions  for 
“Veal ” and “Barley  Beef ’ are given  in Table  1 with milk  powder  costed  at £ 1.20/  
kg, “Pink  Veal” concentrate  is charged  at £0.20/kg  and “Barley  Beef ’ concentrate  
at £0.15/kg. In the pig it is assumed  that it takes 3.7 kg concentrates  per kg 
carcase.
Feed (including  animal  replacement)  
Costs  - £/Kg Carcase
White  Veal 4.30*
Pink Veal 2.50*
Barley  Beef 1.90*
Pig 0.70
See Table 1
** Calf included  at £150; Breeding  stock feed included  for pig.
iii) Input/Output  targets
The input/output  targets  for a variety  of beef  production  systems  are shown 
in Table 1.
CONCLUSIONS  AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
Sucklers  - suggested  framework  and targets  
1. * Calving  Spring
Cow  : Continental  Cross (Milky)
Sire Third Breed,  Continental
3.
4.Output
Calving  interval  
Calving  spreadCalf/cow/year  
365 day
90 percent  in 10 weeks for early  spring  calving  
and 8 weeks  for April/May  calving
Replacement  rate:
(Replacement  costs are low when planned)
Cull cow ; 330 kg carcass  when finished
Parasite  control
no reliable  information  for suckled  calf but not a major  problem,  
absence  of information on parasite  control during second  grazing  season
Grazing  management  for autumn  finishing
inadequate  information
78
Continental  breeding  - Implications
* High growth  potential
* Low forage  intake  capacity  relative  to Friesians
The high growth  potential  and low forage  intake  capacity  of continentals  
relative  to Friesians  dictate  that finishing  continentals  should  receive  higher  
levels  of concentrate  supplementation  than Friesian.  In the grazing  situation  
it would  appear  that high quality  herbage  should  be capable  of sustaining  high 
performance  in continentals  without  supplementation.  There is however,  an 
urgent  need to quantify  appropriate  strategies  for continentals  at grass.
Live exports  to continental  EU - Serious  questions  raised  
1993: 70,000  calves;  33,000  stores
* Calves/weanlings
are we less efficient  than competitors?
The calf supplies  in Western  Europe  have decreased  due to the absence  
of Eastern  European  sources  of calves  in recent  years  and reduced  cow 
numbers.  This may partly  explain  the increased  export  of calves  from  
Ireland.  However,  the possibility  that we are less efficient  than our 
competitors  should  not be overlooked.
* Finished  animals
Do our factories  need competition  from the live trade to provide  an 
equitable  price  to the producer?  This is a question  that will continue  to 
arise.
Production  costs
Beef biologically  inefficient
Because  of high costs of production  (documented  in paper)  beef must  
command  a premium  price, relative say to pig meat.  Thus,  the marketing  
side of the industry  must  legitimately  exploit  the “green ” image  of Irish 
beef.
SUMMARY
* In terms  of production  practices  Ireland  is very much  out of step with most
EU countries.  This does not imply  that we should  or must  change  our systems.
A number  of options  are considered.
* Steer  beef  production  is biologically  less efficient  than bull-beef  production  
and would  need  to command  a premium  price  to make it equally  profitable.
* Producers  in Ireland should not change  to bull beef  production  or other  novel 
systems  unless  a market  is assured.
* Changes  in the breed composition  in the national  herd in the recent  past 
are mainly  positive  from a beef production  point of view.
79
* There  is insufficient  information  in the area of grassland  management  for 
finishing  continental  cross steers off pasture  in autumn.
* There  is a serious  deficit  of information  in the area of parasite  control  of 
suckled  calves  and animals  during  their second  grazing  season.
* Compact  calving  is a necessary  prerequisite  for an efficiently  run spring ­
calving  suckler  herd. Ninety  percent  of the herd should  calve  in 10 weeks  
with  a calving  interval  of 365 days  for early spring  calving.  For later  calving  
(April/May)  herds  the calving  period  should  be reduced  from 10 to 8 weeks.
* High  replacement  rates  should  not be  a consequence  of the need to maintain  
compact  calving.
* Cow maintenance  requirements  should  not be considered  in isolation  but 
rather  in the context  of product  output,  e.g. value  of weaned  calf  or of finished 
animal  per unit cost.
* Upsurge  in the export  of calves  and weanlings  in recent  years  is an ominous  
development.  This  is probably  due to reduced  calf  supplies  in Western  Europe  
resulting  from an absence  of Eastern  European  sources  of calves  in recent  
years  and reduced  cow numbers.  Animal  welfare  issues,  both with respect  
to transportation  and subsequent  production  systems  imposed  on exported  
calves,  imply that we should  seriously  consider  systems  such as “cereal  
beef ’ and “pink veal” in Ireland.
References
Caffrey,  P. J. and P. O. Brophy  (1975):  Beef  Production  from spring  bom calves  using  
an intensive  grassland  system.  Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Assoc.  J. 10: 
45-59.
C.B.F.  (1987): A Market  Assessment  of Bull Beef. Irish Livestock  and Meat Board,  
Lr. Mount  St., Dublin  2.
Connolly,  J. A. and P. J. Caffrey  (1994):  Relative  Profitability  of beef  production Systems  
(Unpublished  University  College,  Belfield,  Dublin  4).
Drennan,  M. J. (1993):  Systems of Beef  Production  using  Continental Cross  Cattle  from  
the Suckler  Herd. Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  J. 27: 41-49.
Jarrige,  R.(1989)  [French  (INRA)  System]:  Recommended  allowances  and feed tables.  
John Libbey  Eurotext
Moran,  J., Hopkins,  A. & Warner,  R. (1991):  The Production  of Pink Veal from Dairy  
Calves  in Australia.  Outlook  on Agriculture,  20: 183-190.
Acknowledgements:  Maeve  Henchion  (U.C.D.):  Michael  Deely  (C.B.F.)  and Nicholas  
Finnerty  (Dept.  Agriculture,  Food and Forestry).
80
5
a -S
e£
>S
£ »
< "m
3
iS
c«U00NO NOVONO•nCOCONO CO CNTfCNCN*— 1-H
M-o£oOn00r-CNCNVO00r- CN CN00r***o>9SOnCO »o3 »o CNu5gNO CN ONCNNO NO00 CN
4>
ex:
oU
3
n
s
3U
3
fSr-m
ON
On
Tj*
r-
r^
OnmmTt
8cs
<N
O5
Tt-
00CN
00
r-
D
U£
3313
fflc9
B
c
(UQON
<sso —€N Tf
cn
NO »riso ^ cn
00
fS
CNCO fSo
NOsw-»
CN
cs
r-
Tf
NO ON OCO ^ CO(N ^O
CO(N•nOn
CS CO
uo
Os
CO
ON
OsNO ^ 00 00 
cs ^ 
cs
^ NO
rt(Soir> ms -
SO CO 
»r> CO
CS CO CO
o— 00 NO (N 
(N Tt
oTt
VO CO CO CNCOVOoCNCNCOCN CO CN
VO COCNooCNTj*CN
00
CN00CO
VOCO
COTtNO»o
r->
r-NOCOoCNo
NO0000
CO
CN
r-
<NTt
CO
(N
oo
r-
CN
in CN
ON NO OOs C4 NO— NO 1—
fS Tf 00 ON o (N Tj* mI ON
Tt
CO ON CO NO 
CO CN
CS — 
CN00 CO O U-)
ON
NOo NO»nCOoCOCN00Os CO NOCN00»oCOoTt CN CNCN<NCOCNCNCOCO
00 NOOsr- CN r-CONOoO»o CO OnCOoONoCO CO NO CNOnCONO 00
00NO ONON00 COCNCNCN 00 00 r-CN00r-NO CNo
CN
CS
fS
w->
NO
<N
00
CO
<N
00
NO
oV)
cs
cs
00
TfNO
Tf
(N
00
<NCS
CO
(N
NOOn
Tj-NO
csCOcs
o00CN
oNO
OsONCN
5
COo
00VO
NOSO
oON
(N
r-ON
CN
a ac
’c3a-CO*oc
[3^ ^ ^3OJO
B
0)X3003
° ^cu D
81
APPENDIX  2
1. Numbers  and Disposition
Cows:1,300,000  dairy (Holstein/Friesian)
2,300.000<
1,000,000  suckler  (increasingly  continental)
Annual  calf crop: 2,000,000
Friesian300,000  Heifers  (replacements/cull  cow)
600,000  <
300,000  Males (steer beef)
Early maturing  beef X220,000  Heifers  (domestic  consumption,  
replacements)
440,000  <
220,(X)0  Males (steer beef)
Continental  x480,000  Heifers  (exports/replacements)
960,000  <
480,000  Males (steer beef)
APPENDIX  3
Carcase  weights  and classification  data at beef export  premises
Steers Heifers Cows
1992 1993 1992 1993 1992 1993
Carcase  (Kg) 356 359 292 291 280 276
% Fat Class 1 0.2 0.2 0.6 0.4 7.1 8.8
Class 2 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.6 10.1 12.0
Class 3 24.1 19.0 15.6 14.9 18.0 18.0
Class 4 72.3 75.6 75.1 74.7 52.0 48.7
Class 5 2.3 3.7 7.3 '8.1 12.8 12.5
% Conformation  E 0.1 0.2 0 0 0 0
U 20.7 18.0 12.3 10.5 0.3 0.3
R 58.5 56.3 60.9 53.2 7.4 4.2
O 19.8 26.5 25.1 33.2 55.5 42.0
P 0.9 1.4 1.6 1.8 36.8 52.0
82
Likely  Impact  of CAP  Reform  and GATT  
Agreement  on the Income  from Beef  
Production
M. BARLOW
Teagasc,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
The broad objective  of CAP Reform  is to control  the expansion  of the 
Community  agriculture  budget  by reducing  the level  of price  support  with direct  
payments  to farmers.  The GATT  agreement  relates  to the freeing  up of world  
trade. Either  reform  on its own would  have a substantial  impact  on the future  
of cattle producers  in Ireland  but the combined  impact  may well be radical.
The details  of the CAP  reform  package  which  came  into  operation  in January  
1993 are well understood  and its principal  elements  relating  to beef are 
summarised  in Table 1. They comprise  (i) reduced  beef price support  through  
intervention  (ii) increased  premium  on male bovines  (S.M.P.)  (iii) increased  
suckler  cow premium  (S.C.P.)  (iv) S.M.P.  and S.C.P. are linked  to stocking  
density  limits (v) the introduction  of a deseasonalisation  or winter  slaughter  
premium  (SI. R).
Table 1
Principal  elements  of CAP Reform  (Beef)
* Intervention
- Price reduced  by 15% from 1993 to 1995
- Volume  reduced  by 53% from 1993 to 1997
- Safety  net price at 60% of intervention  price from 1993
* Special  male premium  (SMP)  at £87.88  x 2 from 1995
* Suckler  cow premium  (SCP) at £136.70  from 1995
* Stocking  density  for S.M.P. and S.C.P. = 2.0 L.U./ha  from 1996
* Deseasonalisation  (winter  slaughter)  premium  - £58.58  from 1993
A summary  of the main features  of the GATT  agreement  are set down in 
Table 2. The expectation  is that the agreement  will come into operation  on 
January  1, 1995 and run for a period  of 6 years.  The main features  which  affect  
beef  producers  relate  to a 36% reduction  of export  support  and a 21 % reduction  
in the volume  of subsidised  exports,  maximum  of 817,000  tonnes  by 2000  A.D.
The EU commmunity  beef exports  have ranged  between  1100,000  and 
1300,000  tonnes  annually over  the past  4 years.  EU cow numbers have  remained  
almost  static  at 31.7 million  during  the past 3 years.  If these  cow numbers  are 
sustained  and if consumption  and imports  remain  at about  the levels  of recent  
years then annual  exports  of between  1100,000  tonnes  and 1200,000  tonnes  
can be expected  over  the immediate  years  ahead.  The level  of subsidised  exports
83
Table 2
Summary  of GATT  Agreement  
Phased  over 6 years (1995 - 2000?)
EXPORTS
* Subsidies  reduced  by 36%
* Volume  of subsidised  exports  reduced  by 21% 
(817,000  tones from year 6)
IMPORTS
* Import  tarriffs  reduced  by 36%
* Minimum  access  5% of domestic  production
YearTable 3
EU subsidised  beef exports  under  GATT  (‘000 tonnes)
GATT Exports  surplus  to GATT  *
1995 1,119 31
1996 1,058 92
1997 998 152
1998 938 212
1999 877 273
2000 817 333
♦Assuming  1,150,000  tonnes  of exports  annually
under  the GATT agreement  are shown  in Table  3. From  this table  it can be also 
seen that a significant  and increasing  level of unsubsidised  exports  can be 
expected  in the years  leading  up to 20(X).  How the European  Commission  deals  
with this problem  of oversupply  is an open question.  Perhaps  a reduction  in 
cow quota or special  male premium  quota are the most likely areas for 
Commission  action.  Against  this background  of over supply  and the downward  
pressure  on other  meats  it seems  inevitable  that beef  prices  will decline.  In this 
paper  prices  are asssumed  to decline  between  10% and 25% from the 1992  
levels.
The estimate  of the likely impact  of CAP  and GATT  presented  here  compares  
the incomes  on a 54 hectare  farm in 1992 with the income  forecast  for the year 
2000  when  it is assumed  that the full impact  will be in place.  Fifty  four hectares  
is the minimum  size farm required  to be eligible  for the maximum  amount  
(£15,818)  from the S.M.P.  Four distinct  systems  of steer beef production  are 
examined,  namely,  one from purchased  bucket  reared  Friesian  calves  and the 
other from single  suckled  continental  type calves;  the remaining  two systems  
are winter  finishing  and summer  grazing  using  continental  animals.  All systems  
are operated  at a high level of efficiency.
The beef prices  used to draw up the 1992 base line budget  are as follows:
84
Table 4
Calf to beef - bucket  reared
Purchase Friesian  calves  in spring
Sell 333 kg carcase  at 24/25 months  of age
Concentrates 800 kg per unit
Silage 10.3 tonnes  per unit
90 Units 54 Hectares
£2.20  per kg of carcase  and £2.30  per kg of carcase  for Friesian  and Continental  
steers  respectively.  Given  that the normal  imbalance  in the seasonal  supply  of 
beef  brings  with it a lower  beef price in autumn  relative  to spring.  The ranges  
in reduced  prices  assumed  for the year 2000  are set as follows:  10% and 20% 
for the three systems  which  sell in spring  and 15% and 20% for the summer  
grazing  system  which sells beef in the autumn.  The 25% level of reduction  
corresponds  approximately  to the safety  net price for continental  type steers.
The intervention  price  of cereals  is being  reduced  by 29% under  CAP  reform  
and as a consequence  of this, concentrate  prices  in 2000  are assumed  to reduce  
by 15% from the £135 per tonne  used in the construction  of the 1992 budget.
Overhead  costs less interest  of £196 per hectare  are derived  from the 1992  
set of Teagasc  F.M.S.  data. They remain  at the same level throughout  1992 - 
2000.  In all systems  interest  is charged  on half the livestock  and variable  costs  
at 13% throughout  the period 1992 - 2000.
System  1 Calf to Beef (Bucket  Reared)
Details  of the system  are set out in Tables  4 to 8. To ensure  that all animals  
are eligible  for the S.M.P.  under  CAP reform  stock numbers  are reduced  by
Table 5
Gross  margin  per animal  in 1992 and forecast  for 2,000
Year 1992 2000 2000
Beef Price Reduction - 10% 20%
Sale: Price p/kg 220 198 176
£/Head 733 659 586
Calf Purchase  + Mortality 154 154 154
Gross Output (A) 579 505 432
Total Variable  Costs (B) 320 303 303
Gross Margin  Excl. Premia  (A-B) 259 202 129
S.M.P.* 30 175 175
Gross Margin  inch S.M.P. 289 377 304
Slaughter  Premium 0 58 58
Gross Margin+S.M.P.+S.L.P.  
*Maximum  of 90 Animals289 435 362
85
Table 6
Overhead  costs less interest*
1992 2000
Total farm 10,584 10,584
No. of animals 105 90
Per animal 101 118
* Based  on: NFS 1992
14%, from 105 units in 1992 to 90 units in 2000. The figures  in Table  8 show 
two sets of total farm income  in 1992 and in 2000 at a beef price reduction  
of 10% and 20%  relative  to 1992,  both with and without  the slaughter  premium.  
In each case the full S.M.P.  and half the borrowings  apply.
These  data  show  that in 2000  at the 10% reduction  total  farm  income  increases 
by £4,399  or 31%. By contrast,  however  at the 20% reduction,  farm income  
declined  by £2,185 or 15% to £12,176.  This  cannot  be regarded  as an acceptable  
level of income  from 54 hectares  operated  at a high level of technical/  
management  efficiency.
Table 7
Overdraft  borrowing  on half of livestock  and variable  costs, interest  rate 13%
1992 2000
Total farm borrowing 41,500 35,000
Borrowing  per animal 395 389
Total interest 5,400 4,600
At the 10% level of reduction  if the slaughter  premium  applies  in 2000  the 
forecasted  income  shows  a very substantial  increase  of 9,657 or 67%. Even  
at the 20% reduction  in beef price the income  increase  on 1992 is £3,057  or 
21% thus leaving  an income  of £17,448.  The likely  availability  of the slaughter  
premium  being in place in 2000 is very dubious.
This system  is very sensitive  to changes  in beef price. This is clear from 
Table  8, every  5% reduction  in beef  price  reduces  total farm income  by £3,300.
Table 8
Total farm income  1992 and 2000 (forecast)
1992 2000 2000
Beef Price Reduction - 10% 20%
Assumptions
1. S.M.P.  only + Half Borrowings
2. S.M.P. + SL.P + Half Borrowings14,361
14,36118,760
24,01812,176
17,448
86
Table 9
System  2 Calf to beef - single  suckled
Spring  Calving  Herd 
Sell
Concentrates  
Silage  
63 UnitsMales at 399 kg at 24/25 Months  
Females  at 302 kg at 21/22 months  
630 kg per unit 
15 tonnes  per unit 
54 hectares
The system  is also sensitive  to changes  in calf price,  for instance  a £20 change  
in calf price alters farm income  by over £1,800.  It seems  that any change  in 
calf price in the foreseeable  future  will be upward  and thus have a negative  
effect  on farm income.  A change  of £10 per tonne in concentrate  price will 
affect  farm income  by just over £700.  Fortunately  this effect  is likely  to be in 
the direction  of having  a positive  effect in income.
Table 10
Gross  margin  per cow in 1992 and forecast  for 2000
Year 1992 2000 2000
Beef Price Reduction _ 10% 20%
Sale: p/kg; (Male) 230 207.0 184.0
p/kg; (Female) 215 193.5 172.0
£ per Cow 744 670 595
Repl. + Mort. 40 40 40
Output/Cow 704 630 555
Variable  Costs 355 342 342
Gross Margin  excl. Pr. 349 288 213
S.C.P. + S.M.P. 69 220 220
Gross Margin  Inch Pr. 418 508 433
If the stocking  density  that existed  in 1992 is fully  maintained  by continuing  
to finish  105 steers  annually  total farm income  is only marginally  increa.sed  by 
about  £500. Alternatively,  if the 15 non premium  earning  steers are replaced  
by heifers  farm income  may increase  by about £800.
Table 11
Overhead  costs less interest
1992 2000
Total farm 10,584 10.584
No. suckler  cows 63 63
Costs per cow 168 168
87
Table 12
Overdraft  borrowing  on half the livestock  and variable  costs
1992 2000
Total farm borrowing 39,000 39, 000
Per suckler  cow 619 619
Total interest 5.922 5.922
Against  this background  of falling  beef  prices  it seems  well nigh impossible  
to see how a viable  calf to beef system  as outlined  here can be sustained  in 
the absence  of S.M.P.  This presents  a major  challenge  for the future.
System  2 Calf to Beef (Suckled)
Details  of the systems  are outlined  in Tables  9 and 13. These  tables are 
presented  in essentially  the same  format  as for System  1. The figures  in Table 
13 show that at the 10% price reduction  farm income  in 2000 is forecast  to 
increase  by £5,670  or 55%. The £5,670  is quite substantial  but the very large  
percentage  increase  reflects  the very low base-line  income  of less than 10,000  
in 1992. At the 20% price reduction  the increase  is very modest,  only £945,  
thus yielding  a total increase  of only £10,773.
The inclusion  of the slaughter  premium  increases  farm income  by between  
£1,700  and £1,800.  Thus,  the impact  of the slaughter  premium  is much more  
modest  than in the case of System  1.
The system  is much less sensitive  than System  1 to beef price changes  - a 
5% reduction  in beef price reduces  farm income  by approximately  £2,300.  A 
change  in calf price obviously  has no effect  on income  while  a change  of £10 
per tonne  in concentrate  price alters farm income  by just under  £400. Unlike  
System  1 this system  can continue  yielding  levels  of income  indicated  in Table 
13 on very large farms - up to 145 hectares.
Trading  systems  - Store  to Beef
It is not possible  to predict  with any acceptable  degree  of reliability  the future
Table 13
Income  in 1992 and 2000 (forecast)
1992 2000 2000
Beef Price Reduction _ 10% 20%
Gross Margin/Cow 418 508 433
Overheads/Cow 168 168 168
Interest  (V2) 94 94 94
Income/Cow 156 246 171
Farm Income 9,828 15,498 10,773
Income  + SI. P. 9,828 17,251 12,526
88
Table 14
Store to beef production  - winter  finishing
The System: Purchase  Continental  Steers  in Autumn  
Sell Finished  Beef Following  Spring  
Two Silage  Cuts
Details  per Animal
Purchase  Weight 550 kg
Feeding  Period 140 days
Concentrates  per Day 4.0 kg
A.D.G. 1.00 kg
Finishing  Liveweight 690 kg
K.O. 54.5%
Carcass  Weight 376 kg
Stocking  Rate 5.70 Blks/Ha
Total Silage 7.14 tonnes
price of non premium  carrying  steers.  The use of models  based  on historical  
relationship  to predict  prices  are of little  or no value.  Accordingly,  the approach  
with the two trading  systems  examined  in this paper  is to establish  the purchase  
price  payable  for stores  in both systems  that will yield the same level of income  
per hectare  as the single  suckled  calf to beef systems  which  has already  been  
outlined  at No. 2. This purchase  price payable  is derived  from the following  
equation:
Purchase  price = Total sales less total costs + income
Table 15
Costs and profit margin  per animal  - winter  finishing
Variable
Concentrates 64
Silage 76
Other 20
Total Variables 170
Overhead 37
Interest* 20
Total Costs 227
Profit Margin** 53
Total Cost + Profit 280
* On Half Stock + Variable  Costs
** This margin  varies from about £37 to £60 depending  on sale price reduction  and 
whether  the slaughter  premium  is or is not available.
89
Table 16
Sales: winter  finishing
Beef Price (i) 10% Reduction (ii) 20% Reduction
P/kg 207 184
fVanimal 778 692
System  3 Store  to Beef - Winter  Finishing
Details  of the system  are set down in Tables 14 to 17. The data in Table 
17 show  that if the profitability  of winter  finishing  is to be approximately  the 
same as the levels  already  described  for System  No. 2, the purchase  price of 
stores in the autumn  will have to be reduced  considerably  from the prices  
obtaining  in recent  years,  namely,  approximately  £120  per 100 kg liveweight.
When  the slaughter  premium  is not available  and the price  of beef  in spring  
declines  by 10% and 20% the figures  in Table  17 show  that the live price  payable  
for autumn  stores is £91 per 100kg  and £78 per 100 kg respectively.  This 
represents  a massive  reduction  of £29 to £42 per 100 kg on the prices  obtaining  
in recent  years.
At this point  it is important  to consider  the implications  of the autumn  prices  
payable  for stores  as seen in Table 17. Traditionally  the autumn  price of beef 
has had a major  effect  on the price  of stores  for winter  finishing.  In recent  years  
both of these prices  have been practically  the same on a liveweight  basis. If 
autumn  beef  prices  in the future  declined  to its lowest  level namely,  safety  net 
price (£1.725  per kg of carcase)  this would  be the equivalent  to about  £93 per 
100 kg live. This is £12 per 100 kg higher  than the £81 per 100 kg identified  
as the price  payable  for stores  in Table  17. In such circumstances  farmers  selling
Table 17
Price payable  for steers  in autumn  - *winter  finishing
Purchase  Price (P) Total Sales less Total Costs and Profit Margin
Sale Price Rel. to 1992 (i) 10% Reduction (ii) 20% Reduction
Excluding  Slaughter  Premium
(P) = 778 - 280 692 - 264
£ per Animal = 498 428
£ per 100 kg = 91 78
Including  Slaughter  Premium
(P) = 836 - 286 750 - 273
£ per Animal = 550 477
£ per 100 kg. = 100 87
* This price assumes  that winter  finishing  yields  the same  total farm income  as the fully 
integrated  calf to beef system  (suckling).
90
Table 18
Store to beef production  - summer  grazing
The System:  Purchase  Continental  Steers in April
Sell Half in July and Half in October/November
Details:
Purchase  Weight  
Sale Weight: July 
Oct.
St. Rate at Turn Out/Ha500 kg
630 kg Live, 340 kg carcase  
690 kg Live, 373 kg. carcase  
2470 kg = 4.94 animals
store in the autumn  will carry them on to beef  rather  than take the very much  
lower  store  price. The competitiveness  of autumn  store  price  is, of course,  even 
worse  if the beef price declined  by only 15% rather  than 25% or safety net 
price.  Even  in the more  favourable  circumstances  when  the slaughter  premium  
is available  for winter  finishing  the price  payable  for autumn  stores  by farmers  
engaged  in winter  finishing  vis a vis autumn  beef  prices  is still not competitive.  
Against  the background  it is difficult  to see the continuation  of winter  finishing  
as a specialised  system  of production.  This would  have serious  implications  
for balancing  seasonal  supply.
System  4 Store to Beef - Summer  Grazing
Details  of the system  are specified  in Table 18 to 21. The data in Table  21 
show  the prices  payable  in April  for continental  store  bullocks  so that the same  
level of income  per hectare  is obtainable  from summer  grazing  as that from  
the suckled  calf to beef system  which  has been described  earlier  in this paper  
(System  2),
It can be seen from  Table 17 that when  beef  prices  decline  by 15% and 25%
Table 19
Costs and profit margin  per animal  - summer  grazing
Variable 52
Overhead 30
Interest* 25
Total Costs 107
Profit Margin** 62
Total Cost + Profit 169
Interest  on Half Stock + Variable  Costs
** This margin  is set at the same level as the average  of calf to beef (suckling)  (£304/  
ha) at the 15% reduction  in beef price. The comparable  margin  per animal  at the 
25% reduction  in beef price is £43.
91
Table 20.
Sales - summer  grazing
Sale Price (i) 15% Reduction (ii) 25% Reduction
P/kg Car. 195.5 172.5
£/animal 665 July 587 July
fVanimal 729 Oct. 643 Oct
fVanimal  (Average) 697 615
from the levels  obtaining  in 1992 the price payable  for stores  in April is £106  
per 100 kg and £93 per 100 kg respectively.  The liveweight  price of beef in 
spring  as estimated  earlier  for Systems  2 and 3 is £112 and £100 per 100 kg 
respectively  at the 10% and 20% levels  of reduction.  These  are not that much  
higher  than the prices  payable  in Table 17. Against  this background  it would  
seem that summer  grazing  will continue  in the future  to remain  a competitive  
system  of production.
Table 21
Price payable  for steers  in spring*  - summer  grazing
Purchase  Price (P)= Total Sales less Total Costs + Profit
Beef Price Reduction 15% 25%
(P) 697 - 169 615 - 150
£ per animal 528 465
fVlOO kg 106 93
* This price  assumes  that summer  grazing  yields  the same  total farm income  as the Calf 
to Beef System  (Suckling).
Summary
It is clear that beef price reductions  below  about  £2.00  per kg of carcase  
will cause severe  income  problems  for cattle producers  even with the 
continuation  of premia  at their present  level.
The continuation  of winter  finishing  may have  difficulty  in remaining  viable  
in future  if there is not a substantial  break with the historical  beef/store  price  
relationship.
It appears  that summer  grazing  even in the absence  of premia  may continue  
to be a competitive  system  of production.
The contribution  of premia  to total farm income  is enormous  - ranging  from 
about  85% to 125%  depending on the level  of beef  price  reduction  in the systems  
examined  in this paper.
The need to improve  efficiency  and reduce  costs  are paramount  and present  
a major  challenge  for the future.
92
REPS  for Cattle  Farmers
F. RATH
Department  of Agriculture,  Food and Forestry,  Dublin.
In this paper  the relevance  of REPS  for cattle  farmers  is assessed.  Firstly,  
the criteria  that must be complied  with by all REPS  participants  are outlined,  
then some  relevant  statistics  are examined and thirdly,  the grassland  management  
undertakings  that must be followed  are set out.
The Scheme  is open to all farmers  with more  than 3 hectares  who undertake  
a REPS  environmental  plan  for at least  5 years. The  farmer  will receive  payment  
of approximately  £50 per acre on up to a maximum  of 99 acres each year for 
five years.  Total payments  over the five years  to an individual  farmer  for a 40 
ha farm would  be 25,000  ECU or approx  £24,400.
The strategy  followed  in REPS is one of seeking  harmonisation  between  
agriculture  and the environment  based on the voluntary  actions  of farmers.  
Financing  of the undertakings  is 75% from the EU FEOGA  Guarantee  budget  
and 25% from the National  Exchequer.
This programme  encourages  farmers  to serve  society  as a whole  by offering  
incentives  to them,  to follow  farming  practices  compatible  with the increasing  
demands  for protection  of the environment  and natural resources,  for their  work  
as guardians  of the countryside  and for farming  in an extensive  and 
environmentally  friendly  manner.
Problems  to be resolved
The following  are some  of the main issues  that must be attended  to in this 
programme  if Ireland ’s rural environment  is to be protected:
- the continuing  deterioration  in water quality
- lack of maintenance  of the landscape  and the deteriorating  appearance  of 
the countryside
- loss of wildlife  habitats  and endangered  species  of flora and fauna.
A farmer  in the Scheme  must undertake  the following  measures  in respect  
of the areas farmed.
(i) follow  an appropriate  waste management,  timing  and fertiliser  plan 
prepared  for the total area of the farm;
(ii) adopt  a grassland management  plan for the farm  which  avoids  over-grazing  
and poaching;
(iii) retain  features  such as wetlands,  wildlife  habitats, hedgerows, stone walls;
(iv) maintain  field boundaries  in the interests  of stock control,  wildlife  and 
the scenic  appearance  of the area;
(v) protect  features  of historical  or archaeological  interest;
(vi) maintain  farmyards  in a tidy fashion  by among  other things:  -
- retaining  quality  farm buildings,  including  traditional  stone buildings  
in a good state of repair
93
- use of appropriate  roof and wall colours
- removing  worn out and unsightly  equipment;
(vii) cease  using herbicides  or pesticides  and fertilisers  on hedgerows,  fringe  
vegetation  of ponds  and streams;
(viii)  fence watercourses  to exclude  bovines;
(ix)
(X)
(xi)produce  tillage  crops,  apart from oats, without  the use of plant growth  
regulators,  without  burning  straw  and maintain  uncultivated  field margins  
and ensure  no nutrients  or sprays  are applied  to such margins; 
become  familiar  with environmentally  friendly  farming  practices;  
keep prescribed  farm records.
Nutrient  management  plan and fertiliser  nitrogen  limits
The maximum  permitted  level of total N for grassland  may not exceed  260 
kg/ha.  The permitted  level of organic N may  not exceed  170 kg/ha.  The planner  
is also required  to identify  areas within  the farm where  chemical  and organic  
N use must  be further  restricted  in accordance  with the environmental  sensitivity  
and the marginal  nature  of these areas.
The level of N produced  by the range  of livestock  types are set out in the 
REPS  Agri-Environmental  Specifications.  Some  absolute  maximum  stocking  
rates, assuming  all the organic  N is applied  to the applicants  grassland,  are as 
follows:
2 dairy cows per hectare  
2.6 suckler  cows per hectare  
11.3 lowland  ewes per hectare
Phosphorus  limits
The permitted  upper  limits of P application  for a range of soil fertility  levels/  
indices  for grazing  and silage/hay  are set out in Table 1.
Table 1
Phosphorus  for grazing,  silage/hay  (kg/ha)
Soil Index P
LevelP
GrazedP
Cut onceP
2nd or
3rd cut
1 0-3 mgs/kg 40 50 20
2 4-6 mgs/kg 30 40 15
3 7-10 mgs/kg 10 25 10
4 10-15 mgs/kg 0 15 5
> 15 mgs/kg 0 0 0
It is evident  from  the REPS  plans  submitted to date  and also from  the feedback 
received  in the context  of REPS  training  courses  that the specifications  which 
must be followed  is proving  to be a very useful learning  experience  for the 
REPS  planners.  The P content  of applied  animal  waste  has often been ignored.  
Too much P is being used by many of our intensive  farmers.
94
Complying  with nitrogen  limits
Table  2 shows  that based  on 1993 data  77% of all farms  could  comply  with 
the nitrogen  restrictions  with a further  6% who could comply  if minor  
adjustments  were adopted.
Over  90% of cattle  farms  could  comply  while  only 50% of farms  with dairy  
cows could  meet the required  specifications  for total N. Table  3 indicates  that 
86% of all farms  could  comply  with the organic  nitrogen  limit of 170 kgs/ha  
with 94% of cattle  farms  and 73%  of farms  with  dairy  cows  meeting  the organic  
nitrogen  restrictions.
Table 2
Distribution  of farms  by total Nitrogen  usage levels per hectare  (kg/ha)  (%)
System <80 kg 80 to 200 200 to 260 260 to 300 >300 kg
Farms  with dairy 3 28 19 11 39
COWS
Cattle farms 27 56 10 3 4
All farms  
excluding  tillage18 46 13 6 17
Source:  Unpublished  data from Teagasc  Farm Management  Survey, 1993
Table 3
Distribution  of farms  by organic  Nitrogen  levels per hectare  (kg/ha)  (%)
<60 60 to 140 140 to 170 170 to 190 >190
All farms excl. 19 53 14 5 9
tillage
Farms  with dairy 4 46 23 10 17
COWS
Cattle farms 28 60 7 2 4
Source;  Unpublished  Data from Teagasc  Farm Management  Survey,  1993
Table 4
Family  farm income  per hectare  by total Nitrogen  usage levels per hectare
(kgs/ha)  (%)
< 80 80 to 200 200 to 260 260 to 300 > 300 All
Cattle FFI/ha £70 £176 £278 £243 £277 £167
Farms  with £118 £278 £392 £434 £610 £466
dairy cows
Source:  Unpublished  data from Teagasc  Farm Management  Survey,  1993
Table  4 shows  that average  income  per hectare  for all cattle  farms in 1993 
was only about  one third of the average  income  of farms  with dairy cows.  The
95
REPS  incentive  payments  should  be more attractive  to the low income  cattle  
farmers  than their  more  prosperous  dairy  farmer  colleagues.  It is recommended  
that farmers  contemplating  joining  REPS  should  have a financial  assessment  
carried  out by an approved  REPS  planner  before  deciding  to participate.  For 
some  cattle  farmers,  in particular  those involved  in summer  grazing,  or those  
with satisfactory  pollution  control  facilities,  the cost of complying  with REPS  
would  be small.  For others  it may pay them  to make  adjustments  to their  current  
farming  system  in order  to qualify.  Overall,  the rewards  for most  cattle  farmers  
from joining  REPS are very good.
Grassland  management  undertakings
The objective  of this measure  is to promote  a sustainable  grassland  
management  regime  that avoids  poaching  (in particular  wetland  habitats),  
overgrazing  and soil erosion,  with consequential siltation  and nutrient  enrichment  
of surface  waters  and the protection  of habitats.
In assessing  the requirement  to achieve  this objective  the Planner  shall take 
account  of the following:
- The  extent  or otherwise  of damage  to grassland  by poaching  and overgrazing.
- Overgrazing  leading  to the damage  of heather  or other  natural  vegetation.
- Areas of the farm which  are sensitive  to degradation.
- Extent  of outwintering  of livestock  and its environmental  consequences.
- The extent,  or otherwise,  of soil erosion  and its consequential  effects.  
Where,  on any part of the farm, there are areas sensitive  to degradation  or
where  damage  under  the above  headings  is evident  the Planner  shall prepare  
a sustainable  Grassland  Management  Plan which  outlines  the necessary  changes  
to the current  farming  practices.
In the preparation  of the Grassland  Management  Plan the principal  points  
to be considered  are as follows;
1. The stock carrying  capacity  of the farm calculated  by reference  to the 
environmental  sensitivity  of areas within  the farm.
2. The period  for the year during  which specific  stock must be housed.
3. The period(s)  of the year  during  which  grazing  on specific  areas  of the farm,  
and by specific  animals  is permitted.
4. The livestock  housing,  feed storage  and waste facilities  required.
5. The grazing/conservation/feed  purchase  plan for the farm in order  to provide  
adequate  feed during  the year.
6. The land maintenance  required  to ensure  the sustainability  of the system.
7. The stocking  intensity  of share/s  in a commonage  shall be restricted  to that 
appropriate  for that commonage.
Pollution  control
Pollution  control  is a crucial  area in REPS. All work  which  has to be carried  
out must  be completed  during  the first year  of the plan.  The  detailed  rules  relating  
to the collection,  storage  and disposal  of farm wastes  are set out in the REPS  
specifications.  Grant  aid for necessary  investments  under  the CEP  scheme  when 
combined  with an up-front  REPS  payment  will go a long  way towards  bringing  
most cattle farmyards  up to required  standards.
96
Extending  the Grazing  Season  for Sheep
S. FLANAGAN
Teagasc,  Belclare  Research  Centre,  Tuam, Co. Galway.
The increasing  costs of grass silage  conservation  relative  to grazed  grass,  
together  with  the cost of labour, have  stimulated  interest in extending  the grazing  
season  into the winter  in order  to reduce  feeding  and housing  expenses.  Grazed  
grass costs about  4p per kg DM compared  with 8p for grass silage  and 9p for 
baled silage.
In spring  lambing  flocks December  and January  coincide  with mid-pregnancy  
when feeding  can be restricted  to a level which  is sufficient  to maintain  ewe 
bodyweight.  Winter  feed can be provided  by allowing  a supply  of grass to 
accumulate  in autumn  and by reserving  it for winter  grazing.  By using the 
technique  of grass budgeting  the flock  manager  can match  the supply  of grass  
to the requirements  of the flock.
In order  to demonstrate  this technique  under  Irish conditions  and to examine  
whether  any unforeseen  management  problems  arise, extended  grazing  was 
practised  at the Knockbeg  Sheep  Unit, Carlow  during  the two winters  1993/ 
94 and 1994/95.  In the context  of substituting  grazed  grass  for silage  the following  
questions  were addressed.
1. Can grass be utilised  in December/January  by using a grass budgeting  
technique?
2. What is the feed value of winter  grass?
3. What are the effects  of winter  grazing  on subsequent  grass growth?
The mid season farmlet  consists  of 14.5 ha of pasture  stocked  with  220 ewes
in a paddock  grazing/silage  conservation  system.  In early September  2.8 ha 
(1993)  and 2.5 ha (1994)  of pasture,  predominantly  perennial  ryegrass,  were 
closed  and dressed  with 45 kg N per ha following  tight grazing  in August  by 
weaned  ewes. The pasture  was allowed  to accumulate  until grazing  commenced  
in early December.  Grass yield was measured  in early December  by taking  
grass  clips at ground  level using  a 0.2 sq.metre  quadrat  (average  of 5 quadrats)  
and samples were  analysed  for dry matter,  digestibility  and crude  protein  content.
Pasture  allowance
Commencing  on December  8 in both years,  ewes in good condition  (1993  
n=150;  1994  n=200) and due to lamb in March  were  block  grazed using  portable  
electric  fencing.  The number  of ewes grazed  was determined  by the supply  of 
grass, as discussed  later. The remainder  of the flock was housed  in early  
December  and fed silage.  Pasture  allowance  for grazing  was fixed  at 1 kg DM 
per ewe per day. A backfence  was used to prevent  access  to the ground  already  
grazed  and thereby  to protect  recovery.  The flock was moved  daily with the 
exception  of one block  in December  1993 on which  the ewes were offered  a 
pasture  allowance  of 7 kg per head for 1 week. This allowance  proved  
unsatisfactory  as explained  later. After  grazing  was completed  the ewes were  
housed  for the final 6 weeks  before
97
Table 1
Pasture  sample  analyses
Date sampled 16/12/93 6/12/94
Dry matter,  g/kgDM 195 117
DMD,  g/kgDM 775 804
Crude  protein,  g/kgDM 295 281
Ash, g/kgDM 138 120
Estimated  ME, MJ/kgDM 11.0 11.2
lambing  and offered silage  ad libitum  plus concentrate  supplements.  The pasture  
was dressed  in early  February  with 45 kg fertiliser  N per ha in order  to promote  
regrowth.
To estimate  the influences  of winter  grazing  on supply  of grass in spring,  
cumulative  grass yields  were  measured  by taking  grass  clips  in March and  April 
on the areas which  were grazed  at the start, in the middle  and at the end of 
the winter  grazing  period,  namely,  December  13, January  1 and January  21.
Results:
(T) Pasture  quality
Results  on pasture  sample  analyses  are shown  in Table 1. The quality  of the 
pasture  was high. As already  stated,  the pasture  consisted  mainly  of perennial  
ryegrass  and the regrowth  after  intensive  grazing  in August  contained  very little 
stem. The sward  was green and leafy down to the base.
Crude  protein  content  was very high,  indicating  a high content  of N. A possible  
explanation  may lie in the system  of management.  The winter  grazing  area is 
part of a 15 ewes per ha grazing/silage  conservation  system  and was dressed  
with N fertiliser  on three  occasions  earlier  in the season:  for early  grass,  silage  
conservation  and silage  aftermaths,  amounting  to 175 kg N per ha. The dense  
stocking  during  August  probably  produced  a high  return  rate of dung  and urine,  
resulting  in considerable  N recycling.  Moreover,  a further 45 kg N per ha were  
applied  in early September.  The combined  effects  of these N inputs,  together  
with the leafmess  of the sward  and the slower  rate of grass accumulation  in 
autumn  relative  to spring  and summer,  were the likely  factors  contributing  to 
the high crude protein  content.
(21 Grazing  capacity
Results  on ewe grazing  capacity  and ewe liveweights  pre- and post-grazing  
are shown  in Table  2. In 1993 the supply  of pasture  was estimated  at 2160 kg 
DM per ha and to provide  a daily  ration  of 1 kg DM per ewe, the pasture  was 
block  grazed  at a stocking  rate of 1 ewe per 5 sq. metres  per day. It was estimated  
that the supply  of grass on offer  would  feed 150 ewes for 6 weeks. This  estimate  
was confirmed  in practice;  2.8 ha carried  150 ewes for 44 days from 8/12/93 
to 21/1/94.
98
Table 2
Ewe grazing  capacity  of winter  pasture
1993/94 1994/95
Area of pasture,  ha 2.8 2.5
Grazing  commenced 8/12/93 8/12/94
Grazing  completed 21/1/94 23/1/95
Yield, kg DM/ha 2160
(7/12/93)4274
(6/12/94)
Pasture  allowance,  kg DM/ewe/day 1.0 1.0
Pasture  allowance,  sq.m/ewe/day 5.0 2.5
No. ewes grazed 150 200
No. ewes grazed/ha 53 80
Ewe liveweight,  kg - 8/12/93 67.1 60.6
- 21/1/94 66.4 60.9
Pasture  supply  in December  1994  was twice  that of 1993.  Thus,  ewe carrying  
capacity  was estimated  at about 100 ewes per ha for 6 weeks.  It was therefore  
decided  to graze  the whole  flock  except  ewes with condition  scores  under  2.5, 
i.e. 20 ewes which  were housed  and offered  silage  ad libitum.  To repeat  the 
daily pasture  allowance  of 1 kg DM per ewe,  the stocking  rate in 1994/95  was 
increased  to 2 ewes per 5 sq. metres  per day. In very wet spells,  e.g. 20mm  
rainfall  per day, this level  of stocking  intensity  resulted  in poaching.  Increasing  
the daily allowance  to 1.5kg DM per ewe, that is, reducing  the stocking  rate 
to 1.3 ewes  per 5 sq.metres  per day alleviated  the problem. Ewe  carrying  capacity  
was 80 ewes  per ha for 46 days.  Results  on grass  recovery  in spring  are awaited.
The feeding  value  of the pasture  and the adequacy  of the daily allowance  
may be assessed  from ewe hveweight  recorded  before  and after  winter  grazing.  
Table  2 shows  that the changes  in liveweight  were  neglible.  These  results  relate  
to ewes that were in good condition  post-mating  and show that high quality  
autumn  saved  pasture  grazed  at an allowance  of 1 kg DM per ewe was adequate  
for maintaining  liveweight.
(31 Grass  recovery  in snriny
Grass yields  in spring 1994 are shown  in Table 3. Yields  in March  were  
significantly  lower  on January  grazed  pastures  than on that grazed  in December.  
Although  there were no ungrazed  plots in this trial, the results  are consistent  
with previous  findings  at Belclare.
In contrast  to March,  grass  yields  in April  were  high indicating  good responses  
to the additional  month ’s rest. Although  the yields  of January  grazed  pasture  
were  again  lower  than that grazed  in December,  yields  of 1967 to 2672  kg DM 
per ha were considered  to be very satisfactory  for April, relative  to the feed 
requirements  of lactating  ewes when stocked  at 15 per ha.
99
Table 3
Grass  yield in spring  (kg/DM/ha)
March  7 April 5
Grazed  on December  13 1163 2672
Grazed  on January  1 598 1967
Grazed  on January  21 767 2101
The relatively  low yield of grass in March  on the January  grazed  areas was 
not a major  constraint  because  it constituted  less than 20% of the farm and the 
full stocking  rate was not achieved  until lambing  was completed  in early  April.
As stated  earlier,  the system  of grazing  in this trial was based on daily  shifts,  
with a back fence  to prevent  access  to pasture  already  grazed  and thereby  to 
protect  recovery.  Thus, plant  defoliation  was for one day only. In contrast,  the 
conventional  system  of continuous  grazing  is likely  to result  in the depletion  
of plant root reserves  and in poaching,  thus delaying  grass growth.
High rainfall
Rainfall  levels (mm) recorded  nearby  at Oakpark  Research  Centre  were:
December January
1993/94  141 121
1994/95 98 209
1968/90  Average  75 86
Although  the months  of December  and January  were  exceptionally  wet, no
flock management  or health  problems  arose. Pasture  damage  was caused  on 
one occasion  in December  1993 when it was decided  to extend  the duration  
of the shift to 1 week by increasing  the pasture  allowance  to 7 kg per head. 
The reason  for this change  was to give the flock a larger  area during  a spell 
of wet weather.  However,  most of the allowance  was consumed  within  5 days  
and the area was severely  poached  over the remaining  2 days.
Silage  and housing  costs reduced
In order to facilitate  grass growth  for spring  lambing  ewes it is necessary  
to vacate  pastures  in early to mid-December.  Unless  forage  crops  or roots are 
available, the ewes must  be housed  or confined  and fed silage  or hay until lambing 
in March,  a period  of about 12 weeks.  The results  reported  here show  that this 
housing  period  was reduced  to 6 weeks by the provision of autumn  saved  pasture  
for winter  grazing.
Estimates  of the financial  savings  gained  by extending  the grazing  season 
and reducing  the housing  period  from 12 weeks  to 6 weeks  for a flock of 200 
ewes are summarised  in Table  4. For a 12 week  housing  period,  the inputs  per 
ewe are: 0.5 tonne  silage  @ £7; 25 kg concentrates  @ £167 per tonne,  5 bales  
of straw @ 75p per bale. In the case of hired labour,  experience  at Knockbeg  
shows  that about 1.5 man hours  per day are required  for feeding,  bedding  and
100
Table 4
Estimated  costs of wintering  200 March  lambing  ewes (£)
(1)
Housed  for 12 weeks(2)
Grazed  for 6 weeks  
Housed  for 6 weeks
300 m Electric  fencing  @ £50
depreciated  over 5 years 60
100 Tonnes  silage 1400 14 Man hours, wage 80
1000 Bales of straw 750 50 Tonnes  silage 700
5 Tonnes  of concentrates 835 Bales of straw 375
2985 5 Tonnes  of concentrates 835
2050
Per ewe 14.92 Per ewe 10.25
Labour: Labour;
126 Man hours 716 65 Man hours 369
Per ewe 3.58 Per ewe 1.84
supervising  200 ewes,  amounting  to 126 man hours  for a 12-week  period  and 
charged  at the wage  rate of £4.75  per hour  plus overtime  at week-ends. However, 
on many sheep  farms  the opportunity  cost of the farmers  own labour  may be 
considerably  lower  than  that shown  here. If so, the value  for man hours  should  
be adjusted  accordingly.
For the management  of extended  grazing  the primary  inputs  are portable  
electric  fencing  for allocating  grass  on a daily  basis and labour  for moving  the 
fences.  In addition  to the front  and back fences  for allocating  grass on a given  
day, managing  the daily shifts is easier  if a second  front fence is installed  in 
advance  of the shift. Thus,  for convenience  three  fences  are recommended,  e.g. 
for a field that is 100 m wide,  300 m of fencing  are required  for block  grazing  
200 ewes;  the cost is about  £1 per m. The time required  for moving  fences  and 
inspecting  the flock was 0.3 man hours per day, equivalent  to 14 man hours  
for the 6 week period.
The figures  in Table 4 show that extended  grazing  offers the opportunity  
for considerable  savings  in the costs  of sheep  flock  management  during  winter,  
a total of £6.41 per ewe in the example  shown.  These values  should be interpreted  
in the light of conditions  on individual  farms.
How is the build up of autumn  grass achieved?
The closure  of autumn  pastures  for winter  grazing  coincides  with the need 
to provide  adequate  supplies  of grass  for ewes  during  mating.  To reconcile  these  
requirements,  a management  plan should  be drawn  up on a whole  farm basis.
At Knockbeg,  extended  grazing  resulted  in a 50% reduction  in silage  
requirements  for ewes that were winter  grazed  i.e. from 0.5 to 0.25 tonne  per 
ewe. This has removed  the need for closing  2.5 ha of pasture  for 8 weeks  in
101
July/August  for late cut silage.  Instead,  this extra grass is carried  forward  for 
grazing  during  the breeding  season  when the winter  grazing  area is closed.
The silage  feed budget  for the 220 ewe flock  is now conserved  in one early  
cut off 3 ha (20% of farm) in late May, about  75 tonnes  of silage.
How many hectares  of autumn  pasture  should  be closed?  The answer  depends  
on the competing  demands  for grass in the autumn,  the overall  stocking  rate 
on the farm and the expected  yield of grass in early December.  The priorities  
must  be ranked  and if grass  is required  for finishing  lambs or  for other  livestock  
in the September  to November  period,  the opportunity  for closing  up and 
accumulating  a bank of grass for extended  grazing  may be limited.
When  the annual  stocking  rate is high, e.g. 15 ewes per ha, it is difficult  
to accumulate  sufficient  supplies  of autumn  grass for extended  grazing  on a 
whole  flock basis.
At lower  stocking  rates,  e.g. 10 ewes  per ha, there  is considerable  scope  for 
extended  grazing.  Thus,  on a 40 ha farm  stocked  with 400 ewes,  8 ha of autumn  
saved  pasture  with a DM yield  similar  to that of 1993/94  in Table  2 will provide  
maintenance  feeding  for 6 weeks  in December/January.  By planning  a system,  
a flock  of 400 ewes  can be readily  managed  in autumn  on 32 ha, i.e. 12.5 ewes  
per ha, thus releasing  8 ha for winter  grazing.
Less farmyard  waste
Less silage and a shorter  housing  period  have implications  for the 
environment.  Reductions  in silage  effluent  and in the amount  of manure  from  
housed  animals  result in easier  control  and disposal  of farmyard  wastes.
102
What  Irish Farmers  Need from EU 
Sheep  Policy
J. ELMORE
IFA National  Sheep Committee,  Irish Farm Centre,  Dublin  12.
At the IFA Annual  General  Meeting  the Minister  for Agriculture,  Food and 
Forestry,  Mr. Ivan  Yates  said: “The EU average  method  of calculating  the ewe 
premium  is unfair  to Ireland.  There  are a number  of options  that we can pursue  
and I want to discuss  these options,  select  those that are most'favourable  for 
Ireland  and pursue  them in Brussels ”. The Minister ’s recognition  that there  are 
problems  in the sheep  sector  and his commitment  to take  action  is a good starting  
point.
The reality  of a £12 million  cut in ewe premium  payment  to sheep  farmers  
and the prospect  of an extra 20,000  tonnes  of New Zealand  lamb imports  are 
two of the problems  to be confronted.  The shortcomings  in EU policy  have  
adversely  affected  Irish sheep farmers  over the last two years; ewe numbers  
have declined;  3,300  flock  owners  have ceased  production;  incomes  on sheep  
farms are down 35% since 1988.
Fundamental  changes  in the EU Sheepmeat  policy  are necessary  if sheep  
farmers ’ incomes  are to be restored.  Major  challenges  on lamb price, flock  
productivity  and production  costs also have to be tackled  if the competitive  
position  of Irish sheep farming  is to be maintained.
Inequitable  system
The underlying  principle  which  paved  the way in 1989 for Farm Ministers  
agreement  on the Single  European  method  of Ewe Premium  calculation  was 
the prediction  by the Commission  that lamb prices  throughout  Europe  would  
converge  by 1992.  In such circumstances,  the Commission  argued  that it would  
be fair to pay all EU sheep producers  the same level of Ewe Premium  
compensation.  In theory  the Commission  was right; in fact history  has proven  
them to be wrong.  Lamb  prices  have not converged  as anticipated.  In addition,  
UK lambs  prices  have  not improved  sufficiently  since  the abolition of the Variable  
Premium  and are unlikely to  close  the gap with Europe  in the foreseeable  future.
Meanwhile,  Irish sheep  producers  are receiving  up to 66p/kg  less for lamb  
than their colleagues  in France  & Belgium,  yet this system  pays the same  level 
of Ewe Premium  compensation.  Clearly  this is an inequitable  policy.
A return  to the Single  country  method  of calculating  income  loss is the only 
sure method  that can guarantee  Irish sheep  farmers  full and fair Ewe Premium  
compensation.  In money  terms,  this year, if we were operating  on the Single  
country  method,  we could  look forward  to a Ewe Premium  payment  of £25.11/  
head  as opposed  to £ 17.88/head  under  the present system.  Based on our national  
quota  of 4.97 million  ewes,  this would  put an extra  £36 million  into the pockets  
of Irish sheep farmers.
103
Other  flaws
Any sound  method  of long term income  protection  for sheep  farmers  must  
be inflation  proof.  Again  the current  policy  is flawed  in this respect.  The basic  
price which is used to calculate  the Ewe Premium  has been reduced  by 14 
ECU/100  kgs (13p/kg)  since 1990. Meanwhile  sheep farmers  must contend  
with general  inflation  and rising production  costs. To adequately  protect  
compensation  in the longer  term,  IFA is proposing  that the basic  price  be linked  
to an EU inflationary  index and adjusted  automatically  each year.
Stabilisers  were introduced  in May 1988 in an attempt  by the Commission  
to stop the rapid expansion  taking  place in sheep flocks  throughout  the 
Community,  particularly  in Ireland,  UK and France.  In the 1992 CAP  Reform,  
individual  production  quotas  put an end to any further  expansion  in sheep  
numbers.  IFA is now proposing  that the stabiliser  mechanism  be abolished.  
This move would  increase  the 1994 Ewe Premium  by £4.57/head.
IFA proposals
The exodus  from sheep  farming  in the lowland  areas is evidence  of income  
difficulties  on these  farms.  Clearly, there  is a sound  case for additional  premium  
compensation  here. IFA is proposing  that the Rural  World  Premium  worth  £5.37/  
ewe be paid on all sheep in Objective  I regions  in the EU, so that all Irish 
producers  would  qualify.
In view  of the fact that ewes  are included in the calculation of stocking  density  
for Extensification  Premium,  there is no good reason  why sheep should  not 
receive  this premium.  IFA is proposing  that the Extensification  Premium  be 
extended  to sheep  and paid on a livestock  unit basis  to producers  who conform  
to the necessary  stocking  rate requirements.  This would  be worth  £4.39/ewe  
to eligible  producers.
In the GATT Agreement  EU Farm Ministers  agreed  to allow an additional  
20,000  tonnes  of New Zealand  imports.  It appears  that Europe  raised  no real 
opposition  to increased  imports  in these negotiations.  It is surprising  how 
European  Agriculture  Ministers  could  on the one hand sanction strict  production  
quotas  to limit  their  own producers, while  on the other  hand  agree huge  increases  
in imports  from outside  the Community.
In order  to minimise  the negative  price impact  of these increased  imports,  
IFA is proposing  that the 12,500  tonne  limit  on chilled  product  from  New  Zealand 
be reinstated.  In addition  the EU should  insist  that imports  are evenly  spread  
throughout  the year, and restricted  to whole  carcasses  as opposed  to primal  
cuts.
With a fourteen  fold variation  in lamb consumption  among  EU Member  
States,  the potential  for further  growth  is enormous.  Sheepmeat  promotion  
deserves  proper  funding.
Quality  can be measured  by classification  and a premium  price  is available  
for quality  lamb.  The absence  of a national  classification  scheme  is not in the 
best interest  of Irish sheep  producers.  All concerned  must  re-double  the efforts  
to have a properly  structured  scheme  introduced  without  delay.
104
Definition  of eligible  ewes
When  the change  in definition  of ‘eligible  ewes ’ was negotiated  in 1992,  
the benefit  of removing  the confusion  at Ewe  Premium  inspections  was obvious.  
However,  this change  was never intended  to encourage  dry sheep  farming.  This 
is a negative  development  with serious  implications  for national  sheep  output,  
farm productivity  and farm incomes. I am convinced  that a solution  which  retains  
the present  eligible  ewe definition  and discourages  dry sheep  farming  can be 
found.  In the interests  of the Irish sheep  sector  a solution  to the problem  must  
be worked  out sooner  rather  than later.
In summary,  these  are the EU policy  changes which IFA believe  are necessary  
to protect  the incomes  of Irish sheep  farmers  in the years ahead.  Negotiating  
a change  in the method  of Ewe Premium  calculation  is the priority  issue.  The 
Minister  for Agriculture  has already  displayed  a real willingness  to tackle  the 
problems  in the sheep  sector.  Delivery  of tangible  results  in the months  ahead  
will be the real measure  of success.
On behalf  of the IFA National  Sheep  Committee  I wish to thank the Irish  
Grassland  Association  for their tremendous  efforts  over the years  on behalf  of 
sheep  farmers.  Your  Association  has proven  itself  to be a real catalyst  for change  
in the management  of Ireland ’s greatest  national  resource,  green grass.
105
Evaluation  of Crossbred  Ewe Types
J. P. HANRAHAN
Teagasc,  Belclare  Research  Centre,  Tuam, Co. Galway.
Ewe productivity  has always  been an important  determinant  of economic  
performance  of sheep  production  systems.  With  the introduction  of quotas  and 
support  systems  designed  to limit  stocking  rates,  individual  animal  productivity  
assumes  an added  importance.  A major  objective  of Teagasc ’s sheep  breeding  
research  programme,  over the years,  has been to identify  and develop  genetic  
resources  which  can be exploited  to increase  ewe productivity.  It is sobering  
to note that when  the weaning  percentages  for mid-season  flocks  are examined,  
at national  level, there is no evidence  for any improvement  over the past 15 
years.
Production  efficiency
The basic objective  of the lowland  sheep industry  should  be to produce  
carcasses  of good quality  as efficiently  as possible.  Efficiency  is a function  of 
output  relative  to inputs;  in this context  biological  efficiency  can be defined  
as the liveweight  of lamb produced  per unit  of food input  to the combined  “ewe 
-I- lamb(s) ” unit. Using results  at Belclare  on herbage  intake  by ewes and  lambs,  
the annual food intakes  by ewes  and their  lambs  have  been  calculated  for various 
conditions.  The following  conclusions  can be made:
(i) Herbage  intake  by ewes  depends  on body size, stage  of lactation  and the 
number  of lambs  being  suckled.  Large  ewes  consume  more  than smaller  
ewes; intake  peaks at weeks  6 to 7 of lactation.  Ewes suckling  twins  
consume  more feed than ewes suckling  singles  and dry ewes consume  
the least.
(ii) Herbage  intake  by lambs increases  from near zero at 4 weeks  of age. 
Twins  consume  more  than singles  pre-weaning  and differences  between  
singles  and twins are not detectable  post-weaning.
The foregoing  information  provides  the basis for calculating  the annual  
efficiency  of a ewe as a function  of litter  size (Table  1). The results  clearly  show 
the biological  advantage  of prolific  ewes and this is reflected  in results  on the 
economic impact  of prolificacy  on income  per ewe. Information  from  two sources 
is summarised  in Table 2. Firstly,  analysis  of information  from the Farm  
Management  Survey  for the years 1988 to 1992 for lowland  mid-season  flocks 
provides  an estimate  of the impact  of increasing  the number  of lambs  reared  
per ewe by 0.1, on gross  margin  per ewe. This estimate  is based  on comparison  
of the middle  third  of flocks  (ranked  on number  of lambs reared per ewe  joined)  
with the corresponding  top third.
The FMS data yielded  an estimate  of gain in gross margin  which is very 
close to that produced  a few years ago using a farm management  accounting  
analysis  approach.  Similar  estimates  of response  to increases in prolificacy have 
been routinely  reported  for UK lowland  flocks by the Meat and Livestock
106
Commission.  There  can be little argument,  based on the foregoing  evidence,  
that increasing  the number  of lambs  reared  per ewe can make  a major  contribution  
to profitability  of the sheep  enterprise.
Table 1
Estimates  of total annual  organic  matter  intake  (kg) by ewes and Iambs
Ewe with 
singleEwe with 
twins
(a) Intake  by ewe (kg) 540 571
(b) Total intake by lamb(s)  (kg) 41 112
(c) Total weight  of lamb at 18 weeks (kg) 39.4 65.4
Efficiency  = c/(a-i-b) 0.068 0.096
Twin Single 1.41
Table 2
Estimates  of the impact  of ewe productivity  change  oneconomic  performance
Source Measure  of 
performanceResponse  to an increase  
of 0.1 in lambs reared  
per ewe joined  
(£/ewe)
Farm Management'  
survey  (1988 to 1991)Gross margin  
per ewe -1-3.08
P. Mahon^,  Teagasc,  
AthenryFarm Income  
from sheep enterprise -1-3.01
' FMS data  on flocks  grouped  according  to weaning  percentage  and comparing  middle  and top one- 
third groups.  No evidence  for differences  between  these  groups  with respect  to stocking  rate, lamb  
sale price  or the proportion  sold as stores  although  the high weaning  percentage  group  sold a larger  
proportion  as stores in 3 out of 4 years (average  3%).
^Unpublished  report
Crossbred  ewes from hill breeds
Crossbred  ewes from hill-breed  mothers  represent  a potentially  important  
source  of replacements  for lowland  flocks.  A study was initiated  in the 1980 ’s 
with  the objective  of evaluating  the productivity  of ewes sired by various  breeds  
out of Scottish  Blackface  and Cheviot  mothers.  This report  concerns  the 
reproductive  performance  and bodyweight  of the various  crossbred  ewe types  
evaluated.
A flock  of Scottish  Blackface  ewes,  originally  maintained  at the  Maam  Hill 
Farm and subsequently  maintained  at Creagh  Research  Station,  was used to 
produce  crossbred  ewes.  The breeds  of ram used were Belclare,  Blue Leicester,  
Border  Leicester,  Cheviot, Galway,  Suffolk  and Texel.  In addition contemporary
107
Table 3
Summary  of number  of records  per ewe breed  and average  mating  weight
Sire of
eweEwes
Joined  (no.)Ewes
lambed  (no.)Ovulation  
rate (no.)Mating  
wt (kg)
Belclare 492 464 282 61
Blue Leicester 357 325 214 70
Border  Leicester 332 315 197 66
Cheviot 118 102 62 59
Galway 117 97 61 61
Suffolk 197 181 120 68
Texel 289 271 167 65
S. Blackface 211 186 141 61
purebred S. Blackfaces  were  produced  in the first 3 years.  Rams  from  the Belclare 
breed were used each year while the representation  of the remaining  breeds  
varied.  Thus,  Galway  and Cheviot  rams were used for the first two years  only 
whereas  Suffolk  and Texel  were  only involved  in later  years.  All female  progeny  
were  retained  for evaluation  and were  reared  together  in a single  flock.  Evaluation 
involved  a minimum  of three  joinings,  to yield lambing  performance  data at 
2,3 and 4 years  of age. In addition  to lambing  data,  ovulation  rate was determined  
by laparoscopy  for all ewes prior to joining  at 1.5 and 2.5 years of age and 
again after the first mating  of the joining  period.  During  the evaluation  phase  
all the ewes in the flock were  joined  with terminal  sires in a mid-season  lamb 
production  system.  The flock was located  at Creagh  from 1983 to 1989 and 
at Blindwell  until 1993.
The potential  of the Cheviot  as a source  of crossbred  ewes for prime  lamb  
production  has been examined  at the Knockbeg  Sheep  Unit, Carlow.  A flock  
of Cheviot  ewes was established  in 1985 and mated with Belclare, Blue  Leicester  
and Suffolk  rams.  Again,  all the female  progeny  were retained  for evaluation  
and were managed  together  in a single  flock, originally  at Knockbeg  and in 
recent  years contract  reared  on a private  farm (Belclare  and Suffolk  only).
Results  and Discussion
S. Blackface  crosses.  The number  of records  for the principal  traits  and the 
mean  liveweight  at mating  are given  in Table  3 for each  breed  type. Blue  Leicester  
cross  ewes  were  heaviest,  Cheviot  cross  was lightest  and, surprisingly,  Galway  
cross ewes were only 2 kg heavier  than the Cheviot  cross and equal to the 
Belclare  cross type. The relatively  low bodyweight  of the Galway  cross and 
Cheviot  crosses  many be partly  due to the fact that these were all produced  
in the first 2 years of the study when the S. Blackface  flock was maintained  
in a hill environment  and ewe lambs were removed  to lowland  in August/  
September.
108
Table 4
Ewe age effects  on bodyweight  and reproductive  performance
Ewe age 
at lambingNo. of
ewesBodyweight
(kg)Fertility Ovulation
rateLitter
sizeLambs  reared  
per ewe joined
2 750 53 0.87 1.48 1.21 1.02
3 672 63 0.92 1.75 1.54 1.38
4 716 68 0.91 — 1.66 1.43
Overall' 2309 62 0.91 — 1.68 1.35
'Includes  ewes older than 4 years
The effects  of age on performance  are summarised  in Table 4  and show  that 
2-year  old ewes were considerably  lighter  and had lower reproductive  
performance  than the two older  categories  while  4-year  old ewes had the best 
performance.  The least squares  means  for reproductive  performance  of the 
various  crossbred  types  are given  in Table 3. The results  show  that the Belclare  
cross  yielded  significantly  better  reproductive  performance  than any other  breed 
for all traits with the exception  of fertility.  Ibr the latter trait the levels were  
equal  for Belclare  cross,  Border  Leicester  cross  and the purebred  S. Blackface,  
with the Cheviot  and Galway  crosses  being significantly  lower.  The number  
of lambs reared  per ewe joined  provides  an overall  index of reproductive  
performance.  The Belclare  cross ewes yielded  the best performance  while  
Cheviot,  Galway  crosses  and S. Blackface  were poorest  and the other types  
were  intermediate.  The Blue  Leicester  cross  group  was the closest  to the Belclare  
cross  but was still significantly lower  (P<0.05).  When  this is taken  in conjunction  
with the difference  of 9 kg in liveweight  it is concluded  that the Belclare  cross  
is substantially  more efficient  in overall  production.
The breed  differences  in litter size reflect  the differences  in ovulation  rate 
(see Table  5) and when litter size (at 2 and 3 years of age) was adjusted  for
Table 5
Reproductive  performance  of crossbred  ewe types produced  from S. Blackface
mothers
Sire of
eweOvulation
rateFertility Litter
sizeNo. lambs reared  per ewe
Joined  Lambing
Belclare 1.90 0.94 1.89 1.54 1.63
Blue Leicester 1.62 0.91 1.71 1.38 1.52
Border 1.51 0.94 1.60 1.36 1.43
Leicester 1.57 0.86 1.51 1.11 1.27
Cheviot 1.62 0.83 1.63 1.20 1.44
Galway 1.50 0.91 1.65 1.33 1.45
Suffolk 1.52 0.93 1.58 1.33 1.43
Texel
S. Blackface1.53 0.94 1.48 1.18 1.34
109
ovulation  rate at mating,  breed differences  were no longer  significant.  This 
indicates  that there are unlikely  to be any important  differences  among  these  
breed  types  with respect  to embryo  survival.  The analysis  also showed  that the 
differences  in litter size between  2- and 3-year  old ewes could not be fully  
explained  by associated  differences  in ovulation  rate. Consequently  it is likely 
that fertilisation  rate and/or  embryo  survival  may be impaired  in these young  
ewes.
The results  of this study show that the Belclare  sires produced  crossbred  
ewes out of S. Blackface  dams  which  were  significantly  more  productive  than 
any of the other crosses  examined.  The difference  relative  to Blue Leicester  
crosses,  which  had the second  highest  reproductive  performance,  was 16 extra  
lambs  per 100 ewes  joined.  When compared  with crossbred  ewes  sired by rams  
from breeds  commonly  used as terminal  sires (Suffolk,  Texel)  the advantage  
of the Belclare  cross  was 21 extra  lambs  per 100 ewes  joined.  These  differences  
represent  large potential  increases  in income  per ewe. Thus, using estimates  
from the Farm Management  Survey  for the effect  of number  reared  on gross  
margin,  the Belclare  crossbreds  should  yield  an extra  gross margin  of £4 to £6 
per ewe.
Cheviot  Crosses:  Results  on the comparative  performance  of the Cheviot-  
cross ewe types at Knockbeg  are shown  in Table 6. Again,  it is evident  that 
crosses  sired by the Belclare  out-performed  all others with respect  of ewe 
productivity.  This result  is consistent  with those given above  for crosses  out 
of S. Blackface  dams.
Table 6
Performance  of crossbred  ewes at Knockbeg  (1990 to 1993)
Sire of
eweNo.
joinedMating  
wt (kg)Fertility
(%)Litter
sizeLambs  reared  
per ewe joined
Belclare 476 61 94 1.87 1.62
Blue Leicester 277 67 92 1.78 1.47
Suffolk 461 68 91 1.72 1.42
Suffolk-x-Cheviot  ewe types  are commonly  used on lowland  farms  and the 
results  in Table  4 show that output  can be significantly  increased  by replacing  
them with the Belclare  cross (20 extra lambs  per 100 ewes  joined).  Moreover,  
many  of the Suffolk-cross  ewes  on lowland  farms  in Leinster  are not first cross  
types and, consequently,  benefit  less from heterosis  (hybrid  vigour)  in 
reproductive  performance  than the maximum  achieved  when first crosses  are 
used.
Crosses  with French  breeds:  We have no direct information  on the 
performance  of crossbred  ewes sired by French  breeds  such as Vendeen,  
Charollais,  Rouge  de I’Ouest.  At present  a small sample  of Bleu du Maine  
crossbreds  is being evaluated  and preliminary  results  suggest  that they are only 
marginally  better than Suffolk-crosses.  Information  (unpublished)  from
no
reasonably  large scale trials in the U.K., involving  Bleu du Maine  and Rouge  
de rOuest  crossbreds,  have  shown  that the prolificacy  of Rouge-crosses  is just 
about  equivalent  to Blue  Leicester  crossbreds  while  Bleu du Maine  crosses  are 
somewhat  lower.  This pattern  is consistent  with what we know about the 
prolificacy  of the French  breeds,  as purebreds,  in France  (Bodin  and Elsen,  
1989).  This information  is summarised  in Table 7.
Table 7
Estimates  of natural  prolificacy  of sheep breeds  in France:  mature  ewes only 
(i.e. excluding  2 y.o. and yearlings)
Breed No. of 
recordsLitter
sizeDeviation  from 
(Suffolk  + Texel)
Charollais 19109 1.77 0.14
Bleu du Maine 11350 1.86 0.23
Vendeen 70822 1.69 0.06
Berrichon  du Cher 13756 1.42 -0.21
Suffolk 19207 1.62 -0.01
Texel 34632 1.64 -1-0.01
Rouge  de I’Ouest 26671 1.81 0.18
He de France 94247 1.56 -0.07
It should  be noted that these values  have been obtained  under French  
conditions  and are on-farm  data so that breed  differences  must  be treated  with 
caution.  However,  the observations  cover  a 3-year  period  with at least 10,000 
lambing  records  per breed  and excluded  ewes treated  with PMSG.  A different  
set of data, based  on 1987 flock  recording  in France,  gave similar  mean  values.  
These  data suggest  that relative  to the Suffolk,  the Bleu du Maine  and Rouge  
de I’Ouest  have most potential  as prolific  sires although  their advantage  over 
the Charollais  is quite small.  The performance  data on Vendeen  puts the breed  
ahead  of the Suffolk  but slightly  behind  the Charollais.
Purebred  flocks  of Belclare,  Suffolk  and Texel are managed  together  at 
Belclare  Research  Centre  and litter size information  can be used to put the 
Belclare  performance  into the same context  as the French  results  by comparing  
it with the mean for Suffolk  and Texel ewes. The average  litter size for adult  
ewes in our Belclare  flock (1991 to 1993) was 2.13 compared  with 1.56 for 
the mean of Suffolk  and Texel (Hanrahan,  1994).  The superiority  of Belclare  
(-1-0.57)  is more than twice that exhibited  by any French  breed (Table  7).
Of course it must  be noted  that breed  rankings  as purebreds  do not necessarily  
hold for their crossbred  daughters  and indeed  breed ranking  may depend  on 
the other  component  of the cross.  However,  a reasonable  generalisation  is that 
heterotic  effects  are unlikely  to have a major impact  on prolificacy  ranking  
since  ovulation  rate accounts  for the major  proportion  of any breed  differences  
in litter size and it has a mainly  additive  genetic  determination.
Table 8
Estimated  productivity  of crossbred  ewes sired by different  breeds.
Sire breed Litter Lambs  reared
size per ewe joined
Belclare 1.88 1.60
Bleu du Maine** 1.77 1.45
Blue Leicester 1.75 1.44
Border  Leicester 1.65 1.36
Charollais* 1.74 1.43
Rouge  de I’Ouest* 1.77 1.45
Suffolk 1.69 1.39
Texel 1.62 1.34
Vendeen* 1.72 1.41
*Based  on information  from France  on purebred  performance
**Based  on limited  information  from Ireland  and U.K.on  crossbred  performance  and information 
from France  on purebred  performance.
With this assumption  the available  information,  from our own trials  and from  
the UK and France,  can be used  to predict  the likely  differences among  crossbred  
ewes  sired  by different  breeds.  The results  are summarised  in Table 8 as a guide  
when considering  options  in relation  to the production  of flock replacements.  
The differences  between  the breed-types  shown are those  to be expected  if rams  
of these breeds  were used to sire flock replacements.
Growth  rate of repla cement  lambs:  Concern  has often been expressed  
about  consequences  for lamb  growth  rate when  rams of the Belclare  breed  are 
used to sire flock  replacements.  Information  from the production  phases  of the 
ewes involved  in the crossbred  trials discussed  above  is summarised  in Table 
9 (crossbred  lambs from S. Blackface  ewes)  and Table 10 (crossbred  lambs
Table 9
Crossbred  lambs  from S. Blackface  ewes: effect of sire breed on lamb growth
Breed of 
sireNo. of 
progenyBirth 
wt (kg)Weaning  
wt (kg)Growth  rate (g/day)
0-5 weeks 0-14 weeks
Suffolk 126 4.2 29.5 324 253
Texel 92 4.2 29.4 328 249
Belclare 210 3.9 28.0 300 238
Blue Leicester 225 4.3 30.2 322 256
Border  Leicester 204 4.1 28.4 305 241
s.e. (approx) — 0.07 0.45 6.6 4.2
Table 10
Sire breed effects  on weaning  weight  (kg) of crossbred  ewe lambs  out of
Cheviot  ewes
Year Bred of sire s.e.d.
Suffolk Belclare
1990 41.0 (37) 40.0 (37) 0.95
1991 36.2 (35) 36.3  (39) 1.52
1992 42.3 (44) 41.5 (48) 1.32
1993 39.6 (59) 38.9 (49) 0.83
( ) = number  of lambs
from  Cheviot  ewes).  The results  show  that lambs sired  by the Belclare  are lighter  
at birth (0.3 kg) and at weaning  (1 to 1.5 kg) than lambs  sired by the Suffolk,  
Texel or Blue Leicester  breeds.  These  differences  are a natural  consequence  
of the smaller  mature  size of the Belclare  breed  and are likely  to have a small  
negative  impact  on the value of the wether  lambs.  However  this is likely to 
be outweighed  by the lower  annual  maintenance  requirements  of a smaller  ewe.
Flock  replacement  policy;  A feature  of the lowland  sheep  industry  is the 
general  absence  of a deliberate  policy.  In relation  to the production  of flock  
replacements  in general,  replacements  for the ewe flock emerge  as a by­
production  of prime  lamb  product  and so replacements are sired  by breeds whose  
primary  role is as a terminal  sire. Effective  progress  on genetic  improvement  
in the reproductive  potential  of lowland  flocks  requires  deliberate  choice  of 
breed to sire flock replacements  and 30 to 40 percent  of the ewe flock must  
be joined  to produce  sufficient  replacements  for a prolific  self-contained  flock.  
There  is also considerable  scope  for the production  of first-cross  ewes from  
draft hill ewes. The results  of the studies  summarised  herein  show the merits  
of the various  breeds  as sires of ewes and clearly  underline  the gains in 
productivity  which can be obtained  from exploiting  high genetic  merit for 
prolificacy.
References
Bodin,  L. and Elsen,  J. M. 1989. Anim. Prod. 48: 535-541.
Hanrahan,!  .P. 1994.  Ewe productivity.  InProc.  Sheep  Conference  for Advisers  9 pages.
113
Grassland
■■illlll
FERTILIZERS
IN THE  TWO  SWARD  SYSTEM  GROW  UP TO 
30% MORE  GRASS  IN SULPHUR  DEFICIENT  AREAS
27-2.5-5-(3.0)
The only  CCF  27-2.5-5  with  Sulphur  on the Irish  Market.
THIS  YEAR  SWITCH  TO '27's WITH  SULPHUR'  FOR  GRAZING
pE
FOR\R\SV^4?
Irish Fertilizer  industries  Ltd., is the only  primary  manufacturer  of fertilizer  in Ireland.  Our  
^ctories  in Arklow,  Belfast  and Cork  employ  the skilled  know-how  of almost  700 people  to 
design  unique  fertilizers  which  give Irish farmers  a key competitive  edge.
Over  the years  our products  have  been  perfected  to produce  the best  results  under  Irish  
weather  conditions.  We have  continually  updated  our factories  with  the latest  technology  and  
this now makes  IFI one of the most efficient  producers  of fertilizer  in the world. Special  
manufacturing  processes  ensure  free-flowing,  even-spreading  product  which  melts  in rapidly.
IFI fertilizer  Is bagged  directly  off the factory  line with no handling,  shipping,  etc., thereby  
always  ensuring  a premium  quality  product.  Each  brand  is made  to an exacting  specification  which  
allows  easy spreader  calibration  and a consistent  application  rate between  batches.
IRISH FERTILIZER  INDUSTRIES  
W a r r i n g t o n  P l a c e ,  D u b l i n  2 . 
Tel: (01)  676  4081
