Irish Grassland  
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal
1995 VOLUME  29
MEMBER'S  COPY
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 29 1995
Edited  by
SEAN  FLANAGAN
ISSN 0332-0588
Printed  by Wicklow  Press Ltd.. Wicklow
CONTENTS
page
G. Stakelum,  P. Dillon 
and S. CrosseFeeding  high merit cows on pasture 3
C. S. Mayne  and
D C. PattersonHigh genetic  merit dairy cows and profitable  
milk production  - A Hillsborough  perspective 11
S. Holmes How competitive  is Irish dairy farming? 16
O. T. Carton Manure  management 23
M. Neill Agriculture  and water pollution  - the main 
issues 30
T. Gleeson  and
J. KielySoil water and pollution 40
P. Commins  and
J. P. FrawleyThe structure  of Irish farming  in 2005 49
COUNCIL  1994/95
President  : M. Magan  
Past-President  : P. O'Kiely  
Vice-President  : C. Hurley
J.Caffrey.J.  Cosgrave,  S. Crosse,  M. Dempsey,  D. Fay, V. Flynn,  T. Grace,  
B. Kavanagh,  M. Keane,  K. Mathews,  B. Meade,  K. Meade,  M. Murphy, 
E. O’Riordan,  F. Shinnick,  P. Walshe.
Hon. Secretary/Treasurer  : Dr. S. Flanagan  
Irish Grassland  Association,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Feeding  High Merit  Cows on Pasture
G. STAKELUM,  P. DILLON  and S. CROSSE  
Teagasc,  Dairy  Husbandry  Department,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
The Moorepark  research  programme  on the feeding  and management  of dairy  
cows is now focused  heavily  on the achievement  of very high performance  
from cows on grazed  pastures.  At farm level this entails  high intakes  of high 
quality  leafy  pastures.  At research  level,  the focus  is on the intake  requirement  
of high genetic  merit cows and on how to achieve  adequate  intakes  and 
performance  (defined  in its broadest  sense)  on a pasture  system  of feeding.
The present  technology  with regard  to production  and grazing  systems  for 
‘Moorepark  type ’ dairy cows has been described  in detail elsewhere  (Dillon,  
Crosse  and Stakelum,  1995). The objective  of this paper  is to explore  the issues  
which will arise with respect  to feeding  higher  genetic  merit cows. The 
production  performance  of the Moorepark  farm over 20 years is given  and the 
implications  for daily dry matter  intake  of continued  breeding  for high daily  
output  of milk  solids  is discussed.  Various  strategies  for the provision  of extra  
feed to dairy  cows are considered  and the economic  implications  of the various  
options  are also discussed.
Rate of genetic  gain in Ireland
The rate of gain in genetic  merit  of the national  dairy  herd in Ireland  is now 
quite  rapid. Breed substitution,  as a concept,  can be used  to appreciate  the rapid  
increase  which is now happening.  With a 20% heifer  replacement  rate, the 
entire  dairy herd will turnover  in 5-6 years. The average  RBI 90 of the bulls 
going into Dairygold  AI this year (1955)  is 147. If we take the present  RBI 
90 of the national  dairy  herd at 100, then in 5 years,  if progeny  from those  bulls  
are used as replacements,  the herd RBI 90 would  be in the region  of 127-128.  
After  a further  5 years the herd RBI would  be 140-142.  The top dairy farmers  
will achieve  a more rapid genetic  gain in their herds  and they are also starting  
from a higher  base. A fifty-unit  increase  in RBI is equivalent  to about  a 37.5- 
unit increase  in breeding  value. Therefore,  with an average yield of 
5500L/COW,  over 10 years  this rate of genetic  improvement  will result  in a milk 
production  potential  per cow of 7,562  L (1600  gallons).  Can this potential  be 
achieved  on grass-based  feeding  systems?  What is the most economical  way 
of achieving  this? What are the implications of underfeeding  these  higher  merit  
cows. These  are very important  questions  for dairy farmers.
Milk yield per cow
Crosse  and Dillon  (1995)  have described  the importance  of achieving  high 
performance  from the dairy herd and the importance  of herd productivity  in 
reducing  unit costs  of milk production.  Quite  simply,  if a farmer  achieves  5850  
L (1250  gallons)  per cow for the same inputs  as another  who achieved  5150  
L (11(X) gallons),  the higher  yield will have much lower  unit costs and higher
3
Figure  1: Increase  in Milk  Yield  per Cow
margin  per cow. Figure  1 outlines  the increase  in yield per cow at Moorepark  
from 1976 to 1992. In all years,  500 kg of concentrate  per cow were fed, the 
overall  stocking  rate was 2.91 cows  per hectare  and 377 kg N per hectare  was 
applied  to the grassland.  Milk  yields  have  increased  from 3745  L (800  gallons)  
to 5851 L 1250 gallons)  per cow over a 16 year period. This is equivalent  to 
an increase  in cow yields  of 131 L per annum  (28 gallons)  or 4.8 kg of butterfat  
per annum. Over that period  it is estimated  that cow RBI 90 increased  from 
90 in 1975 to 95 in 1985 and up to 105 in 1995 (Teehan,  1995). Therefore,  
it is reasonable  to assume  that 80% of the yield  increase  came  from  the application 
of technology  and the other 20% from increases  in breeding  value.
The technology  aspects  include  a wide range of factors  from grassland  
management,  milking  technology, forage  conservation,  supplementary  feeding,  
reproductive  efficiency  and disease  control.  The important  point,  however,  is 
that by the application  of knowledge  and an increase  in skill level, that major  
improvements  in cow performance  were achieved.  How far more can we 
progress  this rate of improvement  without  the provision  of more  expensive  feed?
Herbage  allowance  and intake
The amount  of grass offered  each day to grazing  cows has a very large  
influence  on the amount  consumed  each day. The amount  offered  is defined  
as daily  herbage  allowance  and is calculated  from the amount  of utilizable  grass  
per ha multiplied  by the area grazed  each day and divided  by the herd size. 
It plays a very fundamental  role in determining  the performance  of grazing  
livestock.  Figure  2 outlines  the generalised  relationship  between  daily  herbage  
allowance  and daily herbage  intake. It is impractical  to operate  at extremely  
high levels  of daily herbage  allowance  because  the levels  of grass residue  in 
the paddocks  will be too high and the subsequent  quality  of the herbage  for 
next  grazing  cycles will deteriorate  badly. The grazing/intake  work  at Moorepark
Figure  2:Relationship  between  intake  and grass  allowance
POST  ORAZWO  HEIGHT OCCREASEt
DAILY  GRASS  ALLOWANCE
(Stakelum,  1995a) over the last number  of years has shown that with 
an allowance  of 19-20 kg grass DM above  4 cm daily, cows will achieve  an 
intake  of around  17-18 kg DM daily under  good grazing  conditions.  This set 
of circumstances  will normally  lead to a post-grazing  sward  surface  height  of 
6 cm in the paddocks.
To achieve  success  or more  correctly  to manage  the pastures  in such a way 
so as to realise  this level of allowance  each day is not easy. The overall  system  
as described  is finely  tuned. It demands  flexibility  in grazing  management  and 
some  knowledge  of grass  supply and  grass growth.  Sustained  periods  of below-  
normal  growth  rates will necessitate  a certain  level of supplementary  feeding.  
It is beyond  the scope  of this paper  to describe  the various  options  which  are 
available  for management  of pastures  through  the various  cycles  of high and 
low growth  rates in order to sustain  daily intakes  close to 17-18 kg. Some  
detail  has been given  elsewhere  (Stakelum,  1993 and 1995a  and b). However,  
the important  point  that at the present  level  of genetic merit and a defined  system 
of 2.9 cows per hectare,  380 kg N per ha and 500 kg concentrate  per cow, that 
any further  increase  in milk yield potential  will necessitate  higher  intakes. If 
we change  nothing,  the cows  will have  to graze  below 6 cm in order  to consume  
more feed.
Feed demand  of lactating  grazing  cows
Let us consider  daily intake  of cows in a grazing  herd yielding  25-27 L 
of milk at peak and giving  a total lactation  yield of 5500 L. Figure  3 shows  
75 individual  cow intakes  of herbage  averaged  over the grazing  season  from 
a system  trial carried  out over the period  of 1990-1992  (Dillon  et ai, 1995).  
There are a number  of points  which need to be made in relation  to the data.
Figure  3: Relationship  between  milk yield and daily grass  intake
^ ■ ■!
SOOO 5500 6000
Total Lactation  Yield
The majority  of the lactation  yield values  lie between  5000-7000  L and the 
average  intake  is close  to 18 kg DM  per day. Statistically, the  data  are described  
as having  spread  and scatter  but there is an obvious  relationship  between  daily 
intake  and total lactation  yield. There  are other factors  other than milk yield 
which  influence  daily intake.  Size of the cow, body  weight  gain or loss, calving  
date, and condition  at calving  are among  the more important  factors. Given  
an optimization  of sward  conditions  and taking  these  animal  factors into account, 
we can conclude  from statistical  analyses  of the data, that a large proportion  
of the spread  and scatter  in the data is due to milk yield and size of cow. From 
these  data and from the data from zero-grazing  studies  at Moorepark  we know 
that for each extra 1 kg of FCM that a cow can potentially  produce  daily, she 
will need to consume  between  0.4-0.5  kg of extra grass DM daily.
An interesting  aspect  of the data in Figure  3 is the number  of cows in the 
group  which  are capable  of achieving  daily intakes  above 18 kg of DM. The 
important  issue here is that the large  and/or  high  yield cows  are able to harvest  
enough  grass out of the daily allocation  of 20 kg DM to sustain  their higher  
yield potential.  This of course  adds enormously  to the efficacy  of the system.  
The extent  of the variation  in yields and intakes  are similar  to the normal 
distribution  found  in commercial  herds  with cows  of varying  yields  around  the 
average  herd value.
Supply  and demand  pattern  for grass in our present  system
Figure  4 outlines  the supply of grass feed demand  pattern  of a spring-calving  
herd that is typical  of the generalised  Moorepark  system  as defined  by Dillon  
et al, 1995. The supply  of grazed  grass is the result of the combined  effects 
of the overall  stocking  rate, the silage  conservation  policy,  nitrogen  application  
strategy  and the rate and pattern  of grass growth.  The demand  for feed is set
Figure  4: Effect  of higher  genetic  merit  on supply  end demand  of grass
by the genetic  merit and the size and liveweight  changes  of the cows. The 
pattern  of feed demand  is determined  by calving  date and calving  spread. It 
is evident  that in the months  of May to September,  the system  is basically  in 
balance  with respect  to feed and demand  and grass supply  for the Moorepark  
type cow. In the March to April  and October  to December  period  a large  deficit  
of grazed  grass exists in this system.
An increase  in milk yield per cow of 20% is equivalent  to an increase  in 
RBI from 115 to 140. This increase  in total lactation  yield  of 1200  L, if evenly  
distributed  over the lactation,  will result in an increase  in daily milk yield of 
4 L per cow. This will result  in an increased  daily intake  demand  of around  
2 kg DM. This is shown  in Figure  4. Over  the lactation,  it means  that an extra  
500 kg DM needs  to be fed to each  cow in the herd. There  is now a substantial  
shortfall  in the supply  of grazed  grass under  the present  system.
Comparison  of contrasting  systems
Three  options  of providing  this extra feed were examined  for the various  
scenarios  considered  in this paper. An extra 500 kg of concentrate  can be fed 
to the animals or the overall  farm stocking  rate can be reduced  to such  an extent  
so as to provide  enough  extra  grass  to allow  the cows to perform to their  potential. 
The third option  considered  involved  reducing  the area cut for both 1st and 
2nd cut silage  so as to make up the deficit  of grazed  grass during  the main 
conservation  period.  In this scenario,  purchased  concentrates  are used to make 
up the shortfall  in the availability  of conserved  silage. Due to the unchanged  
overall  farm stocking  rate, extra concentrates  may need to be fed during  the 
early and later parts of the grazing  season  because  there is still an Increased 
deficit of grazed  grass,  compared  to the lower  dairy merit  system,  in the March  
to April period. It must be emphasised  that detailed  component  and systems-
Table I
Assumptions  used in Model  Farm
Quota  size* 40,000  gallons
Farm size 60 acres
Enterprises Dairying  and Beef
*The application  of the quota constraint  depended  on the scenarios  compared.
based research  needs  to be conducted  in order  to establish  the actual relevant  
biological  coefficients  associated  with feeding  these high merit animals  at 
pasture.
Model  farm used to determine  the optimum  system  of production
A model  farm was used in this analysis  to determine  the optimum  system  
of production  under  various  scenarios.  This model  farm represents  a typical 
intensive  dairy farming  system  in Ireland  now where milk quota is usually  
limiting  before  land and where  there has to be a combination  of enterprises  to 
use the land available.  This allows  the opportunity  cost capital  to be evaluated  
versus  profitability  of other  farm production  areas. The main  assumptions  used 
for the model  farm are given in Table 1.
The amount  of capital  used varied  depending  on whether  the quota  or no­
quota  scenarios  were considered.  Capital  was not a constraint  as was Quota  
and farm  size. Capital did however  influence  the final solution because  different  
levels  of capital  were used for the various  systems.  A comparison  of scenarios  
when quota  constraints  apply as against  scenarios  when no-quota  constraints  
apply  is not possible  because  of the assumptions  applied  above. This analysis  
is mainly  focused  on the potential  for profit. It is recognised  that detailed  
financial  analysis  of the various  scenarios  is necessary  before  adoption  at farm 
level.
Financial  evaluation  of the scenarios  compared
The financial  evaluation,  therefore,  considered  three options  for feeding  
higher  merit cows, (i) feeding  more concentrates,  (ii) feeding  more grass (by 
reducing  stocking  rate), or (iii) cutting  less silage  (thereby  feeding  more grass  
and concentrates).  The options  were compared  with the Moorepark  system  
using medium  merit cows. Three levels of each option were considered.  
Concentrate  was increased  by 0, 50 and 100%,  stocking  rate was reduced  by 
5, 10 and 15% and tbe area cut for silage  was reduced  by 5, 10 and 15%. The 
opportunity  cost of land and capital  was considered  in the economic  evaluation  
of the scenarios  compared.  The results  are presented  as opportunity  costs per 
cow for the various  options  and the scenarios  are compared  to the optimum  
solution  which  is the use of high merit  cows which  achieve  their higher  yield 
potential  without  the provision  of extra feed. This implies  that they succeed  
in harvesting  out extra grass from the system. This of course  is an unlikely  
outcome  but it is a necessary  assumption  for clarification  of the comparisons.
8
Table 2 outlines  the opportunity  costs/unit  at high  milk  price  (103 p/gallon)  
with a farm quota  applied.  It is important  to define  the opportunity  cost per 
unit. It is defined  as the revenue  per unit forgone  or lost by replacing  1 unit 
of the optimum  system  by 1 unit of a less than optimum  system. In Table 
2 we can see that the present  genetic  merit  cows carry an opportunity  cost of 
£90 compared  to the optimum  system. If the higher  genetic  merit cows  
necessitate  much increased  concentrate  input levels then their advantage  is 
almost  totally  eroded. The medium  level of concentrate  input (0.75 tonnes)  
gives  some  advantage.  However,  there is a substantial  benefit  to higher  merit  
cows if we can feed them by providing  extra  grass (by dropping  the stocking  
rate). There  is of course  a great advantage  if the change  in stocking  rate is 
relatively  small. There  was little advantage  to reducing  the amount  of land 
cut for silage. These  three systems  were intermediate  between  the high level 
of concentrate  and the stocking  rate options.  This  is due mainly to  the necessity  
to put concentrates  back  into the system  to make up for the reduced  availability  
of silage  and this eroded  to a large  extent  the benefit  of the extra grazed  grass  
made available  by the conservation  management.
In summary,  there  is a very large  benefit  to high merit  cows  under  the quota  
restriction  if they can be fed by adjustments  in stocking  rates or by providing  
some small extra levels  of concentrate.
The systems  were also compared  with quota restrictions  removed.  The 
results  are also shown  in Table 2. The opportunity  cost of medium  merit  cows  
compared  to the optimum  in this case is very large  (£240/cow).  All the options
Table 2
Opportunity  cost of various  production  systems
Opportunity  cost / dairy unit (£)
System  / Option High milk price  
Quota No QuotaLow milk price  
No Quota
Optimum  solution O' O' 0’
Standard  System  & Medium  Merit  Cows 90 240 185
Concentrate  feeding
0 kg extra 0 0 0
250 kg extra 40 40 40
500 kg extra 80 80 80
Stocking  rate reduction
by 5% 9 40 28
by 10% 27 93 69
by 15% 30 131 96
Cut less area for silage
by 5% 61 61 61
by 10% 65 65 65
by 15% 67 67 67
comparison  across  these scenarios  cannot  be made
for feeding  are now strongly  attractive.  With quota  restriction  removed,  farm 
production  of milk  can be increased  by keeping more cows.  High genetic  merit  
cows  have  much  more to offer  in a non-quota  situation  than  in a quota  situation.  
Additionally,  dropping  stocking  rate, especially  if it has to be dropped  
excessively,  has much  less to offer  than the other  options.  This is because  land 
is the constraint  in this situation.
Finally,  the above  options  were analysed  in a similar  way with quota  
restrictions  removed  and milk price decreased  by 20% to 87p/gallon.  The 
opportunity  cost of medium  merit  cows  now changed  from £240  to £185. The 
attractiveness  of reduced  stocking  rate increased  somewhat  while all other  
options  remained  the same  relative  to the optimum  solution.  The one obvious  
point which  presents  itself  strongly  where  quota  restriction  is removed  is the 
attractiveness  of feeding  high merit  cows concentrates  and making  less silage  
and making  up this deficit  with concentrates.  The more obvious  conclusion  
also is the really important  role high genetic  merit cows play in contributing  
to income  in a no-quota  situation.
References
Crosse,  S. and Dillon,  P. (1993).  Milk  Production  Systems-Management  and economic  
considerations.  Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association  Journal,  
27: 3-8.
Dillon,  P. Crosse,  S. and Stakelum,  G. (1995). Summer  Milk Production  System.  In; 
Moorepark  Dairy Exhibition,  Update  on Production  Research,  Teagasc,  19, 
Sandymount  Ave., Dublin  4, p. 2-17.
Dillon.  P, Crosse,  S., Stakelum,  G. and Flynn,  F. (1995). The effect  of calving  date 
and stocking  rate on the performance  of spring-calving  dairy  cows. Grass  and  Forage  
Science,  50: 179-189.
Stakelum,  G. (1993),  Achieving  high  performance  from dairy  cows  on grazed  pastures, 
Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association  Journal,  27: 9-18.
Stakelum,  G. (1995a).  Feeding  the spring-calved  cow on grass. In: Moorepark  Dairy-  
Exhibition,  Update on Production  Research,  Teagasc,  19, Sandymount  Ave.,  Dublin 
4, p. 18-29.
Stakelum,  G. (1995b).  Feed Budgeting.  In: Moorepark  Dairy  Exhibition,  Update  on 
Production  Research,  Teagasc,  19, Sandymount  Ave., Dublin  4, p. 58-64. 
Teehan,  T. (1995). Personal  communication.
10
High Genetic  Merit  Dairy  Cows and 
Profitable  Milk Production  - 
A Hillsborough  Perspective
C. S. MAYNE  and D. C. PATTERSON 
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,
Co. Down, BT26 6DR
There  have been major  increases  in the rate of genetic  improvement  in the 
dairy herd in the United  Kingdom  and Ireland  since  the mid I980 ’s. This trend  
looks  set to continue  for the foreseeable  future.  Eor example,  the average  genetic  
merit  of all Holstein/Friesian  sires  currently  being  marketed by one major  semen  
supplier  in Ireland  is + 60 kg fat + protein  (Predicted  Transmitting  Ability  (PTA^j,,)),  
equivalent  to a relative  breeding  index (RBI) of 148. Furthermore,  even the 
lowest  ranking  Holstein/Friesian  sire being marketed  by this company  has a 
genetic  merit of + 37 kg fat and protein  (PTA^j,)  or RBI of 130, which is 
considerably  above  the current  genetic  merit of the national  dairy herd.
These  rapid increases  in genetic  merit will have major  implications  for the 
production  of milk  from  grass  and grass  silage-based  diets. The important  question 
which  remains  unanswered  at present  is “How  do we best modify  our existing  
management  systems  to accommodate  the high genetic  merit dairy cow, whilst  
retaining  low cost milk  production systems  with a major  reliance  on grazed  grass? ” 
Unless  research  is undertaken  to answer  this question,  there  is a very real danger  
that there will be a trend towards  adoption  of higher  input systems,  based on 
increased  usage  of cereals  and/or  concentrates,  with a reduced  reliance  on grass.  
However,  if we adopt this approach,  milk production  in Ireland  will be at a 
considerable  disadvantage  relative  to that elsewhere  in Europe,  given the more 
favourable  cereal  and forage  maize  growing  conditions  prevailing  in mainland  
Europe.  The aim of this paper  is to examine  the relative  efficiency of high genetic  
merit  dairy cows on grass and grass silage-based  systems  and to examine  what 
modifications  we need to consider  in our current  management  systems.
Are high genetic  merit  cows more efficient?
Studies  at Langhill  and more recently  at Hillsborough,  presented  in Table 1, 
clearly  indicate  that increasing  genetic  merit results  in major  increases  in feed 
efficiency,  reflecting increases  in milk  yield,  or fat plus protein  yield,  but relatively 
small increases  in food intake. For example  in the Hillsborough  studies,  high 
merit  cows  have produced  almost  22% more  fat + protein  yield per unit of food 
consumed,  than cows  of medium  genetic  merit. The.se  studies  have shown  that 
selection  for increased  genetic  merit alters the control  of nutrient  partitioning,  
with high merit cows having  a greater  drive towards  milk production,  even at 
the expense  of severe  liveweight  loss in early lactation.  High merit  cows in the 
Hillsborough  studies  have lost up to 1 kg liveweight/day  over the first 60 days 
of lactation,  even though  they were on a high level of concentrate  input (14 kg 
concentrates/cow/day).
Table 1
Effects  of increased  genetic  merit on feed efficiency  (silage  based systems)  
(Data from Veerkamp  et al 1994 and Patterson  ei al 1995)
Langhill  studies  
(182 days)Hillsborough  studies  
(160 days)
Genetic  Merit (PTA 90 kg F + P) 
Relative  Breeding  Index (RBI)  
Comparative  treatment4.3 vs 18.8
104 vs 115
High cone Low cone5 vs 45
104 vs 136
Animal  nerformance  (% chaneei
Food intake + 5.0 +  4.3 + 6.3
Fat -1- protein  yield +11.5 +12.2 +29.6
Food conversion  efficiencv
(% chanBet
(Fat + protein  yield/unit  food intake) +6.2 +7.6 +21.8
The small increases  in food intake  with increasing  genetic  merit may well 
reflect  the fact that traditional  cattle breeding  programmes,  based  on progeny 
testing,  did not include traits  such as food intake  capacity  within  their breeding  
objectives.  Furthermore  food intake  capacity  may be less important  in North 
America  and other  European  countries,  given  the opportunity  to increase nutrient 
density  of the ration by including  cereals and other  by-product  feeds at relatively  
low cost. However, the  relatively small  increases in food intake with increasing  
genetic  merit  has major  implications  for milk  production  in the UK and Ireland,  
given  the high reliance  on forage.  Food  intake  can now be assessed  in nucleus  
breeding  programmes,  such as the Genus  MOET  programme,  and selection  for 
increased  food  intake  could be highly important  in future  breeding  programmes.  
However,  in the meantime,  there is a strong  case for including  some  measure  
of intake  capacity  in sire assessment  indexes  used in the UK and Ireland.
Challenges  in feeding  high genetic  merit  dairy cows
The major  challenge  in feeding  the high genetic  merit dairy cows on grass  
or silage-based  diets is to increase forage  intake,  particularly  in early lactation.  
Failure  to increase  forage  intake will result in greater  liveweight  loss which 
could have a major  effect  on the incidence  of metabolic  and/or  reproductive  
disorders.
Dry cow management.  Dry cow management  will become  much more  
important  as genetic merit  of the dairy  herd increases.  For example,  cows  calving 
in poor condition  (less than condition  score 2) will have limited  reserves  to 
draw on after  calving,  whereas  calving  in excessive  body condition  (condition  
score  greater  than 3) will result in reduced food intake  in early  lactation.  Further  
research  is needed  to investigate  the role of low digestibility  forages,  such as 
straw,  as a “rumen  conditioner ” during  the dry period,  and also the role of high 
quality  protein,  fed during  the last few weeks of the dry period,  on food intake, 
milk production  and fertility  in the subsequent  lactation.
Winter  feeding  systems
With autumn-calving  cows on grass silage-based  diets, low food intake  is
a major  problem  and there is considerable  interest  at present  in opportunities  
to increase  dry matter  intake,  either through  wilting  or by modifying  silage  
fermentation.  However,  as yet, there is no evidence  that high merit animals  
respond  differently  to low merit  animals  to pre-wilting,  improvements  in silage  
digestibility  or alterations  in silage  fermentation.
Results  of a major  programme  of research  at Hillsborough  on silage  intake  
has now identified  factors  influencing  intake,  and this enables accurate  prediction  
of intake  potential  of silages.  Further  research is currently  in progress  to examine  
if we can consistently  produce  high intake  potential  silages,  by manipulating  
the grass crop during  both the growth  and ensiling  phases. This research  is 
particularly  relevant  to the high genetic  merit cow.
Recent  research  at Hillsborough  (Table  2) has examined  the use of complete  
diet feeding  versus  out of parlour  feeding  of concentrates  with medium  and 
high genetic  merit  cows. High  merit  cows produced  6.6 kg more  milk/day  than  
low merit  cows,  although  with a lower  fat and protein  content.  With the high 
concentrate  feed levels used in this experiment,  cows performed  better in 
complete  diet feeding  than with concentrates  fed out of parlour.  However,  the 
response  to complete  diet feeding was similar  with both medium  and high merit  
cows, with no evidence  of a better  response  with the high merit group.
Research  at Langhill  has shown  that the small increases  in food intake  with 
high genetic  merit  cows  has major  implications  for the concentrate  component  
of the ration.  For example  Oldham etal(  \ 992)  estimated  that to achieve similar  
liveweight  change  to cows with a PTA of + 20 kg fat plus protein  (RBI 116),  
high merit cows with a PTA of + 60 kg fat plus protein (RBI 148) 
would require  an increase  in energy  density  in the total diet of 0.4 MJ/kg  DM. 
Similarly,  to meet their increased  protein  requirements,  Oldham  et al (1992)  
estimated  that high merit cows would  require  an increase  in protein  content  
of the concentrate  of 8.1 %, with an associated  decrease  in protein  degradability  
of 0.16.
Table 2
Effect  of concentrate  feeding  system  on performance  of medium  and high 
genetic  merit cows
Feed system Complete  diet Out of Parlour
Genetic  merit
PTA 90 (kg F + P)
RBIMedium  
+ 15
111High
+45
136Medium  
+ 15
IIIHigh
+45
136
Performance  for first 160 days of lactation
Food intake (kg DM/dav)
Concentrates 12.8 12.9 12.7 12.9
Silage 6.4 6.9 7,0 7,8
Total 19.2 19.8 19.7 20.7
Performance
Milk yield (kg/day) 32.6 38.5 28.7 36.0
Butterfat  (%) 3.89 3.64 3.94 3.89
Protein  (%) 3.19 3.06 3.24 3.08
13
Increases in energy  density  and protein  concentration,  coupled with decreases  
in protein degradability of the total diet, are likely  to incur  considerable  increases 
in feed costs and this could negate  some, or all, of the improvements  in the 
biological  efficiency  of high genetic  merit  cows. Consequently,  it is essential  
that we give increased  emphasis  to food intake  characteristics  in dairy cattle  
breeding  programmes  and in sire selection  in the UK  and Ireland.  Furthermore  
research  on improving  food intake with grass silage-based  diets could have 
major  implications  for improved  economic  efficiency  with high genetic  merit  
cows.
Grazing  systems
The majority  of top sires currently  being used in the UK and Ireland  have 
been evaluated  under intensive,  and in many cases, fully housed  production  
systems.  The major  question  is do daughters  of these sires perform  equally 
well under grass-based  production  systems?  Results  from Canadian  - New 
Zealand  (CANZ)  sire evaluation  studies  showed  that, on average,  there was 
little  difference  in performance  between daughters  of Canadian or New Zealand  
bulls in both countries.  However,  daughters  of some  Canadian  sires performed  
significantly  better  on grass in New Zealand  than was predicted  from  daughter  
performance  in Canada.  This highlights  the need to have sires tested locally 
in order to confirm  the accuracy  of conversion  of proofs  of foreign  sires.
More  recently,  detailed  analysis  of results  from Langhill  indicate  that high 
genetic  merit cows may be unable  to express  their full genetic  potential  for 
milk production  when  offered  a high forage  diet. Taken  together,  results  from 
these  two studies suggest  caution  is required  in breeding very high genetic merit 
cows  (e.g. greater  than PTA  -i- 50 kg fat + protein  (RBI 140))  for use in grassland  
based production  systems. Secondly,  we need to examine  opportunities  for 
modifying  existing management  systems  to better  accommodate  the high  genetic 
merit dairy cow, without  compromising  the basic concept  of low cost, grass  
based milk production.
Increasing  grass intake. From a theoretical  viewpoint  a medium  genetic  
merit  cow (PTA 90 + 5 kg fat plus protein,  RBI 104) producing  25 litres milk/  
day requires  a grass intake  of 15.0 kg DM/day.  However,  with a high genetic  
merit cow (PTA 90 + 60 kg fat plus protein,  RBI 148) producing  32.5 litres 
milk/day,  a grass intake  of 18.7 DM/day  is required  to meet  energy  requirements. 
Previous studies have  shown that under  ‘ideal ’ grazing  conditions,  grass  intakes 
between  15-17 DM/day  can be achieved  in practice.  However,  intakes  of this 
order  can only be achieved  with a reduced  grazing  severity  and this will have 
major  implications  on sward  quality,  particularly  if swards  are undergrazed  in 
early  season.  Furthermore, unless  we can develop  grazing  management  strategies 
to further  increase  grass intake  above  the level of 17 kg DM/day,  it may be 
necessary  to provide  supplementary  feeding  at high genetic  merit  cows  at grass  
in early lactation.  However,  the use of concentrate  feeding  at pasture  with high 
genetic  merit  dairy  cows  could  reduce  the overall  profitability  of milk  production, 
relative  to grass only systems  with cows  of moderate genetic  merit. The break ­
even point  in terms of increasing  genetic  merit  and level of concentrate  feeding  
required  vs moderate  genetic  merit  and grass only systems  will largely  depend
14
on future  changes  in milk price and cost of cereal grain.
With this in mind, research  is currently  under way at Hillsborough  to 
investigate  the followingi-
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)How can we maximise  grass intake  with high producing  cows?
Can we maintain  high quality  swards  through  the grazing  season?  e.g. 
increased  need for topping,  alternating  and cutting,  leader/follower  
grazing.
Can we identify  characteristics  in the grass plant which  can be used in 
future  grass breeding  programmes  to produce  new high intake  grass  
varieties?
Is there a place for concentrate  feeding  at grass with high genetic  merit  
cows and if so, what type of concentrate  should  be used?
This research  is being undertaken  with high genetic  merit cows (PTA 90 
+ 50 kg fat plus protein,  RBI 140) and results  of this work should  provide  
guidelines  for management  of animals  of this type.
Conclusions
Since  the mid 1980 ’s there  have been major  increases  in the rate of genetic  
improvement  in the dairy herd in the UK and Ireland,  largely  through  use of 
imported  semen.  High  genetic merit  cows  produce increased  milk  yields largely  
because  they partition  more nutrients  into milk and less to body reserves.  
Increases  in food intake  with high merit  cows  on grass and grass silage-based  
diets  are relatively small  (between 5-8%).  Consequently  there is some  evidence  
to suggest  that high merit cows may be unable  to express  their full genetic  
potential  for milk  production  when  offered  a high  forage (or  low energy  density)  
diet. In order to prevent  excessive  liveweight  loss in early lactation,  with 
consequent  detrimental  effects  on the incidence  of reproductive  failure  and 
milk protein  content,  the major challenge  for research  and dairy herd 
management  is to increase  food intake  with grass and/or  grass silage-based  
diets. The alternative  is to adopt  “imported  feeding  systems ” including  use 
of total mixed rations  and/or  high levels of concentrate  feeding.  However,  this 
approach  could  reduce  the overall  profitability  of milk production  relative  to 
lower input systems  based on animals  of lower  genetic  merit.
The ‘optimum ’ genetic  merit  of dairy  cows  in grass-based production systems  
will ultimately  depend upon  a number  of factors including standard of grassland  
management  and possible  changes  in milk price and the cost of cereal  grains/  
by-product  feeds.
References
Oldham,  J. D., Simm,  G. and Marsden,  S. 1992. Nutrition  - genotype  interactions  in 
dairy cattle.  In: Recent  Advances  in Animal  Nutrition  1992,  ed. P. C. Garnsworthy.  
W. Haresign  and D. J. A. Cole. pp. 73-92.
Patterson,  D. C., Gordon,  F. J., Mayne,  C. S., Porter,  M. G. and Unsworth,  E. F. 199.3.  
The effects  of genetic  merit on nutrient  utilization  in lactation  dairy cows. BSAS 
Meeting,  Greenmount  College  of Agriculture  and Horticulture.
Veerkamp,  R. F,, Simm,  G. and Oldham,  J. D. 1994. Effects  of interaction  between  
genotype  and feeding  systems  on milk production,  feed intake,  efficiency  and body 
tissue mobilization  in dairy cows. Livestock  Production  Science,  39: 229-241.
How  Competitive  is Irish  Dairy  Farming?
S. HOLMES
New Zealand  Dairy  Board.
Irish dairy farmers  have the potential  to be amongst  the most competitive,  
low cost producers  of milk in the world. Yet this potential  is not being  realised  
nor sought  after.
The potential  to increase  profits  on farms  by reducing  the cost of production  
is enormous.  We know Irish dairying  can be very competitive  because  there  
are farmers  including  Curtins  at Moorepark,  operating  at very low cost and 
high profit.
However,  the majority  of Irish dairy farmers:
a) have very high cost structures  and
b) retain little of the money  they receive  for milk and cattle.
Fingleton  carried  out a cost comparison  between  the major  European  Union
(EU) milk producing  countries  for the years 1991/92  to see how the 
competitiveness  of Ireland  had fared since Boyle ’s study in 1988/89.
Firstly,  costs  were  measured as a % of output  (Table  1). This measure  reflects  
how well farmers  could  cope with a price squeeze;  the lower  the percentage,  
the better.
Table 1
Total costs as % of total value of output
Country 1988/89
%1991/92
%
Ireland 60 73
Germany 76 85
France 72 77
Italy 60 65
Belgium 55 66
Netherlands 67 82
Denmark 82 86
UK 74 81
Irish advantage 13% 5%
relative  to average
In 1988/89  Ireland's  dairy farmers  had a relatively  healthy  ratio of costs  to 
output  compared  with the majority  of EU countries.  However  by 1991/92,  
Ireland's  advantage  had fallen  from 13% to being  only 5% better  than average.
Secondly,  costs  per kg of milksolids  (i.e. butterfat  plus protein)  were  compared 
as a measure  of cost competitiveness  (Table  2).
16
Table 2
Total costs per kg of milksolids  (IR£)
Country 1988/89
IR£1989/90
1R£1990/91
IRE1991/92
IRE
Ireland 1.76 2.15 2.09 2.05
Germany 2.65 2.69 2.59 2.70
France 2.17 2.36 2.38 2.36
Italy 3.13 3.41 3.21 3.17
Belgium 1.72 1.81 1.83 1.94
Netherlands 2.24 2.22 2.18 2.21
Denmark 2.81 2.91 2.91 2.90
UK 2.06 2.25 2.23 2.26
Irish advantage 24% 13% 14% 16%
relative  to average
In 1988/89  dairy farmers  in Ireland  and Belgium  had the lowest  average  
costs per kg of milksolids.  However,  in the following  3 years,  Ireland's  cost 
advantage  was reduced  by 8-10%. Although  Ireland  still held second  place  
behind  Belgium  in 1991/2,  the Netherlands  and UK had closed  the gap and 
had only marginally  higher  costs than Ireland.  Fingleton  also stated  that in the 
period  since 1991/92,  milk production  costs in Ireland  have not improved.  In 
fact average  total costs per gallon  have risen significantly  in 1993.
"Competitiveness"  is the ability  of the industry  to sell dairy products  on 
future  world markets.  Given  the predicted  scenario  of GATT,  reducing  the cost  
of production  on farms  will be critical  if the Irish industry  wants  to sell dairy  
products  at a competitive  price.
Yet there is no clear overall  objective  or commitment  by the Irish dairy  
industry  to increase  the competitiveness  of its farmers.  The farmer  receives  
confusing  and often conflicting  signals. For example:
• signals  from the  EU are focused on the environment,  not on farm efficiency;
• high tax rates encourage  high farm spending;
• schemes  and grants  get so much  attention,  there is little room for helping  
farmers  become  more efficient;
• there is a strong agribusiness  sector  very successfully  targeting  the farmer's  
pocket.
Farmers  cannot  be blamed for  not exploiting  Ireland's  competitive  advantage;  
there is no strong  leadership  or united  focus to encourage  dairy farmers  to be 
more competitive.
A cost competitive  dairy industry  must focus on:
(a) developing  and promoting  the production  system  that is best for Ireland  
and
(b) developing  a "pro-active"  attitude  towards  cost control  within  the farm-  
gate.
It is the combination  of an attitude  to cost control  and a low cost production  
system  that is missing  on the majority  of farms.
17
The technology  to produce  milk at low cost is here - calve  cows to grass, 
manage  the pastures  to provide  high quality  grass for as much of the year as 
possible,  and produce  this milk  through  efficient  cows. There  are farmers  using  
this technology  very well but who do not have high profits. Why? Because  
the technology is not being  combined with good  financial  control  of the business. 
Physical  management  of the farm can be excellent,  but the results  are too often  
lost in wasteful  expenditure  and capital  investment.
The failure  to either  use or combine  technology  with financial  management  
IS reflected  in the following  survey  of farm accounts.  Eddie McQuinn  & 
Associates  of Tralee  carried  out an analysis  of dairy farm accounts  for 1993.  
The survey  size was substantial,  made  up of 2400  cows  and 2.3 million  gallons  
of milk. The results  and trends  are consistent  with those  found  in the National  
Farm Management  Survey.
The two main areas looked  at were: total farm profit
net worth
These  are two of the most important  figures  in accounts  that every farmer  
should  know.
A_ FARM  PROFIT
Total Farm Profit  is; Total Farm Income  (from milk, calves,  culls, cattle,  
LESS
Total Farm Expenses  (not including  drawings  or tax)
In the accounts  analysis,  average  farm profit for 1993 was £11.400 .
Costs  as a % of Total Output
Dividing  farm profit  by the number  of gallons  sold, gives  the net profit  per 
gallon.  Profit  per gallon is a measure  of how efficiently  milk is being produced.
The average  number  of gallons  sold was 41,500  gal.
Profit/gal = £ 11,400/41,500  gal
= 28p/gal
The average  farmer  was making  28p/gal  of milk sold in 1993.
Yet, the range in farm profitability  was staggering  and re-emphasises  the 
enormous potential  for Irish  farmers  to become  more  competitive  and cut costs.  
The top 10% of farms  had an average  profit margin  of 64p/gal  vs 2p/gal  for 
the bottom 10%. Total income,  before  expenses,  was £58,000  (£ 1.40/gal)  
including  milk calves,  culls and some cattle sales.
For each  £1 output,  only  20p was retained  by the farmer.  80% of total output  
was gobbled  up in farm expenses.  The biggest  items  of expenditure  were feed 
and fertiliser  followed  by depreciation  on machinery  and buildings.
Some farmers  will be making  less than 10 pence  for every gallon  of milk 
sold, while a few will be making  70 pence  or more.
Why is there such a range? Based  on the accounts  analysis,  what factors  
were responsible?
1. Size of farm
You would  expect  that as farm size increases,  there are more gallons  over 
which  to spread  fixed costs, hence,  larger  farms should  have lower  costs of 
production.  However,  there appeared  to be no correlation  at all between  farm 
size and efficiency  (Figure  2).
PROFIT  
I P/G fII
Fig. 2 
19
2. Yield per cow
Gallons  of milk produced  per cow receives  lots of attention.  Yield is easily 
measured  and recorded  and tends to be a source  of competition  and pride.
Unfortunately,  if your farm objective  is profit,  yield per cow will tell you 
nothing.  The following  graph  shows  there  is no relationship  between  yield per 
cow and profit  per cow.
PROFIT/  COW  
I € >
-100700  800  900  1000  1100  1200  *13
YIELD/  COW (GALLONS)
Fig. 3
Even  looking  at change  in yield  per cow on individual  farms  over two years  
showed  no correlation  to change  in profit (Figure  4).
CHANGE  IN PROFIT/COW  
Itl
20
Focusing  simply  on yield itself  will achieve  nothing  in terms  of increased  
profitability  and may, in future  years,  only encourage  higher  cost systems  of 
production.
On some farms there is a good relationship  between  yield per cow and 
profitability  but only when  increased  yield is achieved  at very little or no cost. 
Most likely  it is the result  of better  breeding,  grassland  management  or animal  
management.
3. Cost control
Clearly  the range in farm profitability  is not due to farm size or yield per 
cow. When  the top 10% of farms  are compared  to the average,  the top 10% 
had lower  costs as a % of total farm output  (Figure  5).
Top 10% Average
Fig. 5
The most efficient  farmers  were retaining  nearly  40% of output  while the 
average  was retaining  less than 20%. The top 10% were spending  less on all 
items  of expenditure,  including  all variable  and fixed costs. This supports  the 
view that it is the “ attitude ” to how the farm business  is run that has the biggest  
effect on farm profit.
B NET WORTH
The second  and most important  area looked  at in the accounts  analysis  was 
“net worth ”. Net worth  is what  the assets  (farm,  stock,  machinery, cash,  shares,  
etc.) are worth,  LESS any borrowings.  As a result  of your management  and 
hard work you obviously  want to be worth MORE  and not less over time.
In Eddie  McQuinn ’s accounts  analysis,  the net worth  of the average  farmer  
had remained  static in 1993, despite  the milk price averaging  £1.03/gal and 
excellent  prices for calves  and cattle. When  incomes  are booming,  there  should
be an aim of increasing  net worth. To grow net worth,  farm profit must be 
high enough  to cover living  expenses,  pay tax and still generate  a surplus. 
Farmers  in the top 10% for increasing  net worth  averaged  7% growth.  At 
the other end of the scale, the bottom  10% decreased  net worth by 5%.
Farm size of the top 10% ranged  from 29,000  to 95,000  gallons. Again,  
smaller  farms  that ran the business  efficiently  competed  very well with large 
farms. Farm size was not an issue.
Summary
In summary,  the lack of cost control  relative  to output  is the main reason  
why the average  Irish dairy  farmer  is not as competitive  as he should  be. The 
majority  of farmers  and the wider  dairy industry  are production  and income-  
driven  and not profit-driven.  What is the point of focusing  on income  when  
so little of it is being retained  as profit?
Ireland  should  have a competitive  advantage  but it is not being exploited.  
For Irish  farmers  to become more  competitive, the entire industry  must  recognise  
the potential  that is there and focus on achieving  a more efficient,  cohesive,  
profit-driven  dairy industry.
Farming  will become  more competitive  by:
Focusing  on production  systems  which  maximise  the use of grazed  grass;  
Focusing  on production  systems  which minimise  the investment  in 
depreciating  assets  of machinery  and buildings;
Developing  clear  policies  of spending  only what is needed  to produce  milk 
efficiently;
4. Setting  clear targets  of increasing  net worth.2.
3.
References
Fingleton,  W. A. (1994). Inter-County  Comparisons  for Milk Production.  Competitive  
Dairy Farming  Conference.
22
Manure  Management
O. T. CARTON
Teagasc,  Johnstown  Castle  Research  Centre,  Wexford.
Summary
Landspreading  of manure  on the silage ground  is the most practical  
management  strategy  on grassland  farms. Slurry  can reliably  substitute  for 
fertiliser  P and K while  0.25 of the N is available  in spring  though  it is much  
less at all other times. Therefore,  landspreading  of manure  can reduce  grass  
production  costs through  lower fertiliser  inputs. The need to protect  the 
environment  and existing  legislative  requirements  demand  slurry  be managed  
without  causing  pollution.  Landspreading  at the right time and at the correct  
rate will help eliminate  this risk. However,  manure  creates  management  
problems  for the farmer  which militate  against  effective  recycling  of the manure  
nutrients  and increase  the pollution  potential.  These problems  are being  
addressed  by the Teagasc  research  programme  and cost effective  solutions  will 
emerge  to assist the grassland  farmer  in his attempt  to achieve  sustainable  
production  systems.
Introduction
Grass  provides  an energy  and nutrient  source  for animal  maintenance  and 
production.  Between  0.05  and 0.20  of the minerals  ingested  by grazing  animals  
are absorbed  and the remainder  excreted  in the manure.  The value  of animal  
manures  as a nutrient  source  for crop production  has been  known  for millennia.  
Xenophon  in 400 B.C. described  its importance  for crop production.
In the last 50 years  there have  been many changes  in agricultural  production.  
In Western  Europe  these reflect  many social changes  including  an increased  
demand  for livestock  products.  The availability  of relatively  cheap  inorganic-  
fertilisers  as the major  source  of improving  and maintaining  soil fertility  was 
an important  response  to this demand.  A consequence  has been that agricultural  
manures  became  agricultural  wastes. In the last 10 years the environmental  
implications  of this change  in attitude  may have  contributed  to the deterioration  
of the quality  of our surface  water. The degree  of public  concern  is emphasised  
by the continuing  introduction  of legislative  controls  at National  and European  
level.
Sustainable farming  systems  are required  in response  to both the  current  and 
future  environmental  legislation,  CAP  reform  and GATT. The role ot manure  
on grassland  farms  is being reconsidered  as fertiliser  accounts  for about  0.33 
of agriculture ’s energy  requirements  combined  with the requirement  to protect  
our environment.  In this paper  the potential of manure to substitute  for chemical  
fertilisers  and the practical  problems  facing  the grassland  farmer  in achieving  
this objective  are reviewed.
Background
Quantity  of manure.  Significant  differences  in the quantity  of manure  and 
the nutrient  load they impose  have  been shown  between  individual  EC countries.
23
For example,  the Netherlands  has an estimated  animal  manure  load in excess  
of 42 t ha ' of utilisable  agricultural  land whereas  in Greece  and Spain the 
corresponding  values are  only 31 ha This  contrast  in the extent  of the problem,  
between  countries,  is reflected  in the different  national  approaches  to providing  
solutions  in one country  may not be appropriate  to another.
In Ireland,  total annual  manure  production  has been estimated  at almost  87 
million  tonnes  - 85 million  tonnes  from grazing  animals  and 2 million  tonnes  
from  pigs and poultry.  At grazing  the manure  is returned  or recycled,  naturally, 
to the pasture.  During  the winter  many  of the grazing  animals  are housed  for 
varying  periods  of time. It has been estimated  that these animals  produce  29 
million  tonnes  of manure  or 0.33 of the total during  the indoor  winter  period.  
This is the quantity  of manure  which  has to be managed  each year.
Manure  management  systems  on farm. Animal  manures  are generally  stored 
in semi-solid  or liquid  form. The semi-solid  waste  is stored  in dungsteads  and 
is the excreta  mixed  with relatively small  quantities  of bedding material.  Recent  
trends  on intensive  livestock  production  farms  have resulted  in liquid  or slurry 
systems  where  animals  are housed  on slatted  floors,  without  bedding  material,  
over the storage  tanks. The advantages  of slurry  systems  are that it facilitates  
the management  of large livestock  units with savings  in labour  and material 
costs. There  are no accurate  data available  on the labour  and material  costs. 
There  are no accurate  data  available  on the types  of manure management  systems  
for the different  animal  enterprises.  A significant  proportion  of farmers  are still 
operating  solid storage  (dungstead)  manure  systems  for dairy and beef cattle. 
However,  it is very likely that the smaller  proportion  of farmers  using slurry 
storage  systems  are responsible  for the biggest  proportion  of national  manure 
output.
Nutrient  composition.  The nutrient  composition  of slurry  is influenced  by 
the type of animal,  its diet, the storage  conditions  and the extent  of the dilution  
with either  water  or litter. The effect  of animal  type and diet on the nutrient  
composition  oftheir  respective  slurries  is illustrated  (Table  1). The phosphorus  
(P) and potassium  (K) concentrations  of cattle  slurry  are 0.5 and 2.0, respectively, 
of those  in pig slurry. This reflects  the grass  based  diet of the bovine  compared  
with the cereal  based  diet of the pig. The nutrient  values  quoted  reflect  those  
reported  in the literature  in spite of the geographical  diversity  of the origin  of 
the slurries.  The nutrient  values  of slurries  shown  in Table I are at best  a guide  
to composition.
Table 1
The average  nutrient  content  of cattle and pig slurry
Slurry Dry matter  (%) Nitrogen  Phosphorus  Potassium
(kg of nutrients  10 f')
Cattle 8 38 6 42
Mean from literature 8 40 7 37
Pig 4 30 9 15
Mean from literature 8 58 14 23
24
In practice  there  is considerable variation  in nutrient  values  of slurries  between 
farms  (Table  2). Dilution  with extraneous  water  was responsible  for the large 
between-farm  variation  in dry matter  contents  of the slurries. Transporting  
dilute  slurry  is expensive  and the spreading  operation  will take longer  as there  
will be more  slurry to  be spread.  There  is a clear  need for some  form of “quality  
control ” on farms  by reducing  to a minimum  the quantity  of water  entering  into 
storage  tanks.
The annual  value  of Irish manures  was estimated  to be IR£120m  which  is 
equivalent  to about half the total amount  Irish farmers  spend on fertilisers.  
Complete  substitution  of manure  for fertiliser  is not possible.  However,  the 
value  of the nutrients  illustrates  the potential  of farm manures  to replace  part 
of the inorganic  fertilisers  as nutrient  sources  for grass production.
Table 2
Nutrient  values  of cattle and pig slurry
Slurry
typeDry matter  (%) Nitrogen Phosphorus Potassium  
(g kg’') kg 10 tonnes  ' (fresh slurry)
Cattle  (50 samples)
Mean
Range
Pig (52 samples)
Mean
Range6.9 36 6 43
2-12.3 11-71 1-12 10-82
3.2 46 9 26
1-10.2 15-95 1-32 7-52
The total quantity of organic matter  and nutrients  contained  in slurry  represent  
a serious  threat  to both ground  and surface  water. Therefore  slurry must be 
managed  in such a way as to maximize  the slurry  nutrient  uptake  by the crop 
while  minimizing  the risk of nutrient  leaks to the environment.  Landspreading  
is the most economical  and environmentally  friendly  strategy  for slurries  on 
Irish farms. As 0.93 of the Irish land area is grassland,  the manure  is almost  
exclusively  applied  to grassland.
Summary
The variability  in slurry composition  highlights  a problem  for the farmer  
when trying  to determine  the correct  slurry  application  rates. An objective  of 
Teagasc ’s slurry research  programme  is to develop  a reliable,  automated  and 
rapid method  for estimating  the nutrient  composition  of slurry on the farm.
The nutrient  concentration  of slurry  is used to estimate  the slurry  application  
rates. The objective  is to match as closely  as possible  the slurry nutrient  
application  with the requirements  of the crop. As a general  rule the crop ’s K 
requirement  is used as the basis for the assessment  of the volume  of cattle  slurry  
while the crop ’s P requirement  is used as the basis for the assessment  of the 
volume  of pig slurry.
Availability  of slurry  nutrients
The N and P in slurry  is divided  equally  between  mineral  and organic  forms
25
while  the K is nearly  all in the mineral  form. The mineral  forms  are immediately  
available  to the plant  while  the organic  forms  must be mineralised  before  they 
become  available  to the plant. The rate of mineralisation  is variable  and may 
take a number  of years.
Phosphorus  and Potassium.  The availability of slurry  P and K was determi  ned 
by field and pot trials and estimates  of slurry nutrient  availability  were made 
(Table  3). In making  these estimates  cognizance  was taken of soil fertility  
levels. Where  soil fertility  is low the rate of mineralisation  is too slow to meet 
current  crop  requirements  and account  should  be taken only of the mineral  form  
of the nutrient  in the slurry (Table  3).
Table 3
The proportion  of slurry  nutrients  available  in the season  of application
Slurry  type Nitrogen Phosphorus Potassium
Cattle 0.25 0.50 0.88
Pig 0.50 0.57 0.60
Slurry  P and K utilisation  on grassland  have efficiencies  ranging  from 0.1 
to 1.0. However, on a fertile  soil, the P and K in slurry  have the same  efficiency  
as inorganic  fertiliser  P and K provided  that they are correctly  applied.
Nitrogen.  The efficiency  of slurry N for crop production  is considerably  
less than either  the P or K (Table  3). The relatively  low efficiency  reflects  the 
ease with which  N, compared  with P and K, can be lost from the system.  
Estimates  from the Netherlands  suggest  that up to 0.80 of N is not accounted  
for on intensive  grassland farms. Following  storage,  cattle  slurry N is composed  
of organic-N  and ammonium-N  in approximately  equal proportions.  In soil 
there is a tendency  for N in all forms to be converted  to nitrate  N by soil 
microorganisms.  The rate at which  this conversion proceeds  can vary depending 
on the level of microbial  activity.
Organic-N  from slurry. The organic-N  in slurry  is not immediately available  
to plants  but it is estimated  that ca 0.50 of the organic-N  will be converted  to 
ammonium-N  during  the first 12 months  after spreading.  Fifty percent  of the 
remainder  will become  available  in the second  year, and so on in succeeding  
years  according  to a typical  decay  series. For the grassland  farmer  the organic-  
N is not important  in terms of a grass yield response  because  of its slow  
unpredictable  release.  Therefore  only the ammonium  N is potentially  available  
when considering  a nitrogen  contribution  from slurry for grass production.
Ammonium-N  from slurry. Following  landspreading  there are a number  
of options  for the ammonium-N  including  volatilisation  of ammonia  to the 
atmosphere,  plant uptake  as ammonium  and conversion  to nitrate. The 
ammonium  compounds  in slurry are unstable  and decompose  easily with 
ammonia  gas volatilising  to the atmosphere.  Volatilising  of ammonia  is a mixed  
blessing.  Where  slurry is treated  as a waste for disposal,  volatilisation  of 
ammonia  saves the soils, and ultimately  waters,  from being overloaded  with
26
nitrogen.  On the other hand, volatilised  ammonia  will be carried  in the 
atmosphere  and deposited  in rain in some other area - possibly  an 
environmentally  sensitive  area where  nitrogen  may be undesirable.  The total 
loss on any one occasion  depends  on a number  of variables  including  the 
composition  of the slurry, weather  and soil conditions  and the spreading  
technique  used.
The ammonium-N  not volatilised  or absorbed  directly  by the plant is 
mineralised  to nitrate. In this form it is available  to the plant. However,  if 
the plant  is not growing,  the nitrate  from the slurry  application  remains  in the 
soil solution  and is available  for leaching.  Leaching  of nitrate  to groundwater  
occurs  on the lighter  free draining  soils. The concern  about the health  
implications  of nitrate  in drinking  water  has resulted  in an EC Directive  (80/ 
778) controlling  admissible  concentrations.  The implications  are that autumn  
or late winter  slurry  applications  should  be avoided  on the lighter  free draining  
soils.
Crop recovery  of ammonium-N.  From a grassland  farmer ’s perspective  
volatilisation  of ammonia  is the loss of nitrogen  potentially  available  to the 
crop. The new spreading  techniques  of shallow  injection  and bandspreading  
reduce  volatilisation  compared  with the conventional  splashplate  method.  
Improved  crop recovery  of the ammonium-N  in cattle  slurry  when applied  to 
grass for silage  using a bandspreader  or shallow  injector.  This improvement  
in recovery  reflected  the reduced  volatilisation  losses. More  recent  data from 
field trials  at Johnstown  Castle  have  found similar  results  but with considerable  
variation.
Slurry  treatments  including  dilution,  separation  and pH alteration  to reduce  
volatilisation  can improve  the recovery  of the ammonium-N  in cattle  slurry  by 
a silage  crop. While  treatments  improve  N recovery  compared  with untreated  
slurry, the pH reduction  treatment  appeared  to be the best practical  option.  
Recently,  the International  Fund for Ireland  has provided  significant  funding  
for a collaborative  study between  Queen ’s University  Belfast  and Teagasc  
(Johnstown  Castle,  Oak Park)  to combine  spreading  and treatment  approaches  
in the one operation.  The primary  objective  is to improve  the recovery  of the 
ammonium-N  in slurry by the plant.
Summary
The slurry  P and K can contribute  to the nutrient  cycle  on grassland  farms  
by substituting  directly  for inorganic fertiliser  P and K. The quantity  of mineral  
fertiliser  used should  relate  to the deficit  remaining  when the slurry nutrients  
have  been recycled.  To achieve  this the  farmer  must  ensure  the slurry  is applied  
as evenly  as possible,  at the correct  rate and at the right time. The value of 
slurry  N for silage  is about  0.25 of the total N present  in the slurry  for spring  
applications  and zero at all other  times. Therefore  slurry  has a clear potential  
to replace  fertiliser  nutrients  thus reducing  farm costs. Nutrients  utilised  by 
the crop do not cause pollution.
Problems  for the farmer
Slurry  management  creates  a number  of practical  problems  for the grassland
27
farmer. These include  relatively  few spreading  opportunities,  unsuitable  
spreading  equipment,  agitation  and variable  nutrient  composition.  When  these  
are considered  it is easier  to understand  why grassland  farmers  tend to regard  
slurry as a waste rather  than an integral  part of the farm ’s nutrient  cycle.
Spreading  opportunities.  It is recommended  that cattle slurry  be applied  to 
the silage rather  than the grazing  ground  to minimize  the risk of disease  
transmission  from the landspreading  of cattle  slurry.  This implies  that there  are, 
at best, four spreading  opportunities  during  the year. In early spring  for first 
cut silage,  immediately  after the first cut for second  cut silage,  immediately  
after  the second  cut for third  cut silage  or in the autumn  just before the  animals  
are brought  indoors  for the winter.  On wet-land  farms  wet soil conditions  may 
eliminate  the spring  or autumn  options  reducing  the spreading  opportunities  
to two. In practice  most of the slurry is spread  in autumn.  This increases  the 
risk of nitrate  leaching  on the free draining  soils and the risk of runoff  on the 
wetter  heavier  soils. The time interval  for spreading  in spring  is weather  
dependent  in that suitable  conditions  must exist to ensure  runoff  losses are 
minimized.  Therefore  a major  objective  of Teagasc ’s research  and advisory  
programme  is to bring  the spreading  date forward  into the spring  and summer. 
However,  solutions  are required  for a number  of practical  problems  before  this 
can be realistically  achieved.
Agitation.  The natural  settling  and flotation  that occurs  in slurry tanks  
necessitates  agitation  before  spreading.  To remove  the slurry  from the storage  
tank it must  be agitated,  otherwise  the liquids  would  be drawn  off leaving  only 
the solids  which  cannot  be evacuated  by conventional  methods.  Also, if there  
is no agitation  the initial  slurry  removed  from the storage  tank will contain  the 
liquid fraction  with most  of ammonium-N  and K while the slurry  removed  later 
will contain  most of the P and the organic  N. Therefore,  for effective  nutrient  
recycling,  it is very important  to ensure  the slurry  is agitated  before  spreading.  
This creates a  problem  for the spring spreading opportunity because  the animals  
are still indoors.  They must be removed  from the building  before  the slurry 
can be agitated  to reduce  the risk of poisoning  from hydrogen  sulphide  gas.
Effect  of slurry  contamination  on ensilabilitv.  There  is concern  among  farmers 
about the potentially  negative  impact  of slurry spreading  on the subsequent  
ensilability  of silage crops.  Teagasc  research  has established  that there is no 
negative  effects  of slurry  application  on the grass  composition  or fermentation  
for all silage  cuts provided  it is applied  at the correct  time and rate.
Slurry  spreading  machinery.  The most common  machine  available for slurry 
spreading  (i.e. the vacuum  tanker)  has changed  relatively  little in 30 years  with 
the exception  of its increased  capacity.  Originally  designed  for disposal,  i.e. 
spreading  large quantities  of slurry  quickly,  with a minimum  of maintenance,  
little attention  was given to evenness  of application,  rate of application  or 
emissions  (ammonia  and odour).  With the objective  of utilising  slurry as a 
nutrient  .source  for crop production,  agricultural  engineering  attention  is now 
focusing  on providing  solutions.  Much  attention  is being  devoted  to the spreading 
options  of bandspreading  and shallow  injection  which  apply  the slurry  evenly
28
and reduce  odour  and ammonia  emissions  and may also reduce  the incidence  
of poor fermentation  which  can be associated  with splashplate  applied  slurry.  
The new spreading  techniques  compared  with the conventional  splashplate  
reduce  the opportunity  for the dispersal  of disease  causing  bacteria  that may 
be present  in the slurry
Methods  to monitor  slurry  application  rate from  a vacuum  tanker  have been 
developed.  The need for such  a device  is highlighted  by a particular  farm situation 
where  the measured application rate  was 2.5 times  that of the operator ’s estimate.
29
Agriculture  and Water  Pollution  - 
The Main Issues
M. NEILL
Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Kilkenny.
Up to the first half of the twentieth  century,  Ireland  on the whole  escaped  
the worst  ravages  of water  pollution  that were apparent  in some of the more 
developed  countries. This was mainly  due to  a combination  of factors,  the more 
important  of which  were that:
(i) the bulk of the population  resided  in rural areas,
(ii) the bulk of the urban population  resided  in coastal  areas,
(iii) there was a very low level of industrial  development,  and
(iv) there was an abundance  of water resources.
In the period  1961 to 1981 the population ofthe  Republic  of Ireland increased 
from 2.82M  to 3.44M.  This population  growth  was accompanied  by a rapid  
decline  in the rural, and a rapid expansion  in the urban populations  and was 
also accompanied  by a very substantial  Increase  in industrial  activity  and by 
an intensification  of agriculture.  A measure  of this can be gauged  from the 
country ’s export  performance,  the value of which  increased  from £103M  in 
1959 to £9,743M  in 1985.
All of these developments  over the last 30 years have led to the discharge  
of greater  quantities  of waste  to rivers,  lakes,  estuaries  and coastal  areas.  The 
introduction  of the Local Government  (Water  Pollution)  Act, 1977 was a 
recognition  by the Government  that new initiations  were required  to control  
and abate water  pollution.
The main causes  of water  pollution  in Ireland
The principal  causes  of water  pollution  in Ireland  are:
1. Untreated  or inadequately  treated  municipal  sewage.
2. Industrial  effluents  - mainly  from the longer  established  meat and sugar  
factories  and from creameries  and tanneries.
3. Agricultural  effluents  - particularly  animal  slurry  and effluents from silage 
pits.
4. Eutrophication  - There  has been an increase  in eutrophication  (enrichment  
leading  to increased  weed/algal  and caused  mainly  by increased  
phosphorous  in fresh waters)  in many Irish rivers  and lakes over the past 
few years.
5. Toxic and Hazardous  Waste - Including  chemicals  from industry,  heavy 
metals  from industry  and mining,  biocides  (run-off  of pesticides,  
insecticides,  herbicides  and fungicides  from agricultural  land), industrial 
and transport  spillages,  bacteriological  contamination  or ammonia  from 
sewage  or animal  slurries,  etc.
30
Dissolved  oxygen  in natural  waters
Oxygen  is only slightly  soluble  in water  and concentrations  will depend  on 
temperature,  salt content  and on biochemical  activity  in the water  body.  Dissolved 
oxygen  is essential for  the survival  of most  aquatic  animals  and its determination  
is therefore  a key test in pollution  control.
Table !
Some values  for the solubility  of oxygen  in fresh water and in salt water  at 
various  temperatures
Temperature Dissolved  oxygen  concentrations  at 
equilibrium  (100%)  saturation
Fresh water Salt water
5 12.8 mg/1 O, 10.0 mg/1 O
10 11.3 9.0
15 10.2 8.1
20 9.2 7.4
25 8.4 6.7
30 7.6 6.1
Dissolved  oxygen  concentrations  are expressed  either  in absolute  values  of 
mg/1 Oj or in relative  units of percentage  saturation  (e.g. fresh water  at 10°C  
and at 100%  saturation  contains  11.3 mg/1 O^, while at 10°C  and 60% saturation  
the concentration  is 60% of 11.3 = 6.8 mg/1 O^).
Waste  assimilation  and biochemical  oxygen  demand  (B.O.D.)
When a biodegradable  organic  waste (e.g. domestic  sewage,  food factory  
effluent,  animal  slurry,  silage  effluent,  etc.) is discharged  to a water  course,  it 
serves  as a food source  for bacteria  and other microorganisms  (which  are 
naturally  present  in the water).  These aerobic  bacteria  will commence  the 
breakdown  of the organic  material  and in so doing will multiply  in numbers  
and consume  the oxygen dissolved  in the water.  If the quantity  of waste present  
is sufficiently  large  then the rate of bacterial  uptake  of oxygen  will outstrip  the 
re-aeration  capacity  of the water (i.e. the rate at which  dissolved  oxygen  is 
replenished  from the atmosphere)  and the dissolved  oxygen  concentration  will 
diminish. This  can have  serious  effects  on fish and other  aquatic  life. Ultimately  
the dissolved  oxygen  level could drop to zero, then conditions  would  favour  
anaerobic  bacteria  which produce  foul smelling  odours  (eg. the river Liffey 
smell of the 1960 ’s).
The Biochemical  Oxygen  Demand  (B.O.D.)  of a water or effluent  is the 
amount  of oxygen  which  is used up by bacteria  in breaking  down  that organic  
matter  which  is amenable  to biological  oxidation.  The B.O.D.  test is an important  
test in the determination  of water  quality,  it is also used to determine  the polluting  
strength  of domestic,  agricultural  or industrial  effluents.  Some examples  of 
B.O.D.  levels are given in Table 2.
31
Table 2
Examples  of B.O.D.  levels for water  and effluent  samples
Sample B.O.D.  range (mg/1 02)
Clean water < 3
Doubtful  quality  water 3 to 5
Poor quality  water > 5
Treated  sewage 10 to 40
Untreated  domestic  sewage 300
Cattle  slurry 12,000
Pig slurry 30,000
Silage  effluent 60,000
It will take  a period  of time  for the bacteria  to degrade the waste  and therefore, 
in a river, it will be some  distance  downstream  from the discharge  that the low 
dissolved  oxygen  levels will occur.  The greater  the amount  of waste in the river,  
the greater  will be the oxygen  uptake.  However,  the re-aeration  capacity  may 
be such  that no serious  depletion in dissolved  oxygen  occurs, shallow  or turbulent 
rivers  will have a high re-aeration  capacity.  As the waste  is assimilated  by the 
bacteria,  their food supply  is reduced  causing  their numbers  to diminish  and 
the river gradually  recovers.
A diagrammatic  presentation  of the effects  of an organic  effluent  on a river 
and the changes  as one passes  downstream  from the outfall  is given in Figure  
1. When sampling  a river  stretch  to determine  the effects  of an effluent  discharge  
on water  quality,  it is necessary  to take samples  of the effluent,  an upstream  
sample  from the river and several  downstream  samples  (at various  distances  
from the outfall).
Game  fish will be affected  if dissolved  oxygen  levels drop to 50% saturation  
for any significant  period.  Coarse  fish will also be affected  if levels  are around  
30% saturation.
Eutrophication
Another  factor  influencing  dissolved  oxygen  levels  in natural  waters  is the 
abundance  of plant life, including  algae. Eutrophication  is the enrichment  of 
water  bodies  with nutrients  (mainly  phosphorous  and nitrogen)  which  leads to 
excessive  growths  of plants and algae.
Phosphorous is perceived  to be the limiting  nutrient  for weed  and algal growth 
in freshwater  whereas  nitrogen  is more significant  in saline waters.
Eutrophication can occur  either  naturally  or artificially.  Natural  eutrophication 
occurs  mainly  in lakes and is due to the very gradual  increase  in phosphorous  
levels  brought  about  by processes  such as shallowing  (filling  up with organic  
and inorganic  sediments)  or by traditional  agricultural  practices.  Artificial  
eutrophication  arises  from the marked  increa.ses  in nutrient  supply  from wash  
off of artificial  agricultural  fertilisers  or from domestic  sewage,  industrial  
effluents  or waste from intensive  farming  operations.
32
Fig. 1 - Diagrammatic  presentation  of the effects  of an organic  effluent  
on a river  and the changes  as one passes  downstream  from the outfall.  A 
& B physical  and chemical  changes,  C changes  in micro-organisms,  D 
changes  in larger  animals.
33
Plants  undergo  respiration at all times,  during  daylight  hours  they also undergo  
photosynthesis.  This results  in a net output  of oxygen  during  the day and a net 
intake  of oxygen  by the plants  at night. In eutrophic  rivers  or lakes the exchange  
of oxygen  between  the plants  (including  algae)  and the water  can lead to high 
(frequently  super-saturated)  levels of dissolved  oxygen  during  the day but 
dissolved  oxygen  levels  can decline  seriously  during  the hours of darkness  (see 
Figure  2).
Figure  2 - A typical  24 hour study  of dissolved  oxygen  at a point in a 
eutrophic  river  or lake.
The critical  period  for dissolved  oxygen in eutrophic waters  occurs  just before 
dawn  (i.e. after maximum  hours  of darkness).  During  summer,  when the river  
flows are low and plant growth  is at a maximum,  eutrophic  conditions  have 
caused  fish kills. However  the short hours  of darkness  during  summer  nights 
in Ireland  help to lessen  this effect.
Eutrophication  can be much more serious  in lakes than in rivers.  In lakes  
the phosphorous  levels can build up and recycle  between  water, plants and 
sediments  whereas  in rivers the nutrients  are eventually  carried  to the sea.
Phosphate  is freely removed  from water by plants  and algae during  the 
growing  season.  Therefore  increases  in eutrophication  are not always  evident  
from the analyses  of phosphate  in water samples.  In many instances  the 
eutrophication  problem  is more  evident  from the weed/algal  growth  and from 
the effects  on dissolved  oxygen.
Slime  growths  (sewage  fungus)
Slime growths  of bacteria/fungi/protozoans,  commonly  called Sewage  
Fungus,  are often found in rivers with an excess  of organic  waste.
These  visible  slime  growths  which  resemble  “sheep ’s tails” cause  adverse  
changes  in the nature  of the bottom  fauna  and flora. They can also exert an 
oxygen  demand.  Slime  growths  are often associated with silage  effluent  pollution 
and with sugar factory  effluents,  until recently  they were also often found 
downstream  from meat factory  discharges.
34
Nitrates
The use of nitrogenous  fertilisers  in Ireland  increased  from 90,000  tonnes  
in 1970/71  to 323,000  tonnes  in 1985/86.  A high dietary  intake  of nitrate  is 
known  to lead to the condition  methaemoglobinaemia  (blue baby syndrome)  
in bottle-fed  infants  and is suspected  to cause  the formation  of carcinogenic  
nitrosamines  and nitrosamides.  Normal  treatment  of water  for domestic  supply  
does not remove  nitrate,  therefore  waters  used for drinking  must be protected  
from nitrate  contamination  at source.
Nitrates  are of concern  in some ground-waters,  especially  in areas where  
there is porous  bed-rock  covered  with a shallow  layer of soil.
Nitrate  levels in river waters  in Ireland  are generally  well below  the E.C. 
maximum  admissible  concentration  (11.3  mg/1 N) for drinking  water.  However  
levels  have increased  especially in areas  associated  with intensive  tillage  farming  
(e.g. parts  of counties  Carlow  and Wexford)  where the  recommended  limit (5.65 
mg/1 N) is exceeded  in some  rivers  at times,  mainly  during  winter.  High nitrate  
levels are of major  concern  in many of the developed  countries  and levels in 
Irish rivers therefore  need to be carefully  monitored.
Short-term  pollution  incidents
Public  concern  regarding  “once-off  ’ types  of pollution  of surface  waters  has 
increased  significantly  in recent  years. Incidents  of this type mostly  involve  
the direct  ingress  of high-strength  wastes  to waters  over a short period  which  
result  in fish kills in otherwise  unpolluted  rivers.  In some  cases  water  abstractions  
have also been affected.
In many  cases  the factor  involved  in these  acute  pollution  incidents  has been 
the waste liquor  from silage-making  operations  or animal  slurry.  Water  pollution  
problems  arise when  proper  containment  of the waste  liquor  is not allowed  for 
and it flows  directly  to nearby  streams  or is rapidly  leached  there by rainfall.
The very high B.O.D.  content  of these agricultural  wastes  suggest  that the 
fish mortality  in pollution  incidents  arises from deoxygenation  of the water.  
However,  the presence  of potentially  toxic substances  such as ammonia  from 
slurry may also have a direct  effect  on fish or else act indirectly  by lowering  
their  tolerance  of deoxygenation.  The effects  of silage  liquor  pollution are further  
aggravated  in summer  months,  when river flows  are likely to be reduced  and 
water temperature  are relatively  high.
In many cases  the pollution  incident  may not be discovered  for a period  of 
time and the polluting  matter  will have been washed  downstream  and will not 
be detected  in chemical  samples.  However  a biological  examination  of the 
macroinvertebrate  fauna  of the river may indicate  the location  ofthe  spillage  
and also indicate  the extent  of the effects  of the pollution  (see Figure 1).
WATER  QUALITY  MANAGEMENT  PLANS  
Section  15 of the Local  Government  (Water  Pollution)  Act, 1977, provides  
for the preparation  of Water  Quality  Management  Plans.  Such plans  may cover  
the water located  in one local authority  area but the Act also provides  for a 
number  of local authorities  to consult  together  to take Co-ordinate  action  on
35
a river catchment  basis by the preparation  of river catchment  Water  Quality  
Management  Plans.
The concept  of river water  quality  management
Water  is used for many beneficial  purposes,  some which involve  changes  
in quality  and some which  do not. These  uses include  abstractions  to meet the 
needs of public  water  supplies,  industry  and agriculture  and the in situ uses 
associated  with commercial  and sport fishing  and recreation.  The controlled  
disposal  of wastes,  arising  from domestic  and industrial  sources,  is another  
important  use, even though  it is a potential  constraint  on the foregoing  uses.  
These  various  water  uses and associated  factors are inter-related, often  complex,  
sometimes  conflicting  and they cannot  be managed properly  as a whole without  
adopting  a comprehensive  approach  and without  the availability  of a wide  variety  
of data and basic information.
Objectives  of water  quality  management  planning
The main objective  to be achieved  by a Plan is to ensure  that the quality  
of the waters  are maintained  in a satisfactory  condition  and where  necessary  
improved,  thereby;
(i) safeguarding  public  health
(ii) catering  for the abstraction  of increasing  quantities  of water for 
domestic,  industrial  and agricultural  purposes,
(iii) catering  for the needs of commercial  and game fisheries,
(iv) catering  for the relevant  water-based  amenities  and recreational  
requirements  (including  bathing).
Other  vital objectives  of the Plan are to identify the  control  measures deemed  
necessary  in relation  to the satisfactory  treatment  and disposal  of existing  and 
future  sewage  and industrial effluent  discharges  and also  to identify the  priorities  
for investment  in public  and private  (industrial)  waste water  treatment  facilities.
Methodology  adopted  in preparing  the Plan
(i) All the available  basic data relating  to water  quality  and water  quantity  
are collated.
(ii) The existing  waste  loads discharged  to surface  waters  in the catchment  
are determined  and projections  of the future  generated  waste loads over the 
next 20 years are also estimated.
(iii) Existing  water  abstractions for public,  industrial  and agricultural  purposes 
are assessed  and the projected  future  demand  is estimated.
There  are often  many  gaps in the data available  and it is vital that these gaps 
are eliminated.
(iv) The beneficial  water uses (existing  and future)  to be protected  within  
the catchment  are identified.
(v) The Water  Quality  Standards  deemed  necessary  to support  the various 
beneficial  uses are defined.  In doing this, reference  is made to data and 
information  from various  sources  including:
E.E.C.  Directives  and National  Legislation  concerning  -
36
(a) Surface  Water  intended  for the abstraction  of drinking  water.
(b) Freshwater  fish (Salmonid  waters).
(c) Bathing  waters.
(d) Shellfish  waters.
US Environmental  Protection  Agency  Criteria  for water  quality.  Memorandum  
No. 1 as issued  by the Dept, of the Environment.  The general  water  quality  
conditions  pertaining  in the catchment.
Where  a variety  of beneficial  uses must  be catered  for, then those  requiring  
the highest  quality  of water determine  the standards  which must be set.
(vi) Estimates  of the assimilative  capacity  (i.e. the capacity  of the water  to 
deal with effluent  discharges  without  exceeding  the standards)  are computed  
and the maximum  permissible  waste  loads that can be discharged  to the river  
at a number  of key locations  are determined.  The assimilative  capacities  have  
normally  been calculated  at 95%ile  river  flows  (i.e.. the flow which  is exceeded  
for 95% of the time).
A computerised  mathematical  model  to predict  the effects  on water  quality  
of waste discharges  at various  locations  may be developed.  This is of particular  
importance  in estuaries.
(vii) Any  areas at present  overloaded  by waste  discharges  are identified  as 
are the remedial  actions  deemed  necessary  to rectify  these problems.
(viii)  A number  of options  in relation  to the treatment  of existing  and future  
waste waters  may be identified.  In earlier  Water  Quality  Management  Plans  
these  options  related  mainly  to B.O.D.  removal  and included  primary  sewage  
treatment  as an option.  However,  the recent  EC Directive  concerning  urban  
waste water  treatment  (91/271/EEC)  has removed  primary  sewage  treatment  
as an option at larger  towns  as the Directive  requires  a least  secondary  (biological)  
treatment  at the main  centres  of population.  This Directive  will play an important  
part in the preparation  of future Plans.
An increase in eutrophication  in rivers  and lakes  in Ireland  has been observed  
over the  past few years  and therefore  the option  of phosphorous,  removal  from 
treated  sewage  will probably  be included  in future  Water Quality  Management  
Plans and in existing  plans as they are reviewed.
(ix) The main priorities  for capital  investment  in both public  and private  
waste water treatment  facilities  are identified.
(x) The Plan should  also include  recommendations  on an active  programme,  
including  a programme  of monitoring  water quality  for compliance  with the 
standards,  which will ensure  that all the necessary  basic data required  are 
collected  on an on-going  basis to facilitate  updating,  revision,  refinement  and 
implementation  of tbe present  plan.
(xi) Provision  is included  for periodic  reviews  of the plan. This is necessary  
in order  to judge  the performance  of the Plan. Also, unforeseen  developments  
may arise. The monitoring  may show up new or unknown  problems  and new 
EC Directives  may be implemented  or existing  standards  modified.
(xii) Provision  for a study of the ground-water  in the catchment  area may 
be included  in a plan. In this regard,  a ground-water  survey  by the Regional  
Water Laboratory  in the south-east  region using a computerised  map based
37
system  (GIS) is contracted  under  the EC STRIDE  Programme  and this will 
start in January  1993.
Simplified  representation  of the main elements  of a water  quality  
management  plan
38
CONCLUSIONS
New sewage  treatment  plants  have been constructed  in many of the larger  
towns  in the south-east  region over  the past  decade  or so ; these  include  Thurles,  
Nenagh,  Cahir, Cashel,  Tipperary,  Kilkenny,  Carlow,  Gorey,  Enniscorthy,  
Lismore,  Callan  and several  other smaller  towns and villages  and there are 
plans for further  effluent  treatment  plants  (e.g. Wexford,  Waterford,  Carrick-  
on-Suir  & Clonmel).  Many industries  in the region  have also constructed  or 
improved  their effluent  treatment  plants.  These treatment  plants reduce  the 
organic  waste load discharged  to the rivers resulting  in better  water  quality, 
however  most of them are not designed  to remove  phosphorus.  The effluents  
from such plants  are therefore  likely  to retain  the eutrophication  (or fertilising)  
properties  of the untreated  effluent.  Also, the eutrophication  properties  of 
effluents  are often  enhanced  on treatment  because  the levels  of ortho-phosphate  
(the most  readily  ‘bioavailable ’ form  of phosphorus) may be higher  in the treated  
effluent.  Therefore  the removal of phosphorus  from some  effluents  by additional  
(tertiary)  treatment  is necessary.
As the various  sewage  treatment  plants were commissioned  and also as 
industrial  effluent  licences  have  become  more  fully  complied  with, monitoring  
has shown  a definite  improvement  in water quality  in many of the rivers  
previously  polluted  by industrial  and municipal  effluents.  However  some  
problem  areas  still exist.  Most  of these  effluents  are point  discharges  and their  
impact  on receiving  waters  can be monitored  accurately  and relatively  easily.
Agricultural  pollution  and eutrophication  problems,  on the other hand,  are 
more difficult  to monitor  because  of their intermittent  and diffuse  nature.  
Problems  caused  by agricultural  pollution  have been solved  or conditions  
improved  in some locations,  however  some of these have recurred  and new 
problems  have developed.  Although  many of these agricultural  pollution  
incidents  are of short  duration,  they can have serious  effects  on the river biota  
sometimes  resulting  in fish kills in otherwise  unpolluted  rivers.
A survey  by the local authorities  of all farms in the country  with a view 
to identifying  those  with existing  or potential  pollution  problems  commenced  
in 1987.  This  survey was having  a major  influence in combating  water  pollution,  
however  the survey  work  appears  to have  discontinued  to a large  extent  in more  
recent  years.  The farm pollution  advisory  service  which  was also initiated  by 
Teagasc  (then  A.C.O.T.)  in 1987 is also of significant  importance  in reducing  
pollution  from farm yards.
As further  sewage  treatment  plants  are commissioned and as industrial  effluent 
licences  become more  fully complied  with, it is expected that  pollution  problems  
from these sources  will abate.  However  phosphate  removal  equipment  needs  
to be installed  in some of these plants.
Pollution  from farm yards should  also improve  - especially  if the local 
authority  farm yard survey  was intensified  to the 1988 level. However  run-off  
of fertilisers'(especially  phosphate  and nitrogen)  and slurry from land will be 
more difficult  to control  and this problem  will require  more attention  in the 
future.
39
Soil Water  and Pollution
T. GLEESON
Teagasc,  Kinsealy  Research  Centre,  Dublin  17.
J. KIELY
Dairy  Husbandry  Department,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Water  is the principal  carrier  of pollutants  from the  farm  as run-off  to streams 
and lakes and by infiltration  down to ground-water.  We now have a good  
understanding  of the hydrology  of most Irish soils largely because  of 
investigative  work for better land drainage.  We can also with good site 
investigations  quantify  water movement  in the soil as well as designing  
drainage  systems  that efficiently  control  watertable  to a depth suitable  for 
intensive  farming.
Polluting  materials  from farms
There are three principal  polluting  materials  of concern  from farms.
1. Phosphate  enrichment  of surface  waters:  This is mainly  of concern  because  
of the role phosphorous  plays in increased  algal and other aquatic  plant  
growth  which  can lead to eutrophication  and the deterioration  of surface  
waters  for fish.
2. Nitrate  leaching  to roundwater:  This is a problem  associated  with very 
specific  geological  and soil conditions.  It is of concern because  of its alleged 
effect  on human  health.
3. Organic  materials  with high BOD: These are mainly  silage effluent  and 
water contaminated  with animal  manure  or slurry.  They are of concern  
because  they cause rivers and streams  to be critically  short of oxygen  
particularly  in periods  of warm weather  and low flows resulting  in fish kills. 
They  can also cause  taint  and raised  bacterial counts  which  can be a concern  
where  surface  waters  are used  for public  supply.  The latter  problem can also 
affect  borehole  wells but it is mainly  confined  to domestic  wells close to 
a farmyard  (most  often the farmer ’s own) where  there are no well-head  
protection  measures  in place.
Pesticides  and other  manufactured  chemicals  used  on farms  are not a serious  
problem  in Irish waters  largely  because  ofthe  low intensity  of agriculture  and 
the small acreage  of horticulture.  In the UK pesticide  contamination  of surface  
and ground  water  is due largely  to spraying  on roads,  paths,  railways  and other  
urban and industrial  areas without  soil cover  or a crop canopy  that aid their 
breakdown  in nature.
Recent  research  results
A number  of small pilot measurements  have recently  being  carried  out with 
a view to quantifying  water borne pollutants  from agriculture.
40
Monitoring  sources  of farm pollution:
The quality  of approximately  2,000km  of the largest  rivers are being  
monitored for a number  of years.  The smallest  monitoring  station  will represent  
several  km^ of catchment  making  it difficult  to properly  partition  the origin  of 
any pollution  present  into point  (farmyard)  and diffuse  (land)  sources.  We have  
recently  begun  monitoring  land-drains  and open field-boundary  drains  (called  
sheughs/gripes/dykes  locally),  some with continuous  small flows originating  
in springs,  others  with intermittent  flow. It is estimated  that there are about  2 
million  km of land drains  not counting  mole drains  and 200,000km  of open  
field-boundary  drains.  Some  of these are being  monitored  further  down  along  
small natural  streams  to an existing  “official ” river monitoring  station.  There  
are an estimated  further  20,000km  of such small streams.
Pilot survey  of water  quality  in open field-boundary  drains:
In recent  years  there has been concern  that overland  flow from nutrient  rich 
soil surfaces  is contributing  to the increased  nutrient  status  of some  rivers  and 
lakes.  Long  term monitoring  on a national  scale is only done on rivers,  larger  
streams  and lakes. Even where  small catchments  with different  land uses are 
monitored, the  precise  effect  of land-use  and point  versus diffuse  sources  remain  
confounded.  Preliminary  results from this trial suggest  that analyses  made  along 
small open field boundary  drains  can be used to pinpoint  significant  sources  
of nutrient  enrichment  both point and diffuse  and that these analyses  can be 
used to quantify  the contribution  of each source  to the overall  nutrient  load.  
While  there was a small but measurable  difference  between  forestry,  fertilised  
only at planting,  and intensive  grassland,  results  suggest  that farmyards  and 
not intensive  pasture  are the major  sources  of enrichment.  Several  farmyards  
accounted  for a 10 to 100 fold increase  in open  drain  levels  of BOD  and nutrients. 
Only land areas with excessive  slurry  applications  or with excessive  irrigation  
of dirty water,  or tillage  with soil erosion,  are likely  to be significant  sources  
of nutrients.  Results  also suggest  that nutrient  levels  are attenuated  along  man­
made  watercourses  with aquatic  weed growth.  A feature  of all the near source  
levels  is that the values  for phosphate  were much higher  than that required  by 
fisheries  interests  for the highest  quality  waters,  suggesting  that the uptake  by 
aquatic  plants  in open drains  is an essential  part of the creation  of good fishing  
rivers.  It also follows  that this system  could  break  down  when  overloaded  and 
that this is likely  to happen  when  the combined  sum of all sources  exceeds  the 
level capable  of being absorbed  by plant growth.  There  is also evidence  that 
organic  effluents  from farmyards  may by reducing  oxygen  levels,  be responsible  
for releasing  phosphates  fixed in deposited  stream  silts. Open field boundary  
drains collect  runoff  not only from the land  surface  but also from  shallow  land-  
drains  (moles),  conventional  piped drains  (circa 1 m deep), newer  deep land 
drains  (l'/2 - 2'/2 m deep) and directly  from shallow  or deep aquifers  below  
the water-table  from  land with no land-drains.  Inflow  from  the surface  of enriched 
sites would  have the highest  P levels,  while P levels in piped land drainage  
water is attenuated  with depth  of land-drain.  The deeper  the drain the longer  
the flow path, the greater  the time of travel,  the deeper  the sward  rooting  and 
the lower  the P levels.
41
Measurement  of attenuation  of nutrients  and BOD in overland  flow from
applied  slurrv:
To make  these measurements  a long uniform  slope  on very wet undrained  
land in wet spring weather  with  very low nutrient  status was deliberately  chosen. 
Slurry  was applied  at 10,000  gall/ac  (112m%a).  The nutrients  in the overland  
run-off  were measured  at short intervals  of time (days initially)  and later in 
months.  Nutrients  and organic  fractions  were moved  slowly  downhill  with 
dramatic  attenuation.  The situation  after 4 weeks  is given as an example.
Analyses  of overland  run-off  water  samples  from un-fertilised  and un-drained  
land which  received  10 000 gall of 8% DM slatted  floor slurry  on 24th March
in very wet weather
Analyses  (mg/1)  4 weeks  after spreading
Distance  down slope from treated  area P NH-N4BOD
0.0m 20.30 51.40 810.00
0.5m 13.80 39.00 490.00
1.5m 0.20 0.70 81.50
5.0m 0.25 1.55 57.00
10.0m 0.78 2.50 20.80
40.0m 0.30 0.50 19.00
80.0m 0.06 0.37 9.25
Base-line  data for site day previous  to spreading
0.017 0.22 5.4
There was a dramatic  attenuation  in NH-N,  P and BOD even over short  
distances  e.g. 2m. The results  suggest  that estimates  of nutrient  losses in overland 
run-off,  based on small plots, can be greatly  exaggerated.  Because  overland  
run-off  occurs  only  as short  pulses,  the nutrient  movement  from freshly  applied  
slurry  could  be described  as a down-hill  shift rather  than an overall  loss. This 
would particularly  be the case in paddocks  with long down-slope  distances  
between across-slope  open  drainage  channels. The  results verify  the tremendous  
cleaning  effect  of soil particularly  soil with a grass canopy  and its ability  to 
absorb  nutrients  and suspended  organic  solids from water flowing  over the 
surface.
Modelling  overland  run-off
Run-off  to a hydrologist  is the surplus  of rainfall  over evaporation  that runs 
off the landscape  into streams  and rivers.  On naturally  dry land all this water  
surplus  percolates  down through  the soil and by means  of permeable  rocks  or 
gravel layers travels  to the bottom  of natural  streams  or rivers without  ever 
flowing  over the surface.  Only on wet soils does run-off  water  travel  over the 
surface  or by means  of man made  drains  to man made  open drainage  channels.
A simple  single  reservoir  conceptual  model  has been assumed  for surface  
layers  of soil with the following  characteristics:
42
2.
3.All but the most extreme  rainfall  will percolate  into the soil through  the 
top sod unless  a watertable  has built up to the surface  in which  case run­
off will take place.
Rainfall  will percolate  down  to ground  water-table  level  unless  there  exists  
a layer with an infiltration  potential  less than the rainfall  rate where  it will 
start to build a perched  watertable  at a rate proportional  to the excess  of 
rainfall  rate over deep percolation  rate.
Any soil moisture  deficit  on the surface  will first be satisfied  before  
watertable  buildup  starts. Estimates  of actual evaporation  are used with
rainfall  to calculate  running  soil moisture  surpluses  or deficits.
Experimentally  it has been verified  that grass sward  top sods have higher  
infiltration  capacities  than the highest  rainfall  rates normally  encountered  in 
our climate.  Only top sods in pasture  damaged  by excess  treading  (e.g. around  
feed troughs  and gateways)  or by excess  application  of slurry or sludge  will 
have lower infiltration  capacities.
A good fit between  calculated  and observed  overland  run-off  has been  
obtained  for the model  on heavy  wet soils at Ballinamore  and Kilmaley.  The 
results  to date  give a  detailed  picture  of the occurrence  of overland  run-off  over 
winter  and the grass growing  season  and its relationship  to rainfall  and 
evaporation.  Significant  overland  run-off,  even in winter  on undrained  plots,  
occurs  only after prolonged  heavy rain over a number  of days. Compared  to 
drain-flow, overland  run-off  even  on undrained  plots,  occurs  far less frequently  
but in clearly  defined  events  and only for short  durations.  Mole  drains  are next 
in order having  more frequent  flows.  These  flows start before  overland  flow 
and last longer.  Conventional  drains  are next, followed  by deep  drains  that flow 
at a moderate  rate for long periods.
A major  implication  of these findings  is that with good land drainage  and 
the avoidance  of soil structure  damage  on the grass  sward  overland  run-off  can 
be completely  avoided . It also follows  that land with natural  drainage  through  
deeper  aquifer  layers or that is drained  through  deep land-drains  will not 
contribute  to enrichment  of surface  waters.  On land that is vulnerable,  e.g. areas  
where excess  nutrient  loading  occurs  on wet soils from pig, poultry  and 
mushroom  farming,  because  of the random  nature of rainfall  and thus overland  
run off, rigid calendar  based prohibitions  on land spreading  cannot  be very 
effective.  The single  most effective  treatment  on vulnerable  land would  be to 
effectively  drain the soil and thus prevent  overland  run-off  in the first place.
With this simple  model  in mind and with glacial,  hydro-geological  and soil 
series information  a crude ranking  of the overland  run-off  potential  of the 
principal  Soils in Ireland  was undertaken.  A map of these has been published  
by the Information  Technology  Unit, Johnstown  Castle.
Farm  yard run-off
Farmyards  including  those  with good slurry  and silage  effluent  storage  are 
showing  up as very significant  contributors  not only to elevated  BOD values  
but also to nutrient  levels  in our open channel  measurements.  The sources  are 
often trivial  e.g. small  amounts  of bedding  stored  in the open  from calf houses.
43
overflow  from dairy washing,  run-off  from small  open feeding  yards,  leakage  
from an otherwise  adequately  sized effluent tank and poorly managed  irrigation  
of dirty waters  and effluent,  from land adjacent  to the farmyard.
Remedial  measures:
Clearly  all farmyard  effluent  should  ideally  be stored and  land spread.  Good 
farmyard  design  and management  will reduce  volume  to a minimum.  The 
simplest  of earth bunds  (banks)  can contain  or divert  minor  effluent  seepages  
from any source.  Properly  designed  earth-bank  slurry  storage  tanks  can be built  
for about 5% the cost of a concrete  equivalent.  We have recently  resumed  
monitoring  the performance  of these tanks and they can be recommended  for 
a wide range  of soil and geological  conditions  at least for emergency  or extra  
storage  where  slatted  floor storage  is not adequate  for prolonged  wet winters. 
Slurry  and effluent  storage  facilities  are classified  as exempted  development  
for planning  permission  for any size of existing  development  provided  such 
facilities  do not themselves  cause pollution.  It makes  sense to protect  open  
drains in the vicinity  of farmyards  where  occasional  wash-off  or accidental  
spillage  of manures  or effluents  is possible.  This can be done by piping  the 
drain  and diverting  occasional  surface  flows onto land with simple  earth  bunds.
Pollution  of ground-water
Where  soils are very shallow  (less than 500mm  usually)  over fissured  
limestone  particularly  in karstic areas farmyard  effluents  can easily  leak through  
summer  drying  cracks  in the soil and gain access  to deep mobile  ground-water  
bodies.  However,  contamination  from surface  streams  going  underground  and 
excessively  irrigated  farm effluents  and dirty waters  are also equally  likely 
causes.
Future  research
Future  research  is directed  towards  quantifying  accurately  the contribution  
of overland  runoff  versus  farmyard  run-off  to surface  water  enrichment.  It is 
also an objective  to better  understand  the conditions  under  which overland  run­
off occurs  with a view to accurately  forecasting  same.
The case for land drainage
In recent  years  there has arisen  a belief  that land drainage  is harmful  to the 
natural  environment.  This erroneous  belief  arises from the need to conserve  
quality  natural  wetlands  which  in farmers  language  are generally  flat marshy 
areas of high watertable  that are scarcely  farmland  at all. The need to drain  
wet land for grass and crop production  is an entirely  different  matter.  Some 
soils have  adequate  natural  drainage  but a very high proportion  of the farmland  
in Ireland  benefits  from some degree  of artificial  drainage.  This can  be verified  
by the large amount  of land divided  up by hedgerows  with open drains  at the 
base. Contrary  to popular  belief  almost  all new drainage  systems  are being 
installed  on existing  farmland  that has previously  been drained.  In recent years  
there has been a deterioration  in the drainage  status  of the farmland  resource.  
Absence  of grants,  more intensive  farming,  heavier  axle loads from slurry  and
44
silage  wagons  causing  breakdown  of old systems  are to blame.  The pity of this 
is that never  have  the basic  principles  underlying  drainage  being  more  understood 
and never  has it being  more  possible  to drain wet soils more thoroughly  . The 
following  are some of the advantages  of draining  farmland.
ADVANTAGES  OF DRAINAGE  
Environmental:
1. Eliminates  the overland  component  of surface  run-off  and thus reduces  loss 
of enriched  soil and nutrients  to surface  waters.
2. Reduces  denitrification  and saves on fossil fuel input to fertiliser  
manufacture.
3. Reduces  production  of “greenhouse ” gases from wet ground  eg NOx,  
methane  etc.
4. Reduces  soil erosion  in its own right.
5. Increases  the crop  efficiency,  pasture  and animal  production and thus reduces  
all energy  consuming  inputs  to agriculture  with their associated  pollutants.
Production:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.Increases  aeration  and reduces  denitrification  losses.
Improves  rooting  depth  which  in turn improves  nutrient  uptake  efficiency  
and nitrogen  fixation.
Improves  yield and quality  of crops.
Increases  longevity  of sown swards  and improves  botanical  composition.  
Increases  bearing  strength  and trafficability  of soil.
Reduces  poaching  damage  and thus reduces  pasture  yield loss, sward  
destruction,  weed invasion,  spoiling  of grass  with  soil which  in turn reduces  
grass  intake,  soil loss, structural  degradation  and thus infiltrability  to water.  
Reduces  need for multiple  tillage  operations  and thus costs of seedbed  
preparation.
SELECTING  A DRAINAGE  SYSTEM
The single  most  important  physical  characteristic  of soil for drainage  purposes  
is its permeability  to water  or its hydraulic  conductivity  which  is a measure  
of how easily  water  can flow through  it. A soil with coarse  particles  will have  
large pores between  the particles  and thus have high hydraulic  conductivity.  
Similarly,  a soil with very fine particles  such as clay will have a very low 
hydraulic  conductivity.  The difference  in hydraulic  conductivity  between  soils 
or soil layers  can be enormous.  Gravels  have values  hundreds  of millions  of 
times those of heavy clays. The first step in proper  drainage  design  is the 
identification  of the particular  drainage  problem.  The extent  and depth of layers 
of different  hydraulic  conductivity  can be estimated  from deep test pits which  
should  be dug up to 3m deep if necessary.
Drainage  of permeable  soils (soils with high hydraulic  conductivitvl:
Field  drainage  for permeable  soils consists  of lowering the  water-table  from 
the root zone for all but the most extreme  rainfalls  by means  of deep piped 
drains  at optimum  depth  and spacing.  Drains  placed  in or near  the most  permeable
45
layer are much  more  effective.  Optimum  depth  and spacing  can be calculated  
from test pit estimates  of the hydraulic  conductivity  of the different  layers.
Drainage  of heavy  clav soils (soils with very low hydraulic  conductivity!:
These  soils cannot  be economically  drained  by conventional  piped  systems  
because  of the close  spacing  required.  Drainage  methods that include  disruption  
techniques  to improve  hydraulic  conductivity  are necessary.  Mole drains  are 
a very efficient  and effective  method  of draining  heavy  soils, if the soils are 
stable.  However,  a large percentage  of heavy  soils in Ireland  are unstable  and 
the water-transporting  channels  may collapse  at an early stage. The  gravel-mole  
system  does not suffer  from  channel  collapse  and is therefore an effective  system 
for draining  soils that are unstable  for ordinary  mole drains.
Influence  of geology  glaciation  and soil on drainage  characteristics
It is possible  to generalise  the occurrence  of drainage  problems  when the 
solid  geology,  glacial  history,  land formation  and soil type are known.  Rainfall  
pattern  will also have an influence.  The primary  influence  on the landscape  is 
usually  the solid geology  where  the soil cover  is less than 3m. The following  
are brief  descriptions  ofthe  drainage  characteristics  of soils with shallow  cover  
on different  solid geological  formations.
Shallow  soils on upper  carboniferous  INamurian  and Westphalianl  shales:
These  rocks  have very low permeability  and usually  give rise to soils with 
heavy  texture  and low permeability.  They  are usually  as wet on the hillock  crest  
as down  slope.  These  soils usually  require  loosening  and closely  spaced  drains  
(i.e. moles  or gravel  moles).  Occasionally  glacial action  has fissured  superficial  
layers  of these rocks giving  rise to good permeability.  If this happens  with a 
thin soil cover,  soils will be dry on hillocks  and wetter  due to seepage  down 
slope.  Carboniferous  shales  suffer  the added  disadvantage  in Ireland  of being 
on the upper  end of lowland  elevation,  being on raised  plateaux  and having  
higher  rainfalls.  At high altitudes  these soils are usually  covered  with blanket  
peat. Typical  areas are the Castlecomer  and Ballingarry  plateaux,  west Clare,  
north Kerry,  north Cork and west Limerick,  as well as much of Leitrim  and 
parts of Cavan  and Fermanagh.
Shallow  soils on limestone:
Limestone  is a brittle  and easily  soluble  rock. It tends  to be highly  fissured  
and cavernous and therefore  pervious.  Limestone  soils are generally well drained 
except  where  the topography  dips below  the fairly  flat groundwater.  When  this 
happens,  basin  peat forms.  Some  limestones  are not so pure and are not fissured  
to any extent  except  near the surface.  These  “calp” limestones  tend to give 
heavier  soils  on less well drained  landscapes. They  are often  in areas  contiguous  
to the upper  carboniferous  shales  e.g. north  County  Dublin  and County  Meath. 
Most limestone  in Ireland  occurs  on Hat lowland  landscape  covered  by deep 
glacial  deposits  which  often dominate  the drainage  pattern.  Generally,  wet soils 
are peat covered  and require  deep drains.
46
Shallow  soils on old red sandstones:
These  are generally  massive  rocks  with  poor  drainage  characteristics  except  
where  they are strongly folded  and fissured  as in south  Munster.  They are always  
associated  with hills or mountains  in Ireland.  They are of particular  influence  
on the lower  slopes  of much  central  and southern  hill land. They give rise to 
soils which  vary from clay loams  of low hydraulic  conductivity  to fine sandy  
soils. The soils are often  considerably  more  permeable  in deeper  unweathered  
layers.  Where  these layers  are present  they respond  very well to deep drains  
- particularly  since  seepage  is often  severe  in these  cases. Where  the soil is tight  
(lowish  hydraulic  conductivity)  for several  metres,  deep gravel mole drains  
usually  give excellent  results.  The soils tend to loosen well and give good  
permeability  after the ripping  effect  of the mole plough.  Peat will develop  on 
all permanent  seepage  surfaces.  At high altitudes  peat will also develop  over 
iron-pan  podzols  where  there  once was sufficient  free draining  soil with a low 
water-table  for podzolisation.
Shallow  soils on granites:
These  are massive  impervious  rocks.  In their pure form (e.g. Connemara)  
they have  little  agricultural  value  - consisting  of pools  of water  and peat. However  
when they are broken  down  by weathering  and glacial  action  they often give 
rise to very coarse  sandy  material  particularly  deep down in the profile.  They  
are significant  on mountain  slopes,  e.g. Wicklow.  In this situation  if they are 
wet they will invariably have  strong  seepage. Deep  drains  give very good  results.
Shallow  soils on Avonian.  Ordivician  Silurian  and Cambrian  shales:
These  can give rise to heavy  soils like the upper  carboniferous,  but being  
older are generally  partly metamorphosed  so the soils tend to be somewhat  
coarse  textured  and more permeable.  Furthermore,  the rocks  are usually  highly  
folded.  They tend to be much more fissured  than the younger  carboniferous  
shales  and often give rise to quite dry soils e.g. the Clonroche  series.  Down  
slope seepage  is often a problem.  Deep drains  give good results  in these  
situations.
Shallow  soils on Metamorphic  rocks:
These  are old rocks  of various  types fused  by heat. The solid rocks tend to 
be massive  and have poor drainage  characteristics.  Quartzites  generally  give 
fine sandy  soils with low permeability.  Schists  and gneisses  appear  to weather  
more easily  and give rise to coarser  textured  soils. Metamorphic  rocks form 
the greater  part of the Dalradians  in the north west. The area was intensely  
glaciated  and glacial  deposits  tend to dominate  the drainage  pattern  of most  
of the lowland  in these areas.
Deep glacial  soil deposits:
These  affect  drainage  in two ways. Firstly,  large scale deposits  destroy  old 
river  systems  and block up natural drainage  systems  in the landscape.  Secondly, 
the nature  of the glacial  deposit  itself  particularly  its permeability  can be of 
major importance.  Where  the deposits  are deep they can even blot out the 
influence  of an “impervious ” bedrock.  Since  the nature  of the deposit  depends
47
upon the rocks from which  it was derived  as well as its mode ot deposition  
they can vary from clays of very low permeability  to coarse  gravels.  Except  
for the deep clay deposits  of low permeability  most other  glacial  deposits  are 
generally  layered  for permeability.  Deep  drains  generally  give good results  on 
these.  Where  there are deep clay subsoil  deposits,  e.g. on the Drumlins,  mole 
drains  and gravel mole drains  are required.
Soil formation  and climatic  effects:
From a drainage  point of view podzolisation  is the single  most important  
soil forming  process.  It occurs  on non-calcareous  soils. It occurs  on soils 
originally  free draining  with deep watertable.  It is accelerated  by high rainfall.  
Almost  all free draining  soils at high altitudes  in Ireland  are non-calcareous  
and have developed  into podzols.  There  are also many soils at low altitudes  
where  rainfall  is high enough  particularly  in the west where podzols  have  
developed. When  podzols  develop  an “iron pan”  downward percolation  of water  
is virtually  stopped  and they will have a perched  watertable  in wet weather. 
Most iron pan podzols  are peat covered.  On many hill situations,  particularly  
in high rainfall  areas in the west, there is continuous  peat cover  over an iron 
pan podzol  on hilltops  and hillocks,  down to seepage  peat on mid slope and 
deep swamp  peat in hollows.  Where  peat cover  is relatively  shallow  (less than 
500mm)  iron pans are easily drained  by bursting  the pan by ripping.  Deep 
ploughing  can also be used  but generally  ripping  will work  equally  well anywhere 
ploughing  works  without  burying  the surface  fertility.
Conclusion
The successful  control  of drainage,  water-table,  overland  flow  of soils requires 
the application  of the physical  science  of water  flow through  porous  media and 
an accurate  knowledge  of the physical  characteristics  of the underlying  soil and 
bedrock.
48
The Structure  of Irish Farming  in 2005
P. COMMINS  
J. P. FRAWLEY
Rural  Development  Department,  Teagasc,  Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin  4.
I INTRODUCTION
In considering  future needs and priorities  in agricultural  research,  it is 
appropriate  to turn attention  to the broad  context  of change  and adjustment  in 
the agricultural  sector.  This wider  canvas  is the concern  of the present  paper. 
Our aim  is to analyse  from a socio-economic  perspective  the prevailing  pattern  
of re-structuring  in Irish agriculture  and to pose a likely  scenario  for the next 
decade.  Obviously,  there is a degree  of speculation  in this exercise  especially  
as we have not been in a position  to draw on specialised  research  on scenario ­
building  for the future structure  of Irish farming.
There is now a substantial  amount  of statistical data  on agricultural  structures  
and this paper  draws  mainly  from three sources:  the EU Structures  Surveys,  
the Census  of Agriculture  and the Teagasc  National  Earm Survey.  There  are, 
however,  some  difficulties  in analysing  trends  over time. The different  sources  
use somewhat  different  concepts  and measurements  (e.g. in recording  labour  
inputs)  and there is not a consistent  methodology  over time (in the agricultural  
censuses).  Nevertheless,  the main  trajectory  of structural  change  can be clearly  
traced;  in fact changes  in statistical  definition  and categorisation  are very much  
a response  to structural  change  itself.
Any attempt  to project  the future  structure  of agricultural  production  must 
be grounded  in a knowledge  of existing  trends,  identifying  in particular  those  
trends  that are relatively  stable  - and set to continue  - and bearing  in mind that 
agricultural  restructuring  has different  consequences  for different  areas.
Accordingly,  the first main  section of this paper  examines  changes  in resource  
use at sectoral  and regional  level.  The second  section  reviews  changes  at farm 
level, with particular  reference  to incomes  and economic  viability.  The third 
part identifies  the factors  determining  structural  change  and their likely  impact  
over  the next ten years. The main conclusions  are presented  in the final section.
II SECTORAL  AND REGIONAL  CHANGE
The dominant  trends in the longer-term  adjustments  occurring  in Irish 
agriculture  are well known:  the trend towards  fewer  farms  and larger  business  
units  driven by economic  forces  which reward  economies  of size, concentration  
of production  on a declining  number  of farms,  dynamic  specialisation  in the 
more profitable  sectors  of production  mirrored  by residual  specialisation,  shifts  
from dairying  and tillage  to drystock  production,  and decline  in farm labour  
- especially  among  family  members.
The 1980 EU Farm Structures  Survey  showed  there were 223,500  farms  of 
one hectare  or more in the country,  whereas  the 1991 Census  of Agriculture  
recorded  179,000  farms.  These  two figures  are not comparable  because  of
49
differences  in the method  of enumeration.  Significantly,  it seems  that the more  
rigorous  screening  procedures  used in 1991 removed  over  30,000  of the smaller  
or more marginal  units which were included  in the coverage  of the earlier  
structures  surveys.  Even  then  there  were  4,500  farms  in the 1991 Census  which  
had less than two ha, so that for all practical  purposes  there are now 166,000  
farms  in the country.  Of these  77,000  (or just over one-half)  are still under  20 
ha.
In assessing  farm  structures  it is necessary  to supplement  data on the surface  
area of farms  with information  on economic  size. The economic  size of a farm  
in an EU context  is defined  as the sum of the Standard  Gross  Margins  (SGMs)  
of all its activities  or enterprises  expressed  as European  Size Units  (ESUs).  For 
the 1991 Census  of Agriculture  one ESU was taken as 1200 ECUs,  or 
approximately  £890*.  The national  averages  in 1991 were 11.6 ESUs,  and 26.0 
ha per farm.
Table 1 shows  that in 1991 there  were  38 per cent of farms  which  were  both 
comparatively small  in area  (under  20 ha) and of small-scale  in terms  of economic  
size (less than 4 ESUs).  A further  4.8 per cent of farms  were less than 4 ESUs  
although  greater  than 20 ha in area; another  17.6 per cent were between  4 and 
8 ESUs  - about  half of this last group  being less than 20 ha in size. Thus,  up 
to 60 per cent  of Irish farms  are small or moderately  small  in terms  of economic  
size. These  account  for about one-third  of Agricultural  Area Used [AAU].
Since  SGMs  are calculated  in a way which  reflects  the economic  realities  
of farming  margins  the type of farming  system  has a predominant  influence
Table 1
Percentage  distribution  of farms  by area (ha) and economic  size units (ESUs)'
1991
Economic  size units (ESUs)
Hectares <4 4-8 8-16 16-40 40-1- Total
<5 10.4 0.5 0.2 0.1 0.05 11.2
5-20 27.5 8.9 4.7 1.2 0.05 42.4
20-30 3.6 5.2 5.2 4.1 0.1 18.2
30-50 1.0 2.5 5.0 6.9 1.2 16.7
50-1- 0.2 0.5 1.7 4.9 4.2 11.4
Total 42.6 17.6 16.8 17.3 5.6 100.0
Average  farm  
size (AAU)11.0 21.5 30.2 44.8 84.4 26.0
'European  size unit = 1,200 ECU using 1986 Standard  Gross Margin.  
Source:  Derived  from Census  of Agriculture  1991, Table 6, p. 27.
I. The purpose  of the SGM application  is to allow  comparisons  to be made  in relative  terms  
between  farms  in regard  to their overall  economic  activities.  It should  not be interpreted  as 
an indicator  of nominal  income  for individual  farms  (see Census  of Agriculture  1991,  p. 10).
50
Table 2
Structural  characteristics  of Irish farms  by type of farm, 1991
Economic  
size (ESUs)Tillage DairyingType of Farm
Beef Sheep Mixed
livestockCrops  and 
livestockOther
<4 21.3 5.1 69.6 35.0 43.0 13.4 30.4
4-8 14.1 9.8 19.5 26.6 20.6 14.6 12.5
8-16 19.3 25.2 8.3 24.2 20.3 25.1 15.8
16-40 28.1 44.0 2.4 12.9 13.8 34.2 21.5
40+ 17.2 16.0 0.2 1.3 2.3 12.7 19.8
Total 100 100 100 100 100 100 100
Average  ESU 24.0 24.6 3.9 8.7 8.7 21.2 29.7
Average  AAU 
(ha)50.1 32.9 18.7 29.1 25.9 50.7 15.3
ESUs per ha 0.48 0.75 0.21 0.30 0.34 0.42 1.94
% of all farms 3.0 24.4 42.1 8.8 17.9 2.5 1.4
% of all AAU 5.7 30.8 30.2 9.8 17.8 4.9 0.8
% of all ESUs 6.1 51.6 14.1 6.6 13.4 4.6 3.5
Source:  Derived  from Census  of Agriculture  1991, various  Tables.
on the calculated  economic  size of a farm. The 1991 Census  of Agriculture  
distinguished  between  ‘specialist ’ and ‘mixed ’ farm types.  Specialist  farms  are 
those where  a particular  activity  such as dairying  or tillage  accounted  for at 
least  two-thirds  of the farm ’s total SGMs,  whereas  in mixed farms  no individual  
activity  was large enough  to breach  the two-thirds  threshold.  Specialist  cattle  
farms,  representing  42 per cent of all farms,  were almost  all less than 8 ECUs  
in scale. Sheep  farms  and mixed  grazing  livestock  farms,  constituting  8.8 per 
cent and 17.9 per cent of all farms  respectively,  had each approximately  three  
out of every  five units under  the 8 ESU level.  By contrast,  on dairy farms  (24.4  
per cent of the total) three out of five units had more than 16 ESUs.
Cattle  farms  are smaller  than average  in area (18.7 ha AAU  as against  26.0 
ha AAU)  and are operated at less than half  the national  average level of economic  
intensity  (0.21 ESUs  per ha compared  to 0.45 ESUs  per ha). Sheep  and mixed  
livestock  farms, though  closer  in area size to the national  average,  are also 
operated  at low levels of intensity  (Table  2).
Taken  together,  cattle,  sheep  and mixed  livestock  farms  account  for 69 per 
cent of all farms,  58 per cent  of AAU  but only 34 per cent of total ESUs.  Dairy 
farms represent  24 per cent of all farms,  31 per cent of AAU and 52 per cent 
of all ESUs.  The essence  of the structural  problem  in agriculture,  therefore,  is 
that 60 per cent of farms  are relatively  small or moderately  small businesses
51
Changes  in the numbers  and percentages  of farms  with selected  enterprises  
and in the size of enterprise  per farm'Table  3
Year Cereals Potatoes Sugar
beetDairy
cowsCattle
(all)Sheep Pigs
Number  of farms (000s)
1975 99.2 122.0 11.3 127.5 140.7 53.6 26.4
1983 53.8 72.5 7.2 91.5 115.4 44.2 10.2
1991 23.2 12.4 3.9 49.1 151.4 54.8 2.9
Per cent of farms
1975 43.5 53.5 5.0 55.9 91.9 23.5 11.6
1983 23.6 32.8 3.2 41.4 86.0 20.0 4.6
1991 13.6 7.3 2.3 28.7 88.8 32.2 1.7
Average  per farm; hectares/animals
1975 3.3 0.3 2.9 12 34 70 33
1983 6.7 0.4 4.9 18 36 92 103
1991 13.0 1.7 8.4 27 46 162 454
'1991 figures  are not strictly  comparable  with those  of earlier  years  because  of changes  in methods  
of enumeration.
Source:  O'Hanlon  (1987);  Census  of Agriculture  1991.
because  they comprise  mainly  non-dairy  livestock  enterprises  which  are not 
intensively  farmed.
The current  structure  of agricultural  production  is, of course,  an outcome  
of a process  of adjustment  and rationalisation  that has been under  way over 
recent  decades.  While  the 1991 statistics  are not strictly  comparable  with the 
data for earlier  years, they serve to illustrate  the scale and direction  of 
restructuring.  Structural  change  has been more  pronounced  in tillage,  dairying  
and pig farms than on the holdings  with other enterprises  (Table  3). Cereal  
growing  and potato  production  are now quite  concentrated  and very much  the 
concern  of a relatively  small minority  of farms  compared  to 20 years  ago. The 
percentage  of farms keeping  dairy cows has halved  during  this period  while 
average  herd size has more  than doubled.  The numbers  and percentages  of farms  
keeping  cattle and sheep  have increased  since 1983, both in absolute  and in 
relative  terms.
Clearly  there  has been a dramatic  shift  towards  drystock  systems,  with sheep  
in particular  becoming  more prominent.
The figures  indicating  the increases  in the average  number  of hectares  or 
animals  per farm (Table  6) do not reveal the full extent  of the concentration  
of production  on fewer  farms.  For example,  7.3 per cent of farms  grew  potatoes  
in 1991 but 80 per cent of production  came from farms with over 16 ESUs  
and these represented  2.1 per cent of all farms  in the State.  As Table  4 shows,
52
Number  and percentage  of farms with specific  enterprises/activities,  1991Table  4
Enterprises  or 
ActivityNo. of farms Per cent of 
farms in StatePer cent of 
area/animals  on 
farms of 16+ 
ESUsFarms  of 16+ 
ESUs as per 
cent of all 
farms in State'
Cereals 23,183 13.6 81.1 6.8
Potatoes 12,393 7.3 79,8 2.1
Sugar  beet 3,945 2.3 72.1 1.7
Arable  crops^ 41,282 24.2 81.1 8.9
Silage 81,354 47,6 65.6 19.5
Dairy cows 49,068 28.8 84.1 16.4
Other  cows 92,557 54,3 27.6 lO.I
All cattle 151,422 88,7 55.7 2f.6
Sheep 54,842 32.1 51.2 8.5
Pigs 3,873 1.7 96.9 0.9
Poultry 26,627 15.6 71.1 4.4
'Farms  of 16+ ESUs referred  to in previous  column.
^AII crops, fruit and horticulture.
Source:  Derived  from Census  of Agriculture  1991. Tables 14A to 3IA.
by far the greater  share  of production  in tillage  crops  was provided  by less than 
10 per cent of the country ’s farms.
While  84 per cent of dairy cows  were  on 16 per cent  of farms  the distribution  
of ‘other  cows ’ (the suckler  herd) was much  more widespread.  About  half the 
animals  came from farms  below  8 ha and these  farms  accounted  for one-third  
of the country ’s total number  of farms.
Regional  aspects
Because  changes  in the agricultural  structure  have differential  impacts  by 
farm  size  and system, restructuring  clearly has regional  dimensions.  While there  
is an obvious  distinction  to be made  between  the Disadvantaged  Areas  and the 
rest of the country  the approach  taken here is to categorise  counties  into four 
groups  according  to their  average  ESU  per farm as of 1991.  This categorisation  
gives a useful  gradation  of the national  territory  from the small-farm  counties  
of the north-west  to the large-farm  counties  of the south-east  (see Map I). The 
four groups  are as follows;
Group I. Large-farm  counties  (over 17.0 ESUs per farm on average)
Carlow,  Dublin,  Kilkenny,  Wexford,  Wicklow,  Cork.  Tipperary  South  
and Waterford.
Group  2. Medium-to-large  farm counties  (12.0 to 16.9 ESUs on average)  
Kildare,  Laois,  Louth,  Meath,  Limerick  and Tipperary  North. 
Group  3. Medium-to-small  farm counties:  (7.0 to 11.9 ESUs on average)
Longford,  Offaly,  Westmeath,  Clare. Kerry,  Cavan  and Monaghan.
53
Map 1
E3m
<W'7 to 11.9 
12 to 16.9  
Over 17
54
Group  4, Small-farm  counties  (under  7.0 ESUs  on average)  Connacht  counties  
and Donegal
Farms  in the ‘large-farm ’ counties  are, on average,  3.5 times  bigger  in scale  
than those in the ‘small-farm ’ counties,  when measured  in ESU terms.  
Expectedly,  the percentages  of farms with crops and dairy cows (including  
heifers-in-calf)  decline  consistently  across the spectrum  from Group  1 to Group  
4 (See Table  A1, Appendix).  Moreover,  those  farms  with crops  and dairy  cows  
in Groups  3 and 4 have much smaller  areas sown and fewer  cows. Group  4 
dairy farms,  for example,  had 14.3 cows,  on average,  compared  to 35.9 cows  
for the dairy farms in Group 1. The proportion  of farms with ‘other cows ’ 
(including  heifers-in-calf)  increased  consistently  across  Group 1 to Group  4 
but the average  number  of animals  per farm declined.  Similarly,  the average  
numbers  of ‘all cattle ’ and of sheep per farm (of the farms having  these  
enterprises)  declined  consistently  from Group 1 to Group  4.
Thus,  while  cattle  and sheep  production have  become  the mainstay  of farming  
in the west and north-west,  with dairying  and tillage  concentrated  in the south  
and south-east,  farms  in these  latter  regions  still manage  to have  larger  drystock  
and sheep  enterprises  than in the northern  and western  counties  (See Table  A1, 
Appendix).  There remains,  apparently,  greater  diversity  now in the farming  
economy  of the better-off  counties , perhaps  accompanied  by greater  diversity  
within  individual  farms .
This leads  us to consider  one of the significant  features  of structural  change  
in agriculture,  viz., the comparative  failure  of county  Groups  2, 3 and 4 to
Table  5
Percentage  change  in crops and livestock  (hectares  and animais),  
hy categories  of County
Years Crops Dairy cows' Other  cows' All cattle Sheep Pigs
Large Farm Counties
1960-80 -4.3 + 105.2 +2.4- +55.4 -17.8 +0.4
1980-91 -25.8 -13.3 +83.4 +6.8 + 188.2 +7.5
Medium-to-Large  Farm Counties
1960-80 -1-2.1 +75.9 + 10.6^ +35.6 -42.3 -7.7
1980-91 -16.7 -16.2 +84.7 + 1.5 +277.9 +58.1
Medium-to-Small  Farm Counties
1960-80 -56.7 +59.0 +56.2- +43.2 -22.2 +38.5
1980-91 -53.4 -23.8 +95.2 -0.7 +204.6 +54.7
Small Farm Counties
1960-80 -54.8 -9.9 +229.7- +45.2 -22.3 + 1.7
1980-91 -60.2 -36.7 +47.7 -10.4 + 122.2 -14.4
'Including  heifers-in-calf  'Estimales  
Source:  Census  of Agriculture,  various  years
55
offset  their loss of tillage  enterprises  by sufficiently  high rates of increase  in 
livestock  production.
Table  5 shows  changes  in the longer-term  of trends in crop and livestock  
production  for the groups  of counties  selected.  For the later  period  in particular  
(1980-1991)  it will be noted that crop area and dairy cow numbers  declined  
steeply  from the south-east  to the north-west.  The numbers  of other  stock did 
not increase  consistently  in a countervailing  trend.  In fact ‘all cattle ’ numbers  
declined  in the small farm counties;  by contrast  there was a progressive  rate 
of increase  in the numbers  of young  cattle in the north-south  direction.  Sheep  
numbers  increased  in all regions  but the lowest  rates of expansion were  recorded  
in the smallest  farm counties.
This regional  dimension  of structural  change  can be seen more clearly  by 
converting  livestock  numbers  to livestock  units (Table  6). From 1960 to 1980  
there was no clear-cut  pattern,  except  that the south-eastern  counties  showed  
a higher  rate of increase  than the other groups.  From 1980 to 1991, however,  
the fastest  rates of expansion  occurred  in Groups  1 and 2.
The effect  of these changes  is that the small farm counties  have failed  to 
retain  their  percentage  share  of production,  not alone  in crops  and dairying  but 
in the other  livestock  enterprises  also (see Table  A2, Appendix).  These  changes  
also mean that since 1980 the gap in the intensity  of land use has widened  
between  the south-east  and north-west,  with livestock  units per hectare  now 
one-third  higher  in the south-east  - although  this differential  would  be halved  
if ‘rough  grazing  in use ’ were eliminated  from the calculation.
Ill FARM  AND FARM  HOUSEHOLDS
In turning  attention  to change  at farm level, we are concerned  essentially  
with three  issues:  (i) trends in family  farm income; (ii) the role of direct  payments  
in supporting  incomes;  and (iii) the economic  viability  of different  categories  
of farm.
Family  farm incomes
Despite  relatively  high levels  of price  supports  and direct  income  subsidisation
Table 6
Percentage  change  in livestock  units by category  of county,  and livestock  units
per hectare',  1991
1960-80 1980-91 L.U. per ha 
1991
Large Farm Counties +39.1 + 15.1 1.827
Medium-to-Large  Farm Counties +22.9 +9.1 1.743
Mcdium-to-Small  Farm Counties +30.5 +6.3 1.407
Small Farm Counties +22.9 +6.3 1.345
TOTAL +30.0 +9.8 1.576
'Pa.sture,  hay, silage and grazing  in use.
Source:  Derived  from Census  of Agriculture,  various  years
56
Trends  in family  farm income  and comparisons  with agricultural  wage rateTable  7
Average 
FFI £% year-to-year  
change  in FFIAgricultural  wage  
rate £
1984 5370 _ 4910
1985 4482 -9.1 5291
1986 4327 -11.4 5576
1987 5779 33.6 5585
1988 7197 24.6 5950
1989 7282 1.2 6167
1990 6682 -8.3 6167
1991 6053 -9.5 6366
1992 7172 18.5 6627
1993 8075 12.6 6847
1994 - - 7147
Source:  Teagasc  National  Farm Survey,  variou.s  years
(e.g. through  headage  payments)  farm incomes  have remained  comparatively  
low, and they show a considerable  degree  of volatility  on a year-to-year  basis  
(Graph  1). In the decade  of 1984-93,  average  Family  Farm Income  (FFI),  as 
defined  in the Teagasc  National  Farm  Survey,  increased  by an average  of 5 per 
cent per annum  and, variability  aside,  remained  little greater  than the wage  rate 
for an agricultural  worker  (Table  7). The wage rate refers to the earnings  of 
an individual  while  the FFI is a return  to the family  labour,  management  and 
capital  investment  in the farm business.  As will be made  clear  presently,  there
Table 8
IVends  in average  family  farm income  for selected  farm systems
Dairying
FFI (£)Cattle
FFI (£)Sheep
FFI (£)All Systems
FFI (£)
1984 8964 2301 3782 5370
1985 9926 1839 4196 4882
1986 8492 1588 3506 4327
1987 10838 2167 5041 5779
1988 14545 2590 5895 7197
1989 15706 1881 4442 7282
1990 12706 2416 5207 6682
1991 12172 2281 4455 6053
1992 15336 2943 4844 7172
1993' 17118 3277 5822 8075
'Systems  not strictly  comparable  because  of change  of definition  
Source:  Teaga.sc  National  Farm Survey,  various  years
57
are other points  that may be made about  this comparison  but for the moment  
it serves  to illustrate  the weakness  of the farm economy  in a context  of rising  
living  standards  and income  expectations.
Over the past decade  there has been a considerable  degree  of consistency  
in the FFI relativities  between  the major  farming  systems.  On dairy  farms,  FFls 
were generally  five times greater  than on cattle farms. Sheep  farms yielded  
incomes  in the order  of twice  the earnings  on cattle farms,  except  for the last 
two years of the decade  reviewed  when the gap closed  to some extent  (Table 
8).
Not only are FFIs on cattle  and sheep  systems  substantially  lower  than for 
dairy  systems  but they  are also subject  to greater  year-to-year  variability  (Table 
9). Thus, an average  for all systems  masks  the full effects  of farm income  
volatility.  Cattle  systems,  for example,  experienced  an average  decrease  of 27 
per cent in 1989 but recovered  the following  year with an increase  of 28 per 
cent. During  the decade  up to 1993, dairy farms  accounted  for approximately  
40 per cent of total farm income,  despite  their  declining  numbers.  Cattle  farms  
represented  approximately  one-half  of the farms  in the country  over  the decade  
but in most years earned  less than one-fifth  of total farm income.  This means  
that dairy  farms  have  an influence  disproportionate  to their  numbers in reducing  
their overall  degree  of volatility  in farm income  levels (Table  9).
Evidently,  volatility  in cattle  farm incomes  is not confined  to any farm size 
category.  In fact there appears  to be even greater  variability  in the larger  size 
groups  (Table 10). Moreover,  the very large farms in general  show high 
variability  in FFI (see Graph 1).
In summary  then, we may say that variability  is a highly  pervasive  feature  
of Irish farm income  trends,  within  and between  farm systems  and between  
different  scales  of operation.  Apart  from the many  problems  attaching  to low
Table 9
Percent  change  in family  farm income  over the previous  year for selected
farm systems
Dairying Cattle Sheep All Systems
1984 _ _ — _
1985 11 -20 11 -9
1986 -14 -14 -17 -11
1987 28 37 44 34
1988 34 20 17 25
1989 8 -27 -25 1
1990 -19 28 17 -8
1991 -4 -6 -14 -10
1992 26 29 9 19
1993' 12 11 20 13
'Sy.slems  not strictly  comparable  because  of change  of definition  
Source:  Derived  from Teagasc  National  Farm Survey
58
Graph  1
o^
ON
CN
ON
ON
OS
Os
O
ON
ON
On
00
00
00
On
00
ON
VO
00On
00o\c/3
B
>-ica
Uh
C3
0\ <D
JU90J9J
59C3
+OO
cd ^
X S
O ^
CO E
I « o
+1
z
oV3
CO
00
CO
<uH
ou
Urnoo
c/3
Percent  change  in family  farm income  for cattle system  farms  by farm size,
1989-1992Table 10
Size (ha)% Change  
1989/90% Change  
1990/91% Change
1991/92
2<I0 28 -17 34
10<20 42 -17 27
20<30 8 19 15
30<50 2 -21 24
50<100 13 -2 14
100+ 54 -41 47
Hill 9 -37 96
All cattle 28 -6 29
Srturcc.  Derived  from Teagasc  National  Farm Survey
absolute  farm incomes,  the attractiveness  of farming  as a career  for younger  
people,  even on good-sized  farms,  is diminished  by instability  in the flow of 
income  and the related  insecurity  in the conditions  for investment.
Direct  income  subsidies
The low farm incomes  on cattle and sheep farms include  a substantial  
component  of direct  or ‘non-price  payments  (as livestock  headage  and premia  
payments).  These  payments  have increased  in number  and in volume  in recent  
years and are expected  to account  for over 40 per cent of all farm incomes  by 
1996 [Fingleton  et al 1992;  Kearney  1995a].  Sheep  farmers  have  been the greatest  
beneficiaries,  in that the subsidies  already  represent  over 80 per cent of their 
FFI. The corresponding  proportion  on cattle system  farms is in the order of 
50 per cent (Table  11). However,  comparison  of Tables  8 and 11 will show  that
Table 11
Direct  income  subsidies  by selected  farm systems  and percentage  of family
farm income'
Year Dairying Cattle Sheep All farms
£ % £ % £ % £ %
1989 428 2.7 762 40.5 2860 64.4 1082 14.9
1990 450 3.5 1210 50.0 4630 88.9 1740 26.0
1991 405 3.3 1142 50.0 4159 93.4 1591 26.3
1992 830 5.4 1850 62.9 4582 94.6 2165 30.2
1993 879 5.1 1339 52.3 4682 80.4 2158 26.7
'Most of the 1993 subsidies  were not paid until 1994  
Source:  Derived  from Teagasc  National  Farm Survey
60
the increases  in the absolute  levels  of subsidies  have not had a commensurate  
impact  on the level of FFI in cattle and sheep  farms.  Their  effect  apparently  
has been to maintain  the level of subsistence  incomes  on these  farms  and thus 
cover-up  a real decline  in the market  income  component  of their earnings.  It 
is necessary  to note here that part-time farming  allows  a proportion  of drystock  
farmers  to supplement  their low earnings  from farming.
Simply  stated,  the current  position  in regard  to direct  income  payments  in 
Irish agriculture  is that, given  the relatively  high incidence  of cattle  and sheep  
farms in the total farm population  and the high percentage  of their incomes  
coming  from direct  payments,  a majority  of Irish farms now depend  on non­
price payments  for most of their family  farm income.
Economic  viability  of farms  and farm households
At farm level the viability  of a holding  is determined  mainly  by two sets 
of factors:  its economic  performance  as a business  and its human  resources,  
the latter reflected  in the household  structure  and the operator ’s managerial  
capabilities.  To survive  economically  and sustain  a farming  household,  as such,  
a farm must have the potential  and the opportunities  to generate  a socially  
acceptable  level of income  and to provide  some surplus  for re-investment  in 
the farm  business.  Of course  farm  households  can be sustained  by having  other  
sources  of income.  The 1991 Census  of Agriculture  showed  that 27 per cent 
of farm operators  had other  gainful  economic  activity,  although  the proportion  
ranged  from 9 per cent on dairying-type  farms to 29 per cent on the mixed  
grazing  livestock  farms.
Teagasc ’s National  Farm  Survey  (NFS)  operationally  defines  the economic  
viability  of a farm  as (i) its capacity  to remunerate  family  labour  at the average  
agricultural  wage, and (ii) its capability  of giving  an additional  5 per cent return  
on non-land  assets.  The NFS uses two other variables  to classify  farms:  (iii)
Table 12
Number  and percentage  of farms  in different  viability  categories
Category 1991 1992 1993
No. % No, % No. %
Viable 40,000 24 51,200 31 47,000 29
Large viable 28,300 17 33,000 20 34,600 21
Small viable' 11,700 7 18.200 11 12.400 8
Non-viable 125,000 76 113,800 69 118,300 71
Jobs 30,000 18 29,700 18 36,400 22
Good Demog. 58,300 36 51,200 31 38,100 29
Poor Demog. 36,700 22 33,000 20 33,800 20
Total 165,000 100 165,000 100 165,000 100
'Viable  within  the definition  adopted  but with le.s.s than .7.S of a .standard  labour  unit. 
Source:  Derived  from Teaga,sc  National  Farm Survey
61
‘demographically  non-viable ’ households  where  the holder  is over 55 years  of 
age and where  there is nobody  else under  45 years in the household;  and (iv) 
‘other  activity  status’ , to take account  of whether  or not the farm operator  and/  
or spouse  has a non-farm  job.
From what has already  been said about  the year-to-year  variability  of farm 
incomes  it will  be understood that the numbers of viable farms,  as defined,  will 
vary somewhat  from year to year. An analysis  for the three years 1991-1993 
shows  that this number  ranges  in the order of 40,000  to 50,000  (Table 12).
Table 12 indicates  that the viable  category  may be subdivided  into a ‘large ’ 
and a ‘small ’ group,  the latter  comprising  farms  with less than 0.75 of a labour  
unit. When  this sub-category  of small farms is subtracted  out it can be seen 
that the estimated  number  of viable  farms  remained  fairly stable  during  1991-  
1993 in the 28,000  to 35,000  range.
It will also be noted  from  Table 12 that the other  relatively  stable  category  
in numbers  was at the opposite  end of the spectrum,  i.e., those  on non-viable  
farms,  with  no other  gainf^ul  employment  and with ‘poor  household  composition.  
Their numbers  fell within  the 33,000-37,000  range.
Using  the four NFS viability  variables  already  noted we may classify  the 
national  farm population  of 1993 (taking  165,000  farms as the total) by the 
general  orders  of magnitude  in the diagram  below.  The proportion  of the viable
VIABLE
47
Large
35Small'
12
With jobs  
8Without  jobs With jobs  
27 6Without  jobs  
6
NON-VIABLE
118
With jobs  
36Wthout  jobs  
82
Household
viable
35Household  
not viable  
1Household
viable
48Household  
not viable  
34
Viable  within  definition  used but with less than 0.75 of a standard  labour  unit.
62
category associated with demographically  non-viable  households was relatively  
small and these are not therefore  identified  separately.
Reference  to Table 12 and to the diagram  will show that in regard  to the 
absolute  number  of farms,  there are four major  categories  of interest. The main 
structural  characteristics  of each of these  are presented  in Tables  13 to 16. The 
data in the Tables  are mostly  self-explanatory  but the key points  for present  
purposes  are summarised  here.
Major  categories  of farms  by viability  criteria
Category ’ I- Viable  Farms:  These  47,000  farms  account  for 29 per cent of 
the total and for 44 per cent of AAU.  However,  the ‘small-viable ’ sub-category  
(viable  mainly  because  of the return  to their low input of family  labour)  are 
in most  respects  similar  to the non-viable  groups  as regards  income,  resources,  
farming  system,  and household  composition.  Half of these households  have  
other  gainful  employment.  A more  rigorous  definition  of viability  would  most  
likely  exclude  a large  proportion  from  the viable  category.  For instance, adopting  
a £12,000  FFI and a 5 per cent return  on non-land  assets  as the criteria  for 
viability  (as of 1993)  would  reduce  the national  proportion  of viable  farms  to
Table 13
Selected  characteristics  of viable  farms,  1993 (Category  1)
CharacteristicsViable  Large Viable  Small'
No Jobs^ Jobs Total No  Jobs^ Jobs Total
% of all farms 15 5 21 2 4 8
Family  farm income  (£) 25,818 21,169 24,113 7,590 6,236 6,827
Sales/receipts  (£) 70,865 59,518 66,170 13,416 11,414 11,579
Subsidies  (£) 3,867 5,414 4,134 1,718 1,637 1,673
AAU (ha) 52 52 51 19 17 20
ESUs 50 44 47 10 8 9
Net new investment  (£) 4,271 4,315 4,098 1,260 389 740
Costs/£100  output  (£) 64 66 64 46 46 46
Labour  units 1.8 1,5 1.7 0.7 0.5 0.6
% in dairying 75 57 71 24 26 20
% drystock 15 25 18 70 60 68
% in tillage 8 16 10 6 14 11
No. dairy cows 32 20 29 3 1 2
Age of holder 48 43 48 47 49 48
H'hold  size 4.7 5.0 4.6 3.8 4.1 3.5
% H'holds  with pension 29 26 27 52 11 27
% H'holds  with unemployment  3 0 2 45 9 21
% on good soil (Type 1) 61 63 61 31 50 47
'Viable  within  the definition  adopted  but with less than 0.7.S of a standard  labour  unit
small proportion  with poor demography  not included:  neither  operator  nor spouse  has a job 
Source:  Derived  from Teagasc  National  Farm Survey.
63
16 per cent  (see  Table  17), and correspondingly increase  the non-viable  categories 
- mainly  Categories  2 and 3 as these are described  below.
The more rigorous  classification  means  that there are now somewhat  less 
than 30,000  ‘vanguard ’ farms  in the country,  mostly  in dairying  and on good  
soils, being operated  at high levels  of intensity  by ‘young ’ households.  Most  
of the new investment  is taking  place  on those  farms  but it is of interest  to note 
that operating  costs  per £ 100 output  are lower  than for the other  major  categories.  
Family  farm incomes  at £25,000  to £30,000  are comparatively  high but when 
account  is taken  of the labour  involved  the returns  are not much  different  from 
the average  industrial  wage.
‘Large  viable ’ households  have  two similarities  with  the ‘non-viables’ . They  
earn direct  subsidies  (more  in absolute  amounts  than relative  to their FFls),  a 
fact related  to the retention  of young  cattle  in the dairying  areas and  the inclusion 
of about  6,000  drystock  farms  in this category.  In fact when  the returns  for the 
sub-category  of drystock  farms were analysed  separately  they showed  that 
viability  on those  farms  was in great  part attributable  to direct  subsidies,  these  
accounting  for half of their FFI of £16,700.  A proportion  also have incomes  
from non-farm  employment,  mainly  because  of the occupations  of wives  and 
the self-employment  of farm operators.
Table 14
Selected  characteristics  of non-viable  farms  where  operator  and/or  spouse  has 
non-farm  job, 1993 (Category  2)
Characteristics Small  dairying Drystock Total
% of all farms 4 16 22'
Family  farm income  (£) 5,665 2,530 3,196
Sales/receipts  (£) 21,108 7,983 10.855
Subsidies  (£) 1,337 1,851 1,814
AAU (ha) 26 20 21
ESUs 20 7 9
Net new investment  (£) 2,534 1,075 1,321
Costs per £100 output  (£) 73 71 74
Labour  units 1.4 0.9 1.0
% in dairying 100 0 19
% in drystock 0 100 76
% in tillage 0 0 5
No. dairy cows 14 0 3
Age of holder 46 47 47
H'hold  size 4.9 4.5 4.6
% H'holds  with pensions 36 21 23
% H'holds  with unemployment  11 15 14
% on good soil (Type 1) 32 36 36
kJillUII  pi C I V / I  ■
Source:  Derived  from Teagasc  National  Farm Survey
64
Selected  characteristics  of non-viable  farms  where  operator  and/or  spouse  has 
no other  job and household  composition  is 'Good',  1993 (Category  3)Table 15
Characteristics Small dairying Drystock Total
% of all farms II 17 29
Family  farm income  (£) 6,464 3,480 4,631
Sales/receipts  (£) 20,114 10,843 14,452
Subsidies  (£) 1,273 2,165 1,877
AAU (ha) 24 24 25
ESUs 18 9 12
Net new investment  (£) 1,815 850 1,321
Costs per £100 output  (£) 68 67 67
Labour  units 1.3 1.1 1.2
% in dairying 100 0 38
% in drystock 0 100 59
% in tillage 0 0 3
No. dairy cows 13 0 5
Age of holder 52 56 55
H'hold  size 4.0 3.7 3.8
% H'holds  with pensions 54 54 54
% H'holds  with unemployment 20 31 27
% on good soil (Type 1) 30 41 37
Source:  Derived  from Teagasc  National  Farm Survey
Category  2 - Non Viable  Part-Timers:  The great majority  of part-timers,  
however,  are on non-viable  farms with smaller  than average  holdings.  These  
36,000  part-timers  comprise  22 per cent of all farm households  and have 17 
per cent of all AAU.  A minority  (6,600)  are in small-scale  dairying  (average  
14 cows)  and are not in most cases ’ on the better  soils. While  there is some  
new investment  on these dairy farms  they are operated  with a relatively  high 
cost structure.
Category  3 - Non-Viable  with ‘Good ’ Household  Structure:  This is the largest 
single  category  (48,000  households)  comprising  29 per cent of all households  
and accounting  for 26 per cent of total MU. They have close to the average  
size of farm in the country  whether  in terms  of MU or  ESUs.  In many  respects,  
but particularly  from the viewpoint  of earning  an acceptable  level of living  for 
a household  of today,  this is the main  problem category  in Irish farming.  Analysis  
of NFS on a three-year  period  (1991-1993)  returns  on the basis of the viability  
criteria  used here showed  this category  to be the most variable  in size, and the 
most sensitive  to the vagaries  of farm incomes.  Their incomes  and levels  of 
new investment  can vary considerably.  Clearly,  there is a proportion  of this 
category  who may be ‘temporarily ’ non-viable  or who are otherwise  in a 
transition  stage  probably  to Category  4 (see below). About  18,000  are in small-  
scale  dairying  (average  13 cows),  again  with only a minority  on the better  soils.
65
For the greater  part these  households  depend  on low income  drystock  farming. 
About  40 per cent of their  FFI comes  from direct  subsidies.  They  also manage  
to survive  through  dependence  on State income  transfers  as evidenced  by the 
fact that over half of these  households  have pension  incomes,  most likely  paid 
to a surviving  member  from an earlier  generation.  They also benefit  from 
Smallholders ’ Unemployment  Assistance.
Category  4 - Non-Viable  with ‘Poor ’ Household  Structure:  This is a residual  
category  of some  34,000  households  of older  people  on small farms,  operated  
at low levels  of intensity.  They represent  20 per cent of all farm households  
and have 13 per cent of AAU.  A small  number  are in dairying  (average  6 cows).  
Subsidies  account  for nearly  half of FFI. Household  income  is also dependent  
on pensions  but because  of their older  age structure  they do not benefit  from 
Smallholders  Unemployment  Assistance  to the same extent  as Category  3.
Dynamics  of structural  change
The foregoing  analysis  is a static  picture  of the structure  of farming  in that 
it depicts  viability  categories  for one point in time (i.e. 1993).  A more  exhaustive  
analysis  would  seek to track the process  of entering  or falling  out of different  
categories  by examining  the annual  records  of the same set of farms  for, say, 
a 10 year period.
Leavy  [1995]  studied  the performance  of some 300 farms  which  remained  
in the NFS from  1984  to 1990.  Using  economic  and socio-demographic  variables
Table 16
Selected  characteristics  of non-viable  farms  where  operator  and/or  spouse  has 
no other  job and household  composition  is 'Poor',  1993 (Category  4)
Characteristics Small dairying Drystock Total
% of all farms 3 16 20
Family  farm income  (£) 3,087 2,378 2,490
Sales/receipts  (£) 10,039 6,403 6,967
Subsidies  (£) 730 1,162 1,118
AAU (ha) 17 17 17
ESUs 9 5 6
Net new investment  (£) 246 259 312
Costs per £100 output  (£) 68 62 63
Labour  units 1.0 1.0 1.0
% in dairying 100 0 14
% in drystock 0 100 83
% in tillage 0 0 3
No dairy cows 6 0 1
Age of holder 64 67 66
H'hold  size 1.6 1.6 1.6
% H'holds  with pensions 30 59 54
% H'holds  with unemployment  26 10 13
% on good soil (Type 1) 21 35 33
Source:  Derived  from Teagasc  National  Farm Survey
66
Selected  characteristics  of non-viable  farms  using a £12,000  plus Family  
Income  Criterion',  1993Table 17
Characteristics Total
% of all farms 16
Family  farm income  (£) 28,523
Sales/receipts  (£) 77,999
Subsidies  (£) 4.190
AAU (ha) 56
ESUs 55
Net new investment  (£) 5,197
Costs per £100 output  (£) 64
Labour  units 1.9
% in dairying 77
% in drystock 12
% in tillage 9
No dairy cows 34
Age of holder 49
H'hold  size 4.9
% H'holds  with pensions 27
% H'holds  with unemployment 2
% on good soil (Type 1) 61
'And also a 5 per cent return  to non-land  assets.  
Source:  Derived  from Teagasc  National  Farm Survey
to identify  expanding  and contracting  farms/households  he designated  four 
clusters  of homogenous  groups  as follows;
(i) ‘Entrepreneurs’ : These  represented  less than 10 per cent of the total;  
they were  mostly  the large  dairy and cattle  farms  which  expanded their  businesses  
over the 7-year  period.  They were young,  farmed  intensively  and efficiently,  
had no surplus  labour  capacity,  and had good contact  with the various  support  
services.
(ii) ‘The Pressurised’ : Constituting  about 15 per cent of the total, these  
were mainly  small  dairy farmers  whose  businesses  tended  to decline  or remain  
static  although  they had surplus  labour  capacity. They  were farming  reasonably  
efficiently  but had difficulty  in expanding  from their existing  position.
(iii) ‘Part-timers’ : Approximately  30 per cent  of the total, mostly  with  cattle  
and sheep  enterprises  but also with a limited  number  in small  dairy  enterprises.  
They farmed  extensively  and despite  having  off-farm  employment  they still 
had surplus  labour  on their farms.
(iv) ‘Declining  - At Risk ’: These  accounted  for 45 per cent of the total and
67
their business  size had declined  over 1984-90.  Almost  all were in cattle and 
sheep  enterprises  on limited  areas of land; they farmed  extensively  and had a 
considerable  surplus  of labour  on their farms.
Leavy ’s classification  corresponds  broadly  with that presented  here.  His fourth 
grouping  (‘declining-at-risk ’) would  largely  coincide  with Categories  3 and 4 
as identified  from the 1993 NFS data but his criteria  for business  expansion  
limit the ‘vanguard ’ farms to a select group  of 10 per cent of the total.
Leavy ’s conclusion is that despite  the fact that most  farmers  are under-utilising 
their labour  and to a lesser  extent  their land resources,  their farm businesses  
are not expanding.
IV DETERMINANTS  OF STRUCTURAL  CHANGE  AND THEIR  
IMPLICATIONS  FOR THE FUTURE
Irish agriculture  has been firmly  on a trajectory  of pronounced  structural  
change  for at least three decades.  The data presented  here show that change  
has accelerated  over  the 1980s. This is confirmed  by other  analyses  [Matthews  
1994] showing  that projected  downward  trends  in the numbers  of farms  in six 
enterprises  for 1900-2000,  and which  were based  on 1975-85  changes,  were 
already  surpassed  in 1991 - except  in the case of the sheep  enterprise  where  
the numbers  of sheep exceeded  the numbers  projected.
Structural  change  over the longer  term is marked  by decline  in the number  
of farms,  decline  in the farm labour  force (referred  to in more detail below),  
growth  of part-time  farming,  concentration  of production  on larger  farms  and 
in the more  commercially viable  farming  regions,  a clear  retreat  into low-intensity  
low income  cattle  and sheep  production in a large  part  of the country with greater  
diversity  of enterprises  in the other  part, endemic  failure  to achieve  economic  
and socio-demographic  viability in many  rural areas, and  the increasing  reliance  
of farming  households  on the non-market  component  of family  farm income.
To summarise,  the outcome  of this process  of change  is a current  structure  
containing  four main categories  of farm which are differently  positioned  to 
meet the challenges  of the future.  Using  Teagasc  definitions  of farm and farm 
household  viability  there are now at most 47,000  economically  viable  farm 
units  in the country,  but more rigorous  and indeed realistic  concepts  of viability  
would  reduce  this number  to 30,000  or thereabouts.  Of the economically  non- 
viable  units  there  are 36,000  where the farm operator  and/or  spouse  has another  
source  of income.  Another  82,000  farm  households  do not have such incomes;  
of these 48,000  are ‘young ’ households  on average  sized farms while the 
remaining  34,000  are ‘older ’ households  on poorer  farms and unlikely to survive  
into another  generation  as separate  units.
The questions  therefore  are: what forces  have been driving  this pattern  of 
change?  Will these forces persist  for another  decade  and are there any 
unprecedented  developments  likely  to emerge?  If so, what will be their impact  
on the structure  we have described?
The argument  being  made  here is that while  future  change  will be determined
68
by many factors  - some of which  have not been experienced  in the past three  
decades  - there is no combination  of factors  in prospect  that will substantially  
alter the established  pattern  of structural  change  from its present  course.
Technology
Agricultural  restructuring  is not a simple  outcome  of any single  set of forces  
but derives  from the interactions  of technology,  markets  and policy  on the one 
hand with regional,  local,  individual  farm and household  circumstances  on the 
other. Increasingly,  however,  the modernisation  of farming  is propelled  by factors 
external  to the procedures  themselves,  to the sector,  and, indeed,  to any single  
country.  The ‘globalisation  of agriculture ’ is a term now used to denote  the 
increasing  integration  of the sector  into the international  and world  economy,  
together  with the formulation  of agricultural  policies  in the context  of global  
trade agreements.
With no apparent  reduction  in the expenditure  on agricultural  research  in 
the advanced  economies  it seems  reasonable  to assume  that technological  
advances  and their  transfer  across  national  boundaries  will continue  to increase  
the productive  potential  of agricultural  resources,  possibly  at an increasing  rate 
as new sets of innovations  come on stream  in the late 1990s [Commins  and 
Higgins  1987; Alexandratos  1990:15].  The commercial  applications  of new 
technology  will have to respect  environmental  management,  health  and safety, 
as well as animal welfare  considerations, and also the overall limits  to production  
dictated  by lack of effective  demand  (see below).  In the past, technology  for 
farming  has not been scale-neutral  and the successful  adoption  of further  
technologies  - most likely cost-reducing  practices  - in conditions  of 
environmental  and market  constraints  will call for levels  of knowledge,  skill 
and managerial  ability  found  mostly  among  those farm categories  which  are 
currently  enterprising  or viable.  With the closer  linkage  of farming  to the agri­
industrial  sector  and food-chain  - which has its own imperatives  for 
rationalisation  and technological  development  - the pressures  for innovation  
will continue  at farm level, e.g. to produce  according  to prescribed  and more  
exacting  quality  standards.
The impact  of these technological  forces will be expressed  most directly  
within  the commercial farming  sector  - typically  the Category  1 farms,  especially  
those  just surviving  in this category.  But the international  policy  and related  
market  environment  will have implications  for all categories  except  perhaps  
those  at the lower  end of the spectrum.  The present  authors  cannot  claim  expertise  
in policy  analysis  but we draw upon the views  of a number  of economists  to 
provide  at least a partial  vision  and a degree  of consensus  as to the prospects  
ahead.
External  policy  and market  environment
Following  implementation  of the CAP reforms  over 1993-96  and the 
ratification  of the GATT  decisions  covering  the years 1995-2000  the policy 
context  for the rest of the 1990s  is basically  settled.  This is not to say that the 
eventual  impact  on Irish agriculture  can be accurately  discerned.  Concerns
69
expressed  at the time of the proposed  reforms  seemed  justified  but the actual 
measures  agreed  differed  substantially  from the  proposals,  while there  was also 
an unexpected  devaluation  of the green pound.  Increases  in direct  payments  
for the commodities  affected  have offset price reductions  and the economic  
situation  in the sector  is now quite buoyant  [Kearney  1995b].  Indeed  later 
analyses  of the agreed  reforms  anticipated  this. But the fact remains  that the 
opportunities  for expanding  production  have been curtailed  while the extent  
to which  production  controls  are tightened  or relaxed  in the future  will depend  
very much  on the evolution  of agricultural  markets  and the expected  balance  
between  global  supplies  of food and the global  demand  for food [Matthews  
1994]. Specifically  on the dairy sector  Fingleton  [1994] notes that although  
changes  consequent  on CAP reforms  have had minimal  impact  to date,  
commitments  on trade liberalisation  required  under  GATT  are likely to result  
in significant  restrictive  adjustments  to current  prices  and quota  arrangements  
before  the end of the 1990s.
One obvious  effect  of such a development  will be the further  exit of smaller  
producers  from milk production.  The data presented  here (Tables  14 to 16) 
suggest  that there are a number  of small and economically  vulnerable  dairy  
farmers  among  the non-viable  categories  identified.
Consideration  of the next GATT  round  post-2000  has already  begun  with 
a growing  acknowledgement  of the irreversibility  of the trend towards  greater  
trade  liberalisation  [Kearney  1995b].  Further  GATT-imposed  cuts in agricultural  
protection  can be anticipated  following  the completion  of the current  round,  
bringing  the competitive  capacity  of Irish agriculture  even more strongly  into 
focus within  the EU and in world terms [Lucey 1995]. Reviewing  FAO  
projections  for global agricultural  production  and food demand  until 2010,  
Matthews  [1995]  concluded  that these do not hold out the prospect  of global 
demand  and supply  being sufficient  to reverse  the long-standing  downward  
trend in world  food prices  and to lead to a more remunerative  outlet  for Irish 
and European  farm produce.  Matthews  adds that the best estimate  is for the 
decades-long  imbalance  between  production  capability  and market  demand  to 
continue.
The other  issue  of relevance  here is the enlargement  of the European  Union 
towards  the central  and eastern  European  countries.  This prospect  holds  threats  
for Ireland  in relation  to the degree  to which  the EU will provide  market  access  
for the agricultural  products  of these countries  as part of the process  of EU 
integration.  Enlargement  eastwards  may also  put pressure  on the EU agricultural  
budget  [Kearney  1995b] . However,  Arnold  [1995]  concludes  that these  countries  
offer  not only threats  but also marketing  opportunities,  depending  on their rate 
of economic  recovery.
While  these various  matters  are of direct  concern  to the viable  category  of 
Irish farmers  the large numbers  currently  depending  on non-price  subsidies  may 
be faced with changes  in these payments.  The principles  underlying  such 
payments  have come  into question.  The report  [CEC 1994]  of the expert  group  
convened  by the EU’s Directorate  General  for Economic  and Financial  Affairs  
to assess  EU agricultural  policy  made a number  of recommendations  for further
70
reform  of the CAP. These included:  (i) the separation  of the two aspects  of 
policy,  that of market  competition  and economic  efficiency  on the one hand,  
and that of social  and environmental  aims on the other,  (ii) the gradual  phasing  
out of the EU financing  of compensatory  payments  and the devolution  of 
responsibility  for such  funding  to the Member  States; (iii)  the use of EU regional,  
social and cohesion  funds as accompanying  measures  to support  structural  
change  and rural development.
Such a fundamental  approach  to CAP financing  will not find easy political  
acceptance.  A compromise  is likely  to be found in the more specific  targeting  
of payments  to those farmers  in need, the decoupling  of payments  from  
production,  and their  more  direct  linkage  to social,  environmental  and perhaps  
structural  objectives.
An arrangement  of this kind together  with the availability  of schemes  such 
as the Rural  Environmental Protection Scheme  (REPS), will ensure  the continued  
existence  of a large  category  of low-intensity  drystock  farms  in Ireland.  In fact, 
more so than in the past this sector  will continue  to be a refuge  for the exits  
from the market-oriented  category.
Alternative  farm enterprises
This conclusion  about the continuing  residual  nature  of much drystock  
production  is reinforced  by the progress  to date with alternative  enterprises.  
Evidence  suggests  that their adoption  will be slow in relation  to the magnitude  
of the target  numbers,  and selective  as to kinds of farmers  diversifying  from 
conventional  production.
A study  by Leavy  [1995]  concludes that  several  factors inhibit  the wide.spread  
adoption  of alternatives  to conventional farm enterprises  - despite  the availability  
of land and labour  on the part of those farms displaced  from the viable  
commercial  farming  of existing  enterprises.  The  obstacles  include  lack of funds  
for investment,  the absence  of well-established  systems  of institutional  support  
in promotion,  marketing  and training  (in contrast  to the back-up  which,  e.g. 
dairying had),  and the low level  of human  capital - as reflected  in poor  hou.sehold  
composition,  old age and negative  attitudes  to novel ideas. However,  the 
enterprise  which  requires  least departure  from existing  practices  is forestry  as 
it is not so demanding  of management  skills  or of marketing  systems  - at least 
in the short-term.  Indeed  forestry  has accounted  for perhaps  the major  shift in 
land use in recent  years, with planting  rates of over 20,()()()  ha per year and 
private  landowners  taking  up over half of this area.
Yet, other  studies  show  that, paradoxically,  those  farm owners  who applied  
for afforestation  grants  during  1988-1991  did not come,  even proportionately,  
from the poorer  farming  regions  [Hannan and  Commins  1993:68]  , The regional  
pattern  of forestry  applications  conformed  more closely  to the distribution  of 
tillage  and dairying  than to the regional  pattern  of small-.scale  and low income  
farming.  Data from the 1991 Census  of Agriculture  confirm  this association  
of forestry  with commercial  farming.  In the ‘large-farm ’ counties  (.see Section  
II of this paper)  13.7 per cent of farms  had woodland  compared  to 4. 1 per cent 
in the small-farm counties,  with the percentages  in the other  categories  of county
71
being in the intermediate  range. It is true, however,  that sales of land for 
afforestation  (i.e. ‘non-farm ’ forestry)  occur more frequently  in the poorer  
farming  regions  than in commercial  farming  counties.
The limited  data in the 1991 Census  in regard  to other income  earning  
activities  on farms  (e.g. bed and breakfast,  recreational  activities  for tourists,  
crafts,  etc)  also show  a relatively  higher  incidence  in the more  prosperous  farming 
regions.
Evidently,  the adoption  of alternative  farm enterprises,  not unlike  survival 
in conventional  farming,  is associated  with younger  people  having  capital,  
enterprising  attitudes  and a willingness  to change.  Progress  in this form of 
diversification  will make  only slow  inroads  into the large numbers  of non-viable  
farms in the poorer  regions.
The domestic  economy:  Non-farm  employment
To an increasing  extent  persistent  low-farm  incomes  on small  holdings  have 
been offset  by earnings  from non-farm  employment.  Employment  conditions  
are expected  to improve  appreciably  over the coming  years but it remains  
doubtful  whether  the geographical distribution  of new  jobs  will be as widespread  
as in the expansionary  years of the 1970s - before  world recession  hit Irish 
industrial  employment.
In any event,  given  the difficult  market  environment  which  economists  see 
as facing farming  over  the next  ten years,  it can be assumed that  the trend  towards  
part-time  farming  will continue,  absorbing  greater  numbers  of the operators  of 
non-viable  holdings.  Apart from continuing  difficulties  in generating  
employment  in locations  accessible  to the remoter  rural areas,  the only factors  
to inhibit  the growth  of part-time  farming  are deficiencies  in training  and skills  
on the part of farm operators.  However, these  are unlikely  to present  insuperable  
constraints  given  the extensive  system  of job training  now available  around  the 
country.
Labour  force changes  and farmer  replacement
Decline  in the farm labour  force is the outcome  of past structural  change  
while  the size and composition  of the current  labour  force will dictate  future  
adjustments.  Over the past few decades  decline  in the Irish farm labour  force  
proceeded  steadily  within  a range  of 2.5 per cent to 3.5 per cent per annum.  
There  is nothing  to suggest  that this trend  will change  direction  or scale.  It may 
even intensify  as retirements,  deaths  and exits for other  jobs rise in relation  
to the numbers  of entrants.  A continuation  of current  trends would  take the 
present  farm labour  force down from 150,000  to 100,000  persons  by 2005.
Decline  rates among  farmers  have been lower  than for those  in the total  farm 
labour  force.  Recent  OECD  projections  for Ireland  estimate  90,000  farmers  in 
tbe country  (not tbe same as ‘landholders ’) by 2001 [OECD  1994].  A straight  
trend projection  of the Labour  Force Survey  estimate  of 109,000  farmers  in 
1993 would  suggest  a figure  of 79,000  farmers  by 2005 [see Graph  2]. Here, 
it is reasonable  to assume  that the younger  segments  of the present  generation  
of farm families  will not be prepared  to stake  tbeir  future  in farming  to the same  
extent  as their predecessors.
72
<w
SJ3UIJB  j 000.
73
Fewer  numbers,  however,  will be associated  with better  quality  human  
resources,  as the numbers  receiving  basic career  training  in recent  years have 
remained  steady.  However,  there is again a clear association  between  the 
incidence  of formal  training,  farm size and region.  Between  1986 and 1994 the 
annual  number  of recipients  of the Teagasc  Certificate  in Farming  [CIF] was 
863. When  this was expressed  as a ratio  of the estimated  numbers of farms  over 
20 hectares  changing  hands  annually the  number  of CIF recipients  per 100 new 
farm operators  varied  from 47.6 in the large farm counties  to 23.2 in the small 
farm counties  (as these groupings  were identified  in this paper).
Land  structure
While  the better-trained  young  people  are now coming  into farming  at the 
higher  farm size levels  it is also the case that other  well-qualified  aspirants  to 
farming  (such as those  with  farm apprenticeship  training)  are finding  it difficult  
to establish  a career  on the land if they are not farm inheritors.  In the past the 
exodus  of labour  from  farming  did not result  in corresponding  degrees  of farm 
consolidation,  reductions  in the numbers of holdings  and opportunities  for non­
inheritors  to get access  to the land. In the 1970s  there were  public  discussions,  
committee  reports  and official  declarations  of intent  to deal with the rigidities  
in the Irish land structure  and allow  for greater  mobility  of land between  one 
set of occupiers  and another.  But this momentum  came  to very little and with 
surplus  production  building  up land policy  in this sense went off the agenda.  
Changes  in the structure  of production  and in the farm labour  force  took place  
without  commensurate  change  in the structure  of farms  apart from formal  and 
informal  lettings  and the outcomes  of transactions  occurring  in a limited  land 
market.
What  evidence  there  is of land structure changes again  suggests  a regionally  
differentiated  pattern  [Hannan  and Commins  1993:71].  In the ‘north-west ’ where 
substantial  ‘land retirement ’ has occurred  whether  into part-time  farming  or 
‘refuge  farming ’ - sales  of agricultural  land as a ratio of holding  numbers  have 
been relatively  low. In these areas land mobility  occurs  through  sales for 
afforestation,  through  informal  lettings  or transfer  to absentee  owners.  By contrast  
sales rates  have been highest in areas  of high average  farm size,  good  soil quality 
and high use intensity.
As for the future,  there is little in the current  policy menu  or in any foreseeable  
set of measures  which  would  suggest  a new momentum  in land structural  change. 
One unknown  factor  is the strength  of their attachment  to land on the part of 
those who have it. This is probably  weakening  at least to the extent  that 
landholders  are willing  to surrender  managerial  control  rather  than ownership.  
The provisions  of the Early Retirement  Scheme,  by which  the successor  must 
expand  the transferor ’s holding,  will also give some impetus  to land rental by 
young  people.  However,  on balance,  policies  and initiatives  now in position  
could induce  smaller-scale  farmers  to accept,  and become  accustomed  to, a 
pattern  of living in which income  is not dependent  on active farming  but is 
enhanced  simply  by retaining  farm occupancy  and making  limited  use of the 
land.
74
V CONCLUSION
Looking  10 years ahead  we envisage  two phases  of structural  change  in the 
farm sector.  Up until the year 2000 there could be some moderation  in past 
rates  of adjustment, with  the exception  of a continuation  of decline  in the numbers 
of dairy farms.  Tbe revised  methods  of enumeration  in the 1991 Census  of 
Agriculture  eliminated  in the statistical  sense over 30,000  marginal  farms  so 
there is likely to be a time-lag  before  high rates of decline  appear  among  the 
remaining  170,000  farms.  While  real farm prices  will fall, the rising volume  
of direct  payments  (now making  up one-third  of farm income,  a proportion  
expected  to increase  further)  will cushion  the more  marginal  producers  against  
income  loss. The main blocks  of agricultural  policy  and the related  national  
Programme  for Agriculture,  Rural Development  and Forestry  are in position  
until the end of the century.  Prospects  are improving for non-farm employment,  
thus increasing  the opportunities  for part-time  farming.
The relative  calm of the next five years seems  certain  to be followed  by a 
period of turbulence,  to 2005  at least. There  have  been no policy  shifts  in recent  
times of the scale and magnitude  likely under  GATT  trade liberalisation,  EU 
enlargement  and changes  in EU budget  commitments.  There  is, therefore,  little 
by way of precedent  for assessing the possible  directions  for Irish farm structure.  
To undertake  such an assessment  would  in itself  be a major  research  task. But 
it seems  reasonable  to suggest  that on the evidence  of past trends  structural  
change will gather  momentum with outcomes  mirroring  the pattern  of adjustment  
described  earlier  in this paper.  That is to say, there will be a high degree  of 
volatility  in farm incomes  in the context  of reductions  in market  protection,  
increasing  pressures  on high-cost  producers and consequent  difficulties  for them  
to remain  viable,  further  and perhaps  more rapid depletion  of the number  of 
economically  viable  producers.  A population  of 80,000  farmers  by 2005 - and 
this is a conservative  enough  estimate  based  on a non-turbulent  phase  of change  
- could mean having  no more than 30,000  viable  farms then, without  using  
rigorous  definitions  of viability.  As is tbe case at present  these would  co-exist  
with a large number  of part-time  farmers  and another  large residual  category  
of fulltime  drystock farmers.  The latter  will continue  to depend  on direct income  
supports  but if Brussels  is to continue  to pay these, after political  bargaining,  
they will be more  tightly  targeted  to achieve  social  and environmental  objectives.
This vision  of a three-track  farming  system  is based  on the assumption  that 
the pathways  for future  adjustment  are already  fixed  by the structure  which  has 
evolved  over three decades  and by the limits set by tbe external  market  and 
policy  environment.  An alternative  scenario  would see this prospect  as too 
passive  a stance  to take for a country  which is so dependent  on its natural  
resources.  It would  claim that the shaping  of structural  change  in farming  is 
not altogether  dictated  by inevitable  and external  forces.  It would  argue  for tbe 
full manipulation  of those levers  that we in Ireland  can control  tor ourselves  
in the pursuit  of a model  of development  best suited  to our own circumstances.  
It might  see possibilities  in having  research  and development  capacity  more 
expressly  focused  around  the different  sets of problems  of different  regions  in 
the country.  And it would  seek a more  optimal  balance  than at present  between
75
palliative  income  support  measures  and the required  supports  for resource
development.
There  is need  for more  systematic  thought  and study  on these  or other  options
for the future  of farming  and rural resources.
References
Alexandratos,  N. (ed.) (1990):  European  Agriculture:  Policy  Issues and Options  to 2000  
Belhaven  Press, London  and New York.
Arnold,  T. (1995):  ‘Assessment  of the impact  of Eastern  and Central  Europe  on EU 
Agriculture ’, in B. Kearney  (ed.). What  Price CAP?,  Institute  of European  Affairs,  
Dublin.  33-35.
CEC (1994)  European  Economy.  Reports  and Studies,  No. 4, Brussels.
Commins,  P. and Higgins,  J. (1987):  ‘Towards  the year 2000: emerging  technologies  
and longer-term  trends  in agriculture ’, in The Re-Structuring  of the Agricultural  and 
Rural Economy,  Rural Economy  Research  Centre,  An Foras Taluntais,  Dublin.  1- 
38.
Fingleton,  W. A., Leavy,  A., Heavey,  J. F. and Roche, M. (1992):  Impact  of the Common  
Agricultural  Policy  Reforms  1991,  Teagasc,  Dublin,  Information  Update  Series  No. 
47.
Fingleton,  W. A, (1994):  ‘Inter-country  comparisons  for milk production ’, Teagasc,  
Dublin.
Hannan,  D. and Commins, P. (1993):  Factors  Affecting  Land  Availability  for Afforestation,  
Economic  and Social Research  Institute,  Dublin.
Kearney,  B. (1995a):  ‘Scenario  for the next decade ’, in B. Kearney  (ed,). What Price 
CAP?,  Institute  of European  Affairs,  Dublin,  3642.
Kearney,  B. (1995b):  ‘What price  CAP ’ - issues and  policies  facing  agriculture  and rural 
policy  in the EU’, paper  to Institute  of European  Affairs,  Dublin.  March.
Leavy, A. (1995):  ‘The economic  analysis ’, in P. McDonagh  (ed.). Alternative  Farming  
Systems  in the Lagging  Regions  of the EU: Final Report  for the West of Ireland  
Region,  Trinity  College,  Dublin  and Teagasc,  Dublin.  Working  Paper 12.
Lucey,  C. (1995):  ‘Implications  of the GATT  decisions  for Irish agriculture ’, in B. Kearney 
(ed.). What Price CAP, Institute  of European  Affairs,  Dublin.  7-16.
Matthews,  A. (1994):  ‘Improving  the effectiveness  and equity of income  support ’, paper  
to Macra  na Feirme  Seminar,  October.
Matthews,  A. (1995):  ‘European  agriculture  in the context  of global trends in agricultural  
markets ’, in B. Kearney  (ed.).  What  Price  CAP?,  Instituteof  European  Affairs,  Dublin. 
17-22
OECD  (1994):  Farm  Employment  and Economic  Adjustment  in OECD  Countries,  Paris.
O’Hanlan,  G, (1987):  ‘Irish agriculture  in a changing  and expanding  European  
Community ’, Proceedings  of the Agricultural  Economics  Society  of Ireland.
76
APPENDIX  
Table A1
Per cent of farms  with different  enterprises  and size of enterprise,  by category
of county,  1991
Enterprise Large farm 
countiesMedium-to-large  
farm countiesMedium-to-small  
farm countiesSmall farm 
counties
Per cent of farms with
Crops 37.6 23.3 14.4 22.0
Dairy cows 40.8 35.0 33.8 13.7
Other cows 40.6 41.1 54.8 69.5
All cattle 84.5 86.4 92.2 90.4
Sheep 31.6 24.8 23.8 41.9
Average  size: hectares/animals'
Crops 14.6 18.7 3.5 1.7
Dairy cows^ 35.9 31.9 20.9 14.3
Other  cows^ 11.0 10.8 9.4 7.1
All cattle 66.8 61.2 41.8 26.3
Sheep 221.9 188.8 139.5 131.8
'Of farms with the particular  enterprise  
including  heifers-in-calf
Source:  Derived  from Census  of Agriculture,  Table 11
77
APPENDIX
Table  A2
Changes  in the percentage  share of crops and livestock  (animals  and hectares)
hy categories  of county
Year Crops Dairy cows  Other  cows All cattle Sheep Pigs
Large  farm counties
1960 46.9 34.7 34.7 31.0 28.9 49.5
1980 56.2 43.3 21.8 33.0 31.0 45.8
1991 58.9 46.3 23.2 35.3 33.1 38.9
Medium-to-large  farm counties
i960 19.9 20.6 20.6 21.8 13.4 15.8
1980 25.4 22.0 13.9 20.3 10.2 13.5
1991 29.9 22.8 15.0 20.6 14.2 16.8
Medium-to-small  farm counties
1960 15.6 24.4 24.4 24.3 13.8 23.9
1980 8.4 23.6 23.3 23.9 14.1 30.6
1991 5.6 22.2 26.5 23.7 15.8 37.4
Small farm counties
1960 17.5 20.4 20.3 22.9 43.9 10.8
1980 9.9 11.1 41.0 22.8 44.8 10.1
1991 5.6 8.7 35.2 20.4 36.8 6.9
S(mrce: Derived  from Census  of Agriculture,  various  tables
78
NOTES
79
NOTES
80
1-
. - .--j:-.
:A:; .*-• ;
■^;5
''=M
' ; -J
■ "I
