Irish Grassland  
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal
2000  VOLUME  34
MEMBER ’S COPY
Irish Grassland  Association  
CORPORATE  MEMBERS  2000
AIB
Bank  of Ireland  
Bord  Bia 
Dairygold
Co-operative  Society  
Dairymaster  
Dawn  Meats  
Glanbia
Greencore  Agribusiness
l.A.W.S.  Group  pic 
Irish  Dairy  Board  
Irish  Farmers  Journal  
Irish  Fertilizer  Industries  
Kerry  Agribusiness  
Kerry  Group  
Monsanto
Premier  Molasses  Co. Ltd.'  
Town  of Monaghan  Co-Op.  
Wexford  Milk  Producers  Ltd.
Teagasc  - Advisory  and Training  Services  
Ballyhaise  Agricultural  College  
Cork  East  
Cork  West
Kildalton  Agricultural  College  
Kerry  
Laois  
Limerick
Regional  Office  South,  Kildalton  
Regional  Office  North,  Grange  
Roscommon  
Tipperary  North  
Tipperary  South
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 34 2000
ISSN  0322-0588
Printed  by Wicklow  Press Ltd., Wicklow
F. J. Gordon  
J. F. Mee
F. Buckley,
P. Dillon,  J. Mee,
R. Veerkamp  
M. G. Diskin,
V. Silke,  J. F .Mee,  
J. M. Shreenan
S. Mayne  
M. Scully
M. Humphreys,
L. Miller,  J. Moorby  
P. Dillon,
G. Stakelum  
J. Penno
D. Anglesey
T. Shanahan
M. Drennan,
G. Keane
E. O’Riordan,
D. McGilloway,
P. French  
L. Connolly  
P. Mahon
B. Good
G. Murphy
F. CrosbyCONTENTS
Irish dairy farming  - past, present  and future  3
Better  dairy cow fertility  down under  - What  can we 
learn?  14
Moorepark  farm fertility  study - initial  results  24
Embyro  loss in dairy cows: Implications  for
breeding  management  34
Profitable  and enjoyable  farming  48
Growing  a business  from a dairy base 57
Breeding  high quality  forage  for sustainable  dairy 
farming  - A multidisciplinary  approach  62
Grazed  grass as a feed for dairy cows  70
Profitable  milk production  farm pasture  78
Improving  milk solids  by management  87
Lessons  from Kerry  Agribusiness/Teagasc  “Focus  
On Profit ” Programme  93
Breeding  quality  cattle  for Europe  100
Beef  from grass-based  system  105
Labour  on sheep  farms  112
Financial  implications  of expanding  or reducing  the sheep  
enterprise  on drystock  farms  118
Worm  parasite  control  and new technology:  A fresh 124 
approach
Quality  lamb partnership  programme  130
Tagging,  traceability  and quality  assurance  132
Council  2000/2001
President:  J. Dwyer
Vice President:  N. Culleton
Past President:  P. McFeely
Secretary:  J. O’Shea
P. Baker,  B. Barnes,  J. Claffey,  M. Dempsey,  R. Fallon,  M. Magan,  J. Maher,  
D. McGilloway,  J. O’Brien,  M. O’Brien,  M. O’Donovan,  P. O’Keeffe,
F. O’Mara,  T. Pettit,  A. Thompson,  P. Young,  P. Walshe  
Irish Grassland  Association,  Moorepark  West  House,  Moorepark,  Feimoy,  Co. 
Cork. Telephone;  025 31576 Fax: 025 31706 e-mail:  ahc@eircom.net
Irish Dairy  Farming  - Past,  Present  
and Future
F. J, GORDON
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  Co.
Down.
Milk production  is a vital component  of the agricultural  sectors  within  both 
Northern  Ireland and Republic  of Ireland. However  there is continual  
downward  pressure  on the returns from milk production,  especially  in 
Northern  Ireland,  due to reducing  milk prices and value of cull cows and 
calves. It is hoped that some of these pressures  may be at least partially  
alleviated  as the impact  of BSE is reduced  in the years ahead. However  it 
remains  clear  that survival  of the industry  in the short term, and growth  in the 
longer term if/when milk quotas are eliminated,  will depend on the 
competitive  sector producing  a quality  product  appropriate  for the market 
place (including  timing).  The objective  of this paper  is to look at the technical  
development  of the dairy sector  over the past 20-25  years and provide  a look 
forward  to the future.  To achieve  this the paper  is divided  into three sections  
which endeavour  to address  the issues (1) Is our industry  competitive?  (2) 
what  progress,  at a technical  level,  has been made  in the industry?  and (3) what  
are the technical  issues  for the future?
1. Is Irish dairy  farming  competitive?
There are many ways of comparing  the competitive  positions  of the milk 
production  sectors  in different  countries  and economists  do not always  agree  
on how such comparisons  should  be undertaken.  Also because  of the major 
fluctuations  in currency  values (especially  between  UK and ROI) it can be
■ Land costs  
@ Capital  costs  
C Labour  costs  
Production  costs
Ger NL DK F UK IRL USA NZ 
Country
Fig. 1 - Production  costs  of milk  across  countries  (from  McBurney,  1998)
3
very difficult  to produce  meaningful  comparative  data. Not withstanding  these 
difficulties  McBurney  (1998) produced  comparative  milk production  costs  
across  a number  of countries  by interpreting  data obtained  in a recent  study  
carried  out by German  workers.  In this study costs were grouped  under  four 
main headings;  production  costs; paid and unpaid  labour;  capital  costs (loan  
capital  and equity)  and land costs (rent paid and calculated  rent on own land).  
A summary  of the total economic  costs calculated  by McBurney  (1998)  is 
presented  in Figure 1. These data show that in comparison  with our main  
competitors  across  EU both UK and Ireland  are relatively  competitive  and also 
competitive  in relation to USA. However  when you consider  the total 
economic  costs of production  for countries  such as New Zealand,  the 
difficulties  of Irish dairy farmers  competing  on a world  market  are obviously 
clear.
McBurney  (1998) also undertook  a more detailed  comparison  across the 
different  areas within  the British  Isles and a summary  of the total economic 
costs which  he computed  is given in Table 1. The key points  in these data are 
that in the cost areas  which  many  of us debate  so vehemently,  i.e. variable  and 
fixed  costs,  there were no differences  between  the regions.  However  when  the 
calculation  was taken to full economic  costs, (which  includes  imputed  costs  
for unpaid  labour  by the farmer  and spouse  and unpaid  rent) then there  are very 
major  differences.
Table I
Milk production  costs (p/pl)  across  British  Isles (From  McBurney,  1998)
England  &
WalesNorthern
IrelandRepublic  
of Ireland
Total variable  costs 7.94 6.49 7.73
Total fixed costs 6.13 6.82 6.81
Total input  costs 14.07 13.31 14 54
Unpaid  labour 2.51 3.16 6.07
Unpaid  land rental 0.98 1.39 2.24
Total economic  costs 17.56 17.86 22.85
Milk output/farm  (1) 479,310 248,646 167,018
In the Republic  of Ireland  these imputed  costs are more than double  those  
in England  and Wales  and almost  double  those for Northern  Ireland.  The key 
factor  driving  this high cost in the Republic  of Ireland  is the relatively  low 
milk output  per farm.  This highlights  the absolute  necessity  to ensure  that our 
units have sufficient  scale of operation.  This tremendous  influence  of scale on 
total economic  costs is also demonstrated  by the data in Table  2 derived  from 
the Northern  Ireland  Farm Business  Survey  data (McBurney  1998).
These  data (which  relate  to 1997/98  year) are grouped  on the basis of herd 
size. They clearly  show that herd size has no effect on variable  costs, only 
marginal  effects  on fixed  costs  but a very major  effect  on imputed  labour  costs.
Table  2
Effect  of herd  size on milk production  costs (p/pl)  in Northern  Ireland  (from
McBurney  1998)
Herd size Variable
costsFixed  costs Imputed
labourTotal
economic  cost
Under  20 cows 6.8 5.9 6.2 18.9
30-40 6.7 5.5 4.0 16.2
50-70 6.3 5.8 2.5 14.6
70-100 6.1 5.4 1.3 12.8
Above  100 7.0 4.8 1.5 13.3
These  latter  costs decline  from 6.2 to 1.5 p/1 as herd size increases  from under  
20 cows to over 100 cows.
All these data highlight  the need for growth  in herd size, or more correctly  
milk output  per labour  unit, if we are to remain  viable.  It is always  necessary  
to prune  variable  and fixed  costs  but in those  units where  there  is relatively  low 
outputs  per farm we must accept  that it is almost  irrelevant  in terms of total 
economic  costs.  The only way forward  for such units is growth.  We all realise 
that due  to milk quota  restrictions  it has been extremely  difficult  for small units 
to grow but this must not stop us appreciating  its importance  and recognising 
that it is the key to progress.
A more simplistic  approach  to assessing  the competitive  ability of any 
sector  is to consider  how it is competing  in the market  place for the resources 
which  it employs.  While  in theory  within  UK milk quota  is attached  to land it 
is in practice  traded between  farms and regions and can therefore  be 
considered  as a flexible  resource.  Against  this background  Table 3 indicates  
the level of milk production  in Northern  Ireland  prior to the introduction  of 
milk quotas  along with quota held for the year 1998/99.  Even though  there  
have been numerous  deductions  from quota allocations  the Northern  Ireland  
quota holding  in 1998/99  was well above the 1983/84  baseline  production  
level. Presently  Northern  Ireland  has purchased,  or leased,  milk quota from 
Great Britain to the extent of approximately  20% of its supplies.  This is 
probably  the best indication  that Northern  Ireland  dairy farming  has been 
competitive,  in a UK context,  since 1983. It also highlights  the fact that those
Table  3
The ability  of Northern  Ireland  dairying  to compete  across  United  Kingdom  
(U. Agnew  2000 personal  communication)
Million  litres
Milk produced  pre quota  (1983/84) 1418
Quota  leased/purchased  into N1 280 (-t-20%)
Present  Northern  Ireland  quota 1550
dairy fanners  who are serious about remaining  in milk production  have 
continued  to grow in order  to provide  more  viable  enterprises  - and lower  total  
economic  costs.
2. What  technical  progress  has been made  in the industry?
It is always interesting  to consider  the technical  progress  which any 
industry  has made over a reasonable  time-span.  Such progress  could be 
considered  in terms of changes  in average  performance  at farm level but 
because  of the tremendous  variations  which  occur in on-farm  performances  I 
have confined  the assessment  of progress  to that achieved  at research  level.  
Table  4 provides  the performance  of the Hillsborough  spring  calving  system  in 
1978 and the recent performance  of a relatively  similar  system  operated  at 
Moorepark  during  1999. These  two sets of data, which  either  were, or are, at 
the forefront  of performances  within their relevant  time periods clearly  
demonstrate  the tremendous  progress  which has occurred  over this 21 year 
period.  Similarly  the data in Table 5 for an autumn  calving  system  represent 
the outputs  at research  level for this system  at Hillsborough  over a relatively  
similar  timescale.  Both these autumn  calving  systems  adopted  ad libitum  
access  to ensiled  grass plus a flat rate of 5.4 kg concentrates  per day for the 
total winter  feeding  period,  and grass only during  the summer.
The major increases  achieved  in animal  performance  in both the autumn  
and spring  calving  systems  reflect  a range of factors?  but most particularly 
improvements  in dairy cattle genetic  merit coupled  with enhanced  feeding  
regimes  to maximise  the contribution  which  forage  could make to the diet of 
these higher  producing  animals.  For the autumn  calving  system  the feeding
Table  4
Progress  in the performance  of spring  calving  systems  during  the past 20 years
Hillsborough  - 1978 Moorepark  - 1999 
(Dillon  Pers. Comm.)
Stocking  rate (cows/ha) 2.9 Approx  2.35
Concentrate  input (kg/cow) 550 365
Milk yield (kg/cow) 5504 7500
Table  5
Progress  in the performance  of autumn  calving  systems  over the past 20 years
Hillsborough  - 1980 Hillsborough  - 1993
and 1999
Stocking  rate (cows/ha) 2.9 2.1
Concentrate  (kg/cow) 1140 980
Milk yield (kg/cow) 5689 7854
Table  6
The effect  of dairy  cow genetic  merit  on efficiency  of converting  feed energy  into 
milk energy  (Gordon, et al. 1995)
Genetic  merit  
(PTA fat + protein  kg)Milk yield (kg) Feed efficiency  (%)
5 29.0 25
15 30.6 27
45 37.2 30
value of the silage has been increased  through  more frequent  harvesting  
coupled  with rapid  wilting  to 25-30%  dry matter.  Equally  over the summer  the 
traditional  rigid system of paddock  grazing,  which had the objective  of 
achieving  maximum  utilisation  of the grass grown,  has been replaced  by a lax 
grazing approach,  with herbage  allocations  adjusted  daily. The grazing  
objective  has now moved  to maximising  pasture  intake  per cow. It is my view 
that little if any of this increased  output  has arisen by either  producing  more  
grass, growing  grasses  of higher  inherent  feeding  value or even during  the 
grazing  period  allowing  animals  access  to material  of higher  feeding  value.
We must therefore  recognise  that the increasing  genetic merit of our 
animals  coupled  with our ability  to develop  systems  to exploit  this has been 
our man route to improved  technical  performance.  After all it is now well 
recognised  that dairy cow genetic  merit is the single most important  factor  
influencing  the efficiency  of conversion  of feed nutrients  to product  output  - 
and this remains  the central  point  in competitive  dairying  systems.  The data in 
Table 6 which  are derived  from a study at Hillsborough  in which  animals  of 
different  genetic merit were given ad libitum access to the same feed 
demonstrates  this effect. The efficiency  of conversion  of feed energy to 
product  output  increased  from 25 to 30% (an increase  in milk product  output  
of 20% from a given feed input) as the genetic  ment of the dairy cow was 
increased.  No other single factor can approach  achieving  such a dramatic  
response.
We must recognise  however  that there is nothing  magic about higher 
genetic  merit  cows - they can only sustain  increased  levels  of performance  if 
our management  systems  enable  them to consume  extra feed nutrients  This is 
the factor which puts extra pressure  on our management  systems  and must  
drive our research  horizons.  If our management  systems  do not develop  
sufficiently  to enable good quality cows to consume  more feed then the 
responses  in performance  from increasing  genetic merit will be greatly  
reduced,  or even minimal.  This has been demonstrated  in the work  by Cromie  
et al. (2000) (Figure  2) which showed  that in low feed input systems  the 
performance  benefits  from increasing  genetic  merit were only approximately 
half those  achieved  in more modest  feeding  regimes.  I have no doubt  that this 
difference  is ever increasing  as we widen the difference  in feed inputs.  For 
example  we are fully aware  that the response  in performance  from increasing
Fig. 2 - A comparison  of milk production  proofs  from high input  and low 
input  herds  (from  Cromie  et al. 2000)
genetic  merit in New Zealand  is only 26% of that recorded  in USA  (Cromie  et 
al. 2000).  This must not however  be construed  to imply  that the benefits  from 
high genetic  merit cows can only be achieved  in high concentrate  systems.  
Higher  concentrate  levels are only one approach  to achieving  high nutrient  
intakes.  This is amply  demonstrated  by the data presented  for the spring  and 
autumn calving systems  outlined  in Tables 1 and 2 in which major  
performance  benefits  have been achieved  without  any increase  in concentrate 
input. In these examples  increased  nutrient  intakes  were obtained  by more  
appropriate  grazing management,  and higher quality silage for animals 
producing  milk over the winter  period.  These are the issues which research 
must address.
3. Looking  towards  the future  - being  aware  of the options
The past 20 years have been a period  of considerable  technical  progress.  
Unfortunately  delivery  of much of this potential  progress  at farm level has 
been stifled by the political  constraints  which have been placed on the 
development  of our industry.  This has been particularly  true in the Republic  of 
Ireland  where the inability  to freely trade milk quota has placed an extra  
constraint  on the development  of dairying  enterprises,  particularly  for the 
smaller  milk producer.  While  the milk quota  system  has also been a constraint 
in Northern  Ireland  the ability  to trade quota between  farms,  and across  the 
UK, has eased some of the potential  blockages  in farm development  and 
growth.  Hence the outcomes  in the two industries  have been somewhat 
different.
The key limiting  constraints  to development  and progress  are generally  
quota, land and capital,  although  other constraints,  such as cow and stock  
person  potential,  must not be forgotten.  As our industry  strives  to grow and 
make further  progress  there will be a range of options  for progress  open to 
farmers,  and the best option  for one farmer  may not be the best for another  
(depending  upon the limiting  constraints  in the individual  enterprise).  It is 
clear that the future is unlikely  to be based on the stereotype  production
systems  which  have been adopted  (or advised)  in the past. Where  milk quota  
has greater  flexibility  individual  enterprises  can grow (and many must grow)  
and a range of options  are available  to achieve  this growth.  For those where  
land is limited,  and there are many  enterprises  within  this category  in Northern  
Ireland,  then more radical options  must be sought. In Northern  Ireland  a 
considerable  proportion  of dairy farms  have grown  markedly  over the past 10 
years (and this is demonstrated  by the major  transfer  of quota into Northern  
Ireland)  to the extent  where  now it is often the availability  of land accessible 
to cows which  is the limiting  factor  - and with land at its present  high price  
such farms cannot  easily grow even if land became  available.  These are the 
issues  which  are presently  constraining  many Northern  Ireland  dairy farms.
(a) Calving  season  options
To members  of a Grassland  Society  it is often considered  axiomatic  that we 
consider  spring  calving  systems  as the optimum,  or only, way forward.  There  
are production,  processing,  and marketing  reasons  why this is not always  so. 
A competitive  milk processing  sector,  if it is to operate  in high value  products, 
will increasingly  require  a degree  of balance  in its milk flow across  the year. 
At farm level we neglect  this at our peril with for example  some milk 
purchasers  in Great  Britain  likely  to be offered  12 p/1 for milk during  the early  
summer  of 2000. While I strongly  believe  that farmers  must consider  the 
market place this does not absolve  milk purchasers  from providing  the 
appropriate  price signals  back to the producer.  The key point  however  must be 
that at farm level we recognise  that good  quality  grassland  can provide  a major 
proportioniion  of the feed nutrients  in systems  which  calve at other times of 
the year (eg autumn  calving)  provided  we can operate  at high yields/cow.  At 
Hillsborough  our autumn  calving  cows are now going  to grass at the end of a 
winter  in which  they have received  ad lib silage  and 6 kg concentrate/day  and 
yielding  around  28 litres milk per day. In 1978 the spring  calving  herd (Table  
1) on 31 March  averaged  24.8 litres per day. The lactation  curves  for both 
groups  of animals  are given  in Figure  3. This shows  that the high genetic  merit
Fig. 3 - Daily  milk outputs  from two systems  of milk production;  spring  
calving  in 1978 and autumn  calving  1998
autumn  calving  cow has even greater  potential  to exploit  milk from pasture 
than our spring  calving  cows of 20 years  ago (and we must remember  that the 
latter  system  was by no means  an inefficient  system,  achieving  a yield of 5504  
litres per cow). If a premium  can therefore  be achieved  for winter  milk then 
there are excellent  opportunities  to produce  very viable systems  using the 
autumn  calving  animal.  It is often considered  that autumn  calving  inevitably  
leads to high fixed  cost systems.  In many  parts of Ireland,  where  some  form of 
housing,  feed storage  and slurry handling  are essential,  then autumn  calving 
systems  may require  only marginal  increases  in fixed costs over most spring  
calving  systems  presently  in place. Recent  estimates  would  also suggest  that 
autumn  calving  may only marginally  increase  variable  costs per litre provided  
good milk outputs  per cow can be achieved.
It is readily  accepted  that many autumn  calving  herds (and also spring 
calving  herds) presently  adopt high fixed cost systems.  These however  are 
more a reflection  of the past profitability  of these systems  rather than a 
necessity  of the system.  Indeed  across  Northern  Ireland  there are many  farmers 
operating  autumn  calving  systems,  using simple  but effective  techniques  to 
efficiently  utilise  fresh and conserved  forage  and producing  high milk outputs  
(of around  700,000  litres)  per labour  unit. These  types of systems  can provide 
a good return  to the farmer  and are an important  component  of the milk intake  
by many milk buyers.
(b) Feeding  options
Throughout  Ireland we have rightly focussed  on the maximum  
incorporation  of grass into the diet of the dairy cow, irrespective  of season  of 
calving.  There is no disputing  this as a starting  point for effective/economic 
production  but we must recognise  that as the cost of cereals,  or by-products,  
declines  relative  to forage costs (both grazed and conserved  forage)  and 
individual  farmers  move towards  an expansion  mode, our industry  must  
examine  other approaches  to profitably  converting  ruminant  feed into milk.  
This is particularly  true as the genetic  merit  (or feed conversion  efficiency)  of 
our dairy herd increases  - and is extremely  relevant  for those  farmers  who have 
limited  access to grazing  land. For example  Table 7 presents  data from a 
systems  comparison  at Hillsborough  in which  autumn  calving,  high genetic  
merit,  cows were grazed  during  the summer  period  using  two very contrasting
Table  7
There  are other  options  for achieving  high outputs  at pasture  
(Data  from Systems  Study  at Hillsborough)
Grazing  system
Grass  allowance  (kg/DM/d)Lax and flexible
23Fixed  paddocks
16
Conc/cow  (kg) 0 400
Yield  of fat -i- protein 232 253 +9%
(kg/cow)
Area/cow  (ha) 0.26 0.20 -23%
10
approaches.  In one system  (lax/tlexible)  animals  were managed  to achieve  
maximum  intake  of grass per cow, by allocating  23 kg DM/cow/day  above  4 
cm, and given no concentrates.  In the second system,  the fixed paddock  
grazing system,  animals  were rigidly grazed in a conventional  paddock  
grazing  system  at a much higher  mean stocking  rate over the season  (5 cows  
per ha) and allocated  concentrates  according  to yield and herbage  availability.  
They received  400 kg per cow over the grazing  season.  The system  which  
received  concentrates  used 23% Less grazing  land, produced  9% greater  
output  of milk fat and protein  per cow and was relatively  simple  to manage.  
While all types of economic  conclusions  could be drawn from this, the key 
factor  is that there are different  options  available  and what is correct  for one 
situation  will not be correct  in the other. Where  a farmer  has been (or is) 
expanding  output  from a limited  land base then the concentrate  route may be 
the most effective  while  if a farmer  has ample  grazing  land available  the other  
option is the most appropriate.  Possibly  one of our weaknesses  at research 
level is that we tend to consider  that there is only one way of moving  forward 
rather  than providing  the farmer/adviser  with tools by which he can look at 
options  and make decisions  which  are suitable  for each individual  producer.  
For example  if I am grazing  dairy cows at pasture I would consider  it 
important  to know if I offer more grass to the herd, how much more of this 
grass will the cows eat, and what is the reduced  efficiency  of herbage 
utilisation  - or alternatively  what is the impact  on herbage  intake and grass  
utilisation  of giving  say 2 kg concentrates/day  to a herd which is presently 
being  tightly  grazed.
(c) The genotype  option
The declining  fertility  in our National  dairy cattle population  is now well 
recognised  with calving  rates in large scale surveys  being as low as 40%.  
Equally  the most recent  Moorepark  study indicates  conception  rates of 49%.  
However  these figures  may be hiding  a much  more severe  decline  which  lies 
ahead as genetic  merit increases  further.  For example  at Hillsborough  the 
conception  rate for the group  of very highest  genetic  merit  cows has declined  
to under 30%, a figure which is now not uncommon  in the USA. While  
undoubtedly  through  research  we can provide  a better understanding  of the 
physiological  reasons  for such low reproduction  rates, and hopefully  
management  practices  may be developed  to improve  fertility,  this will be a 
very difficult  road. The very simplistic  hypothesis  that the decline in 
reproductive  performance  can be rectified  by reducing  the extent of the 
negative  energy  balance  in early lactation  is unrealistic.  This fails to recognise 
that a feature of high genetic  merit cows is that as plane of nutrition  is 
increased,  milk yield increases  with often little reduction  in the extent  of the 
energy  gap during  the early lactation  period.  Equally  it does not recognise  that 
in studies  to date where  differences  in planes  of nutrition  have been imposed  
no strong  links between  fertility  and nutrition  have been obtained,  except  at 
extreme  nutrition  levels.  Nevertheless,  while accepting  that this road will be 
difficult,  we must endeavour  to make progress  as quickly  as possible.
11
While  there are few immediate  answers  to the problem  of reducing  fertility,  
in looking  further  ahead we have the opportunity  to make progress  through 
improved  breeding  strategies.  Many  countries  have now recognised  that there 
is genetic  variation  in reproductive  performance  within the black and white  
population  and this opens  the door to include  this within  selection  goals.  The 
Black and White  population  in Scandinavia  has embraced  this approach  for 
some time and other European  countries  are now making  this information  
available.  The work in Republic  of Ireland  will also hopefully  make  progress 
in this direction.
Recently  there has been considerable  interest  in using other breeds to 
address  this problem,  and this is a route which  we are exploring  in Northern  
Ireland.  Two large scale research  projects,  with co-funding  from dairy farmers 
through  AgriSearch  and Department  of Agriculture  and Rural Development, 
are exploring  two different  approaches.  One approach  is involving  cross 
breeding  and the other  examines  breed  substitution.  The latter  project  involves  
a large scale comparison  of Norwegian  NRF and Holstein  Friesian  cattle,  the 
former  being a breed which has been selected  for many years using a total 
merit index which  includes  fertility  as well as health  parameters.  This study  
will involve  600 animals,  300 of the Norwegian  NRF breed and 300 high 
genetic  merit Holsteins,  in two components.  Sixty of each breed will be 
subjected  to detailed  scientific  research  at Hillsborough  to examine  aspects  
such as nutrient  metabolism,  feed efficiency  and grazing  behaviour  while  240 
of each breed  will be compared  on 20 farms,  across  a wide range  of production  
and management  systems.  When both components  of this study are brought 
together  they will provide  a very accurate  and comprehensive  comparison  of 
the two breeds  in systems  which  are representative  across  our industry.  It is 
only through  this type of research  that we can produce  reliable  information  
which  will be appropriate  for the future  of the industry.
Conclusion
Irish dairy farming  has made considerable  technical  progress  over the past 
20 years  and now has the expertise  to enable  high outputs  to be achieved  from 
grassland  by both spring  and autumn  calving  systems.  However  the future  for 
many farms on this island  must involve  growth,  in terms of milk output  per 
farm, and this can only be achieved  through  us all recognising  that there are a 
range  of options  by which  this can be effectively  achieved.  There  is no single  
system  which  everyone  should,  or must, follow.  The key point which  I would  
make  to my research  and technical  support  colleagues  is that we must have a 
sufficiently  open mind to be able to create  options,  and the tools to help these  
to be delivered,  which  will enable  our dairy enterprises  to grow by whatever 
methods  suits each individual  farm.
References
Cromie,  A. C., Kelleher,  D. and Gordon,  E J. (2000). The impact of dairying
environment  on the response  to increases  in genetic  merit in dairy herds. 72th
Annual  Report  of  Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland.  In press
12
Gordon,  F, J., Patterson,  D. C., Yan, T., Porter,  M. G., Mayne,  C. S. and Unsworth,  E. 
F. (1995).  The influence  of genetic  index for milk production  on the response  to 
complete  diet feeding  and the utilization  of energy  and nitrogen.  Animal  Science,  
61, 199-210.
McBurney,  S. A. (1998).  Competitive  milk production  in a world  market.  Proceedings  
Northern  Ireland  Dairy  Conference  1998, pp 7-27.
13
Better Dairy Cow Fertility  Down  
Under  - What  Can We Learn?
J. F. MEE
Teagasc,  Dairy  Research  Centre,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork
Having  spent  a twelve  month  sabbatical  working  in both New Zealand  and 
Australia  my objective  in this paper  is to describe  how scientists  and farmers  
in these  countries  approach  the challenges  of successfully  breeding  dairy cows  
at grass. Specifically,  this paper  focuses  on two issues  of current  concern,  the 
lower  fertility  of high yielding  cows and how to improve  conception  rates at 
grass.
Dairy  herd fertility  - how do we compare?
The completion  of the preliminary  herd level analysis  of the Moorepark 
Eertility  Project  allows  us to benchmark  Irish dairy cow fertility  performance 
with our international  competitors.
Unlike  the current  Irish interpretation  of herd fertility  performance,  based  
on target values  largely  derived  from UK data, in Australia,  median  results  
from the top quartile  of herds (based  on their 6 week  pregnancy  rate) are used 
as achievable  figures  for the dairy industry.  Moorepark  data suggest  that the 
characteristics  of herds achieving  high pregnancy  or calving  rates may not be 
the same as those achieving  low pregnancy  rates and so it may not be a valid  
target  for the latter  group.
Table 1
Dairy  herd fertility  performance  in seasonally  calving  herds  in Ireland,  New 
Zealand  and Australia
Index  (mean) Ireland' New Zealand Australia"
Submission  rate (3 week)  (%) 70.0" 78.9 75.1
Conception  rate (1st service)  (%) 48.0 55.7 48.7
Pregnancy  rate (6 weeks)  (%) 777.0" 62.1
(overall)  (%) 85.7 91.6 90.5
Breeding  season  (days) 104 100 132
'Moorepark  Fertility  Project  (1999);  "Seasonal  herds; "All cows calved  at MSD are 
eligible;  MS day PR.
Submission  rate
Even allowing  for the strict definition  of submission  rate (SR) currently 
used in DairyMIS  (Table 1), the average  SR in Irish herds is only slightly  
lower  than that reported  in Australia,  but considerably  lower  than that reported  
in New Zealand.  In New Zealand  there is a major emphasis  placed on 
submitting  cows early in the breeding  season  for Al. It should  be noted  that in
14
New Zealand,  cows generally  do not ovulate  or show  signs of oestrus  within  4 
to 6 weeks  of calving.  With  an existing  compact  calving  pattern,  possibly  aided  
by induction,  late calving  cows do not lower  the SR as they do in Irish herds.  
A more lenient  definition  of SR (eligible  cows >21 days calved  at mating  start 
date, MSD) shows a dramatically  increased  SR (90%) in Dairy MIS spring  
calving  herds (Mee. Fahey and Crilly, 1999). The definition  of SR for Irish 
herds is currently  under  review.
Currently  there is interest  in Ireland in preventing  oestrus  in finishing  
heifers  and cull cows using ‘cow pills ’ (bovine  intra uterine  devices,  BIUD ’s). 
In Australia  this problem  is solved  by bilateral  ovariectomy  performed  per 
rectum/vaginum  with a special surgical  instrument  (Willis  Dropped  Ovary  
Spay).
Conception  rate
The conception  rate to first service  of Irish herds  is similar  to that achieved  
in Australia,  but substantially  lower than that reported  in New Zealand.  It 
should also be noted that New Zealand  scientists  consider  their actual  
conception  rates ‘below performance  objectives ’ (Hayes, 1998), (60%),  
suggesting  that this target  value  is no longer  being  achieved  even in countries  
with a reputation  for high dairy cow fertility.
Six week  in-calf  rate
Whereas  there are currently  no Irish data on the six week in-calf  rate, this 
has been adopted  in both Australia  and New Zealand  as a national  
benchmarking  tool to set standards  and compare  herds.  In Australia  a target  of 
75% has been set as achievable,  based on the average  (77%) for the top 
quartile  of herds (Morton,  1999a).  In New Zealand  however,  the goal of the 
dairy cattle fertility  research  programme  is to increase  by 10% (from 77 to 
87%) the proportion  of cows conceiving  during  the first 45 days of a seasonal  
breeding  programme.
Infertile  rate
The higher  infertile  rate reported  in Irish herds (Table 1) may reflect  better  
recording  of data, slightly  different  definitions  or a higher  late embryonic  and 
foetal  mortality  rate. The extremely  high (34%)  individual  herd infertile  rates 
detected  in the Moorepark  Fertility  Project  suggests  the latter problem  is 
present  in a proportion  of well managed  herds. Probable  causative  factors  
include  neosporosis  and BVDV  infection.  While calving  induction  is not 
widely  practiced  in Irish herds (approximately  4% of large intensive  herds  
induce  more than 10 cows in at least one year), between  5 and 15% of cows  
are induced  to calve  prematurely  in Australia  and New Zealand  thus adding  to 
the real foetal  mortality  rate.
Duration  of breeding
The wide variations  in the duration  of the breeding  season,  both within  and 
between  countries  (Table  1), renders  national  and international  comparisons  of
15
limited  value. On average,  the breeding  season  in seasonal  calving  herds is 
shortest  in New Zealand,  (particularly  the Al season),  followed  by Ireland  and 
Australia.  More valid comparisons  may be made by using a fixed breeding 
season  (as with the six week in-calf  rate), for example,  13 weeks,  to compare 
the reproductive  performance  of herds  both nationally  and internationally.  This 
is currently  under  review  at Moorepark.
High genetic  merit  cows - a breed  apart?
Research  groups  in both Australia  and New Zealand  are examining  the 
problems  associated  with breeding  high Australian  Breeding  Value  (ABV)  and 
high New Zealand  Breeding  Worth  (BW)  cows at pasture.  Due to the expense  
associated  with this research,  the impact  of genetic  improvement  for milk  yield  
and composition  on fertility  has had a low priority.  However,  in both countries  
there is concern  amongst  farmers  over the perceived  reduction  in conception  
rates associated  with genetic  improvement.  This reduction  is thought  to be 
related to the under nutrition  of genetically  superior  cows during early  
lactation  and has stimulated  recent  research  work.
Australian  results
Australian  studies  with high genetic  merit Holstein  Friesian  cows have 
shown poorer expression  of oestrus (Lean, Westwood  and Porter, 1999),  
longer  calving  to first ovulation  interval,  first oestrus  interval  and conception  
intervals  (Jonsson  et al 1997), lower submission  rate (Fulkerson  et al 1997)  
and more abnormal  cycles  (Fulkerson  et al 1997) compared  to lower  genetic  
merit cows. Altered  progesterone  metabolism  in such cows is also being  
examined.  All of these factors,  detected  in small scale controlled  experiments, 
contribute  to poorer  herd fertility.  However,  the Australian  National  Dairy  
Herd Fertility  Project  did not detect a significant  difference  in first service  
conception  rates between  cows of differing  yields (from < 2,000 to > 4,000 
L/120d),  (Morton,  1998) or between  cows with sires of differing  ABV,  
(Morton,  1999* ’),
New Zealand  results
New Zealand  research  work had shown that Holstein  Friesian  cows  
genetically  selected  for heavy  body weight  (60%  Holstein  genes)  had a shorter 
calving  to first ovulation  interval  but a lower  first service  conception  rate and 
later onset of puberty  than light body weight  cows (10% Holstein  genes),  
(Laborde,  1998).  This study suggested  a strain difference  in fertility.  Hence  a 
retrospective  analysis  was carried  out of strains of Holstein  Friesian  (HF) 
cows,  Jersey  cows and their crosses.  (Harris  et al 1999).  This showed  that as 
the proportion  of overseas  HF genes  in both HF and HF-Jersey  crossbred  cows  
increased,  the risk of culling  and infertility  increased.  HF-Jersey  crossbreds 
were at least risk of culling.  Heterosis  estimates  indicated  improved  fertility  
from crossbreeding  for all fertility measures.  Research  at Moorepark  is 
currently  examining  the reproductive  performance  of different  breeds 
(Norwegian  Red, Normande,  Montbelliard)  and crossbred  dual purpose  cattle.
Similarly,  a joint New Zealand/North  American  project  found  that plasma
16
progesterone  concentrations  after CIDR treatment  were inversely  associated 
with body weight  and milk yield in US and NZ Friesian  cows. Higher  plasma  
progesterone  concentrations  and a shorter  oestrus  cycle  were present  in CIDR-  
treated  NZ versus  US cows (Bilby,  1998).  The results  of this study  stimulated 
a project at the Dairying  Research  Corporation  in New Zealand  to compare  NZ 
(13% Holstein  genes) and Dutch Holsteins  (100%  Holstein  genes) in New 
Zealand  on both pasture and total mixed ration, (Kolver,  et al 1999).  
Preliminary  results  on reproductive  performance  show  that grass-fed  cows  had 
a longer  postpartum  interval  than those fed a TMR,  while the Dutch  cows had 
a shorter  postpartum  interval  than the New Zealand  cows (Verkerk,  pers. 
comm.).
More recently,  a joint Teagasc-New  Zealand  (DRC, LIC, Massey  
University)  Holstein  Friesian  strain comparison  study has been set up to 
compare,  in Ireland,  North  American,  New Zealand  and Irish Holstein  cows  
and similar  cows in New Zealand.  Calves in both countries  are currently  
entering  puberty and pubertal  development  and maiden heifer breeding 
performance  will be closely  monitored.
Thus,  farmers  in Ireland,  Australia  and New Zealand  have similar  concerns 
over the fertility  performance  of high genetic  merit, high yielding  Holstein  
Friesian  cows. Results  from Moorepark  suggest  we need to differentiate 
between  the effects  of the percentage  Holstein  genes and type, in cows from 
their actual  milk yield and composition.  While  the former  has been associated 
with reduced  fertility,  the latter  has not (Snijders  et al 1999).  The origin  of the 
Holstein  genes and the environment  under  which  cows are bred and selected 
may also have a central  bearing  on their reproductive  potential.
Can conception  rates  be increased?
The ongoing  Australian  National  Dairy  Herd Fertility  Project  has identified  
significant  risk factors  for low conceptions  rates (low BCS precalving,  short  
calving  to service  interval,  old cows, low milk protein %, dystocia,  twin 
calving,  retained  placenta,  vaginal  discharge  more than a month  after calving,  
doubt  about  certainty  of heat, sire, and DIYAI).  However,  as the compactness 
of breeding  and hence,  calving  is the ultimate  objective  of seasonal  breeding 
programmes,  conception  rate alone is an inadequate  measure  of reproductive 
success to compare  different  herds. The Australian  national  study has 
suggested  using  the six week  in-calf  rate as a national  benchmarking  tool.
Table  2
Effect  of submission  rate and conception  rate on 6 week  in-calf  rate
Index  (%) Median  herd Top herds
Submission  rate 77 87
Conception  rate to 1 st Al 49 54
6 week in-calf  rate 63 75
Source:  Morton,  J. (1999)  The In-Calf  Project.  A Progress  Report.  DRDC.
17
As the data in Table 2 show, the herds with the best 6 week in-calf  rate 
achieved  this primarily  through  a higher  submission,  not conception  rate.
Longer  anoestrus  for better  fertility?
A novel approach  to increasing  conception  rate in high producing  dairy  
cows  is being  examined  in Australia.  The central  hypothesis  of this work  is that 
early postpartum  ovulation,  with the attendant  growth  of a corpus  luteum  
producing  progesterone,  prolongs  normal  uterine  involution  due to the locally  
immunosuppressive  effects of progesterone.  Delayed  uterine involution  is 
associated  with lower  conception  rates (Smith  and Wallace,  1998) as seen in 
cows served  in the early postpartum  period.  This may be a real issue for well 
fed, high genetic  merit  cows in Ireland  who ovulate  early postpartum  (Snijders  
et at 1998).  It is not a problem  in New Zealand  where  cows calve in moderate 
body condition  and nutritional  anoestrus  delays  ovulation  until more than six 
weeks  after calving,  by which  time uterine  involution  is complete.  This is one 
of the critical  reasons  why first service  conception  rates are high in New 
Zealand  cows.
Having  described  this process,  the objective  of the Australian  research  is to 
use a GnRH agonist to temporarily  and reversibly  suppress  ovulation 
postpartum  until involution  is complete,  thus mimicking  the situation  in 
suckled  cows where  suckling  prevents  the onset of oestrus.  Research  to date 
has shown that pituitary  down regulation  with a deslorelin  implant  can be 
successfully  achieved  but there  is a lag phase  before  both ovulation  and oestrus  
resumes.  This idea may have particular  relevance  to Irish high genetic  merit  
cows, as both early postpartum  ovulation  and delayed  uterine  involution  are 
common  features  in our herds (Buckley,  Dillon  and Mee, 2000).
Progesterone  metabolism
The hypothesis  that one of the reasons  why well-fed  high yielding  cows  
have lower  conception  rates is because  their higher  metabolic  rate results  in a 
higher  clearance  rate of progesterone,  and thus compromised  early embryo  
development,  is being  examined  in Australia.  While  studies  in North  America 
have shown  that the frequency  of feeding  dairy cows has a significant  effect 
on peripheral  progesterone  levels,  the effects  of genetic  merit and milk yield  
have not yet been examined.  These studies may lead to nutritional  or 
progesterone  supplementation  regimes which optimise  progesterone  
metabolism  during  the critical  period  of early embryonic  development.
Hormone  replacement  therapy
In conjunction  with these projects,  which are designed  to explain  why 
conception  rates are lower  in high yielding  cows,  large scale field studies  are 
being  conducted  in Australia  which  attempt  to improve  conception  patterns  in 
commercial  dairy herds. In a recent review  of post-insemination  hormonal  
therapies,  Macmillan  et al (1999)  concluded  that promising  results  in one trial 
have not been confirmed  in others; but negative  effects (except with 
metoestrus  progesterone  supplementation)  have rarely  been reported.  The cost 
effectiveness  of such therapies  was not discussed.
18
Pregnancy  diagnosis
In Australia,  both early and late diagnosis  of non-pregnancy  are being  
examined.  Ultrasonography  is being  used to predict  the risk of non-pregnancy  
based on corpus  luteum  diameter  and follicular  population  as early as two 
weeks after Al. This technique  has been reported  both for bovine  embryo  
recipients  (Dovenski  et al, 1999) and in mares (Sevinga  et al 1999).  For late 
(>6 weeks)  nonpregnancy  diagnosis,  a National  Cattle Pregnancy  Diagnosis  
Scheme  has been set up by the Australian  Association  of Cattle  Veterinarians  
to accredit  its members ’ skills.
New Zealand  research
While  the focus of dairy cattle fertility  research  work in New Zealand  has 
been on anoestrus  and oestrus synchronisation,  nutritional  strategies  to 
improve  the probability  of pregnancy  establishment  have recently  been 
investigated.  Herd reproductive  performance  is now being modelled  as a 
component  of the whole farm system (Verkerk  and Sherlock,  1999) and 
farmers  can now use the DRC website  (www.drc.co.nz ) to calculate  their own 
individual  oestrus  synchronisation  programme.  Attempts  to use individual  cow 
milk progesterone  concentrations  on selected  days after Al to predict 
pregnancy  proved  unsuccessful,  except  on day 22 (Verkerk  and Macmillan, 
1998).
GnRH  to increase  pregnancy  rate
Early work had shown that progesterone  supplementation  during  
metoestrus  reduced  conception  rates (Van Cleeff  et al 1996)  but that additional  
treatment  with GnRH  on days 12 or 13 raised  conception  rate to the level of 
controls  (Lynch  and Macmillan,  1996).  Hence,  research  is being  conducted  on 
the role of GnRH  agonists  in improving  conception  rates in conjunction  with 
anoestrus  treatment  regimes  and synchronisation  protocols.  Inclusion  of 
GnRH in a CIDR/PG/OB  programme  resulted  in induced  ovulation  or 
turnover  of the dominant  follicle,  synchronised  initiation  of a new follicular 
wave and increased  progesterone  concentration  from day 4 after treatment  in 
non cycling  cows (Xu et al 2000). It is suggested  that these factors may 
contribute  to the increased  conception  rate of cows after treatment  with this 
programme  compared  to cows treated  with CIDRyOB  alone. Other studies  
have shown that GnRH  enhances  early trophoblast  growth  to improve  the 
maternal  recognition  of pregnancy.
High vs low pregnancy  rate heifers
A large scale project  has been conducted  comparing  the physiological  
characteristics  of heifers  selected  for either  high or low conception  rates based  
on ET results  (Mcmillan  et al 1999).  These  experiments  concluded  that most  
of the difference  in conception  rate occurred  within 3 weeks of Al or ET. 
Ovarian  factors  were unlikely  to contribute  to the higher  conception  rate in the 
high group  (52% in-calf  at day 60) compared  to the low group  (29% in-calf  at 
day 60 after  Al). The major  differences  occurred  after blastocyst  hatching  and
19
probably  depend  on differing  uterine environments  before day 14 which  
stimulate  the expression  of interferon  tau by the embryo.
Predicting  late embryo  mortality
Attempts  to predict late embryonic  mortality  using ultrasound  proved  
successful  at day 42 with a 90% chance  of fetal mortality  by day 60 if the fetus  
was small or very small  in size or had a small foetal  fluid volume.  Predictions 
from earlier  scanning  were poorer  (Mcmillan  et al 1999).  A similar  project  has 
been conducted  recently  by Teagasc  Athenry  and Moorepark  (Silke  et al 2000).  
In large synchronised  herds in New Zealand,  an intra-rectal  extender  is used 
instead  of the veterinary  practitioner  inserting  his/her  arm into the rectum  to 
introduce  the ultrasound  probe,  thus reducing  stress on both the cow and the 
vet.
Neospora
Neospora  infection  has been described  as the most significant  cause or 
abortion  (25% of cases) in New Zealand  causing  losses of $24 million  
annually  (Thornton,  1998). Nationally,  abortion  accounts  for approximately  
3% of fetal loss. Case studies  suggest  sero-positive  cows have a 5-times  
greater  risk of abortion  compared  to herdmates  (Pfeiffer  et al 1998)  and sero­
positive  dairy heifers  produce  less milk. Reabortion  was not found to be a 
usual sequel,  but can occur.  Neosporosis  is emerging  as a major  cause  of both 
abortions  and foetal  mummification  in Irish dairy herds.
What  about  Irish  dairy  cattle  fertility  research?
Teagasc,  in collaboration  with other  national  and international  institutes  and 
universities,  has an active, innovative  research  programme  addressing  the 
challenges  faced  by farmers  in breeding  the dairy cow of the future  (Figure  1). 
The three major axes of this programme  are the interrelationships  between  
genetics,  nutrition,  milk yield and fertility.  The genetic  aspects  of this program  
are focussed  on the effects  of sire, breed,  cross breeding,  RBI and origin of 
genotype  on cattle fertility.  The nutritional  aspects of the program  are 
addressing  the effects  of dietary  energy,  protein  and fat on cattle  fertility.  Basic  
research  on embryonic  development  and the timing  and extent  of embryonic 
mortality  is being  conducted  in conjunction  with these studies.
International  research  links
The joint Teagasc  Moorepark/New  Zealand  Holstein  Friesian  Strain  
Comparison  Study will foster  research  links between  the two countries  over 
the next five years.  Links  between  Athenry  and Moorepark  Research  Centres  
will become  closer  with the submission  of a joint proposal  for funding  under  
the Teagasc  re-tooling  programme.  Current  links with Cornell  University  will 
be strengthened  following  the completion  of joint research  proposals  on the 
relationship  between  nutrition  and fertility  in highproducing  cows.  Links  with 
Wageningen  Agricultural  University  and ID-DLO  in The Netherlands  are 
ongoing  with the Moorepark  Fertility  Project.
20
1;
Teagasc  Dairy Cattie  Reproduction  Research  Programmes
Milk
YieldNidritlon
[.Breet-; I'OSl ’ Atetmul
calviflg pcfkKl caJviftg
Pkhvrty
Anoestrus  ^ .Utero-OyuHun Oocyte/Embryonic
Conipuct  Calving
.....so what  can we learn?
• We need to focus  on compactness  of breeding,  rather  than on late embryonic 
mortality  alone.
• We have a better chance of improving  compactness  of breeding  by 
improving  submission  rate than by attempting  increase  pregnancy  rate.
• We need to consider  the benefits  of heterosis  to improve  fertility.
• We should  examine  altering  postpartum  ovulation  patterns  to hasten  uterine 
involution.
• We need to extend  heifer  model  work,  on energy  balance  and progesterone 
metabolism,  to high genetic  merit  dairy cows.
• We have a better chance  of solving  fertility  problems  in Irish cows by 
collaborating  with scientists  and farmers  internationally  that have similar 
problems.
Acknowledgements
The author gratefully  acknowledges  funding  received  from the Teagasc
Staff  Development  Fund to undertake  this sabbatical.
References
Bilby,  C. R, Macmillan,  K L., Verkerk,  G. A., Peterson,  J., Koenigsfeld,  A. and Lucy  
M. C. (1998).  A comparative  study  of ovarian  function  in American  (US) Holsteins  
and New Zealand  (NZ)  Friesian  lactating  dairy  cows.  Journal  of Animal  Science  48: 
Suppl 1.
21
Buckley,  R, Dillon,  P. and Mee, J. F. (2000).  Moorepark  Fertility  Project  - Initial  
results.  Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Journal.  34: (in press).
Doveneski,  T., Kocoski,  L. J., Trojacanec,  P., Popovski,  K., Pethov,  V., Mickovski,  G., 
Mickov,  L. J. and Ickov  R. (1999).  Possibility  of ultrasound  pregnancy  diagnosis  on 
day 14 after transfer  of embryos  into recipient  heifers.  In: Proceedings  of the 15th 
Annual  Meeting  of the European  Association  of Embryo  Transfer.  Lyon,  p. 146
Fulkerson,  Wm., Davidson,  T, Hough,  G. and Goddard,  M. (1997).  The genetic  merit  
by level of feeding  study at Wollongbar.  Progress  Report,  NSW  Agriculture  p. 14.
Harris,  B. L., Holmes,  C. W., Winhelman,  A. M. and Xu, Z. Z. (1999).  Comparison 
between  fertility  and survival  of strains  of Holstein  Friesian  cows,  Jersey  cows and 
their  crosses  in New Zealand.  In: Fertility  in the High-Producing  Dairy  Cow, British  
Society ’ of Animal  Science  Occasional  Meeting.  Summaries  Booklet,  Galway,  pp.
91-92'
Hayes,  D. P. (1998).  Reproductive  performance  of New  Zealand  herds.  In: Proceedings  
of the 75th New Zealand  Veterinary  Association  Conference,  Rotorua,  pp. 189-205.
Jonsson,  N., Fulkerson,  W., Mayer,  D. and Bryant.  R. (1997).  The relationship  between 
genetic  merit or production,  level of concentrate  supplementation,  fertility  and 
biochemical  measures  of energy  balance  in dairy cows. In: NSW  Agriculture  Dairy  
Research  Group,  NSW  Agriculture,  pp. 32-36.
Kolver,  E., Naper,  A. and Coleman.  P. (1999).  Lactation  potential  of Holstein  Friesians.  
In: Proceedings  of the 51st Ruakura  Farmers  Conference,  Hamilton,  pp. 93-94.
Laborde,  D. (1998).  Productive  and reproductive  efficiency  of two Holstein  Friesian  
lines of cows which  differ  genetically  for live weight.  M. Appl. Sci. in Anim. Sci. 
Massey  University.
Lean. I.. Westwood,  C. and Porter,  J. (1999).  Did I miss her or didn ’t she show?  
Genetics  Australia,  Summer,  pp. 16-17.
Lynch,  P. and Macmillan,  K. L. (1996). Progesterone  and buserelin  can increase 
pregnancy  rates in dairy cattle In: Proceedings  of the New Zealand  Society  for 
Endocrinology,  p. 143.
Macmillan.  K. L., Taufa,  V. K, Day, A. M. and Eagles,  V. M. (1999).  Some  effects  of 
postinsemination  hormonal  therapies  on conception  rates and re-submission 
rates in lactating  dairy cows In: Fertility  in the High Producing  Dairy  Cow, British  
Society  of Animal  Science  Occasional  Meeting,.  Summaries  Booklet,  Galway,  pp. 
21-22 .
Mee,  J. R, Fahey,  J. and Crilly,  J. (1999).  Breeding  the dairy  cow of the future  - Today's  
challenges.  In: Dairying  in the New Millennium.  Teagasc  National  Dairy 
Conference,  Adare,  pp. 7-16.
Morton,  J. (1999 “). How does your herd compare?  Genetics  Australia,  Spring,  pp.lO-  
11 .
Morton,  J. M. (1999* ’). High genetic merit and high producing  dairy cows in 
commercial  Australian  herds don’t have substantially  worse reproductive  
performance.  In: Fertility  in the High Producing  Dairy Cow, British  Society  of 
Animal  Science  Occasional  Meeting,  Summaries  Booklet.  Galway,  pp. 39-40.
Morton,  J. (1998).  The National  Dairy Herd Fertility  Project  - A study  to identify  the 
major factors affecting  reproductive  performance  in Australian  dairy herds. In: 
Proceedings  of the 20th World Buiatrics  Congress.  Sydney,  pp. 589-594.
McMillan,  W, H., Donninson,  M. J. and Cox, S. F. (1998).  How accurate  are predictions
22
of foetal loss in recipient  cattle  using  ultrasound.  In: Proceedings  of the 29th  Annual  
Conference  of the Australian  Society  of Reproductive  Biology,  Perth, p 20.
Pfeiffer,  D. U., Wichtel,  J. W., Reichel,  M. P, Williamson,  N. B., Teague,  W. R and 
Thornton,  R. (1998).  Investigations  into the epidemiology  of Neospora  Caninum  
infection  in dairy cattle in New Zealand.  In; Proceedings  of the 75th New Zealand  
Veterinary  Association  Conference,  Rotorua,  pp. 279-292.
Sevinga,  M., Schakken,  Y. K, Hesselink,  J. W. and Jonker,  F. H. (1999).  Relationship  
between  ultrasonic  characteristics  of the corpus luteum, plasma progesterone 
concentration  and early pregnancy  diagnosis  in Friesian  mares.  Theriogenology  52: 
585-592.
Silke, V., Boland,  M. R, Dillon,  R, Mee, J. F, Diskin,  M. and Sreenan,  J. (2000).  
Pregnancy  loss between  Day 28 and 84 of gestation  in dairy cows and heifers.  ID: 
Proceedings  of the Agricultural  Research  Forum,  U.C.D.  pp. 203-204.
Smith,  M. C. A. and Wallace,  J. M. (1998).  Influence  of early postpartum  ovulation  on 
the reestablishment  of pregnancy  in multiparous  and primiparous  dairy cattle.  
Reproduction  Fertility  and Development  10:207-216.
Snijders,  S. E. M., Dillon,  P. G., O’Farrell,  K. J., Diskin,  M., O’Callaghan,  D., Rath, M. 
and Boland,  M. P. (1999).  Relationship  between  genetic  merit, milk production,  
body condition,  blood parameters  and reproductive  performance  of dairy cows. In: 
Fertility  in the High-Producing  Dairy Cow, British Society  of Animal  Science  
Occasional  Meeting.  Summaries  Booklet,  Galway,  pp. 94-95.
Snijders,  S. E. M., O’Farrell,  K., Boland,  M. R, Dillon,  R, Diskin,  M., O’Callaghan,  D. 
and Mee J. F. (1998). Effect of genetic merit on post postpartum  follicular 
development,  milk production,  body weight  and, insulin  and glucose  levels  in dairy  
cows.  In: Proceedings  of the British  Society  of  Animal  Science,  Scarborough  p. 188.
Thornton.  R. (1998).  Neospora  case studies.  In: Proceedings  of the 75th New Zealand  
Veterinary  Association  Conference,  Rotorua,  pp. 271-278.
Van Cleeff,  J., Macmillan,  K. L., Drost,  M., Lucy, M. C. and Thatcher,  W. W. (1996).  
Effects  of administering  progesterone  at selected  intervals  after insemination  of 
synchronised  heifers  on pregnancy  rates and resynchronisation  of returns  to service.  
Theriogenology  46:1117-1130.
Verkerk,  G. and Sherlock,  R. (1999).  Modelling  herd reproductive  performance  as a 
component  of the whole  farm system  In: Proceedings  of the 51st Ruakura  Farmers  
Conference,  Hamilton,  pp. 33-36.
Verkerk,  G. A. and Macmillan,  K L. (1998).  Milk progesterone  concentrations  at 
selected  times following  oestrus  and insemination  in relation  to the success  of 
pregnancy  establishment.  In: Proceedings  of the New Zealand  Society  of Animal  
Production  58:95-97
Xu, Z. Z., Verkerk,  G. A., Mee, J, R, Morgan,  S. R., Clark,  B. A., Burke,  C. R. and 
Burton,  L. J. (2000)  Endocrine  and follicular  changes  in postpartum  noncyclic  dairy  
cows after treatment  with progesterone  and estradiol  or with progesterone,  GnRH, 
PGF, and estradiol.  Theriogenology.  (In press).
23
Moorepark  Farm  Fertility  Study  - 
Initial  Results
F. BUCKLEY,  P. DILLON,  J. MEE and R. VEERKAMP 
Teagasc,  Dairy  Research  Centre,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork
In recent years Irish dairy farmers  have expressed  concern  about the 
reproductive  performance  in their herds. Since the mid-1980 ’s the rate of 
genetic  improvement  for milk production  has increased  markedly  to about  
1.3%  per year. The high rate of genetic  improvement  has mostly  been achieved  
through  the importation  of both North American  and European  Holstein-  
Eriesian  genetics.  There is considerable  evidence  in the literature  from other  
countries  that selection  for milk production  may lead to reduced  reproductive 
performance  (ArenJonA:  er a/., 1989,  Hoekstra  et ai, 1994,  Pryce  et al., 1999).  
In recent  years  there  is evidence  that this may also be occurring  in Ireland.  Mee 
et al. (1999)  showed  that there was a significant  decline  in calving  rate to first 
service  between  1991 and 1998 in the order of 0.9% per year on Irish dairy  
herds participating  in the Moorepark  Dairy  Management  Information  System  
(Dairy  MIS).  Two long-term  experiments  conducted  at Moorepark  have shown  
much reduced  reproductive  performance  with high genetic  merit Holstein-  
Friesian  (100%)  dairy cows (Dillon  and Buckley,  1999).
The objective  of the present  study was to relate  (1) genetic  merit for milk 
production,  (2) system  of feeding  management  and (3) health  and reproductive 
management  to the reproductive  performance  being achieved  on commercial  
spring calving  dairy herds. Also of interest  is the possible  existence  of a 
possible  interaction  between  genotype  and feeding  system  for reproduction 
traits. In other words the study is an attempt  to identify  the major factors  
causing  differences  in reproductive  performance  between  cows and between  
herds.
The study involves  a total of 73 herds with fertility  performance  from 
6,399  cows in 1999.
Herd  selection
The key factors  in herd selection  were:
• Predominantly  spring  calving  herds
• Pedigree  (HFS)  herds or at least two generations  of sires for most cows
• Participating  in A4 milk recording
• Accurate  data recording
• Previous  reproductive  performance  not considered
Data  collected  during  1999
• Milk  production  performance  as per A4 milk recording
• Live weight  and condition  score on 8-9 occasions  throughout  the year
• Fertility  performance  recorded  using Dairy  MIS II system.
• Detailed  pre-breeding  ultrasonography  carried  out to determine  ovarian  
cyclicity  and uterine  condition.
24
<iZ
ZL'Q) gur>(Dojs  ui uoijBUBA  aij^i SB/w 3J3qx  '91 £ I oj 01^8 JO sSubj e ipiM  
MOO jod [bS g80‘I uoijonpojd  qiiiu oSbjoae  oqx '6661 Joquiojdos
oj XjBnuBf  uiojj Xpnjs oqj uo suuej  oqj loj oSEsn ojbjiuoouoo  puB uoSoijiu  
oqj srqd ‘ojbj Suiqoojs  ‘uoqonpojd  qiiui ui uoiibuea  oqj SMoqs  z
oouBuiJOjjod  iBoisXqj
p SMOO  0I< uoijonpui  SuiAIBQ
8L SMOO  JO SJOjfOH qnq ^loojs
Z9 SMOO IIV IVAia
18 SMOO  LUOiqOJJ
es sjojioq  uopiBpM uoijBsiuojqouXs
66 qnq posiuiojoosBA  + JuiBd qnx
Z6 (UOSBOS  Suipoojq)  XBp/suoijBAJOsqo  z<
88 UOSBOS  Suipoojq-ojj uoijoojop  srujsoQ
L OUlpO]
8 Lunmojos
Z\ J3dd03
£6SIBJOUIUI  MOO XjQ uoijBiU3uio[ddns  (Bjouq^
e Biuouinoud  snjjA
L QAa
81 BOOqjJBtQ  j[B3
P9 SlSO(pUOlU|ES
£6 sisojidsojdoq UOIJBUpOByV
SUUBJ  JO % sqBjoa OOIJOBJJ  juouio Sbubiaj
SUIJBJ
i^pnjs  uo poqddB  saoijoBjd  juauiaSEueui  q)|Baq  pjaq aAijBjuaAajj  puB Ajiiijjtaj
I siQB!
ouiiuBjgojd  guipoojq  oqj jo UBd sb qnq qoojs b posn spioq  
JO %8Z. oqq'^ ‘spjoq JO %29 uo xiQ loo poujBo  sbm (jv) uoijeuiuiosui  
[Bioijijjv uoijoojop  jBoq OJ piB UB SB qnq pasiuiojoosEA  + jured [ibj posn 
spjoq  JO %55 opqM  ‘uosbos  Suipoojq  oqj §uunp  XpBp  souiij  z < smoo  poAJOsqo  
%£6 ‘siujBj oqj JO %88 i*o jno pomBO  sbm uoijoojop  snjjsoo  Suipoojq
-ojj poijod  Xjp oqj UI s|BJ0uiiu  moo Xjp qjiM pojuouiojddns  (%96)  suubj qE 
jsouiiv  XiOAijoodsoj  ‘sisoqououj|BS  pus sisojidsojdoi  joj uoijbuiooba  posijoBid  
puB %£5 ‘SUUEJ guijBdioijJBd  oqj jq -^pnjs oqj ui poA[OAui  suubj oqj 
uo poqddB  sooijOEjd  qjjBoq  pjoq OAijBjuoAOJd  puB Xjqijjoj  oqj SMoqs  [ 0[qEX
sooijoBjd  juauioSBUBiu  qj|Boq  pjaq OAijBjuoAoid  puB Xjipjjaj
UOSBOS  ouipoojq  oqj jo sqooM  g jsjij oqj guunp  pjoq qoBo ui smoo  jo 
uoijjodojd  B JOJ P0SA[BUB  SBM SnjBJS  JUOUIOJO  OOBJJ puE SOjqoqBJOUI  pooja .
SdH OMJ '^9 poijissBp  odAj ojom sibuiiub  uoijbjoe ( jsjij qy •
uiojsXs  II sij^ Xjjeq
ouisn uuBj qoBO uo popjoooj  ojom sooijoEJd  juouio Sbubui  puB Suipooj  .
to 1.35 LU/acre)  and nitrogen  application  (168 to 370 units/acre)  across  the 
farms  in the study.  Concentrate  supplementation  levels  per cow averaged  625 
kg with a range  from 200 to 1175 kg/cow  for individual  farms.
Table  2
Physical  performance  of the herds  on the Moorepark  study  Jan-Sept.  1999
Mean Min. Max.
Milk Yield (gal.) 1,085 840 1,316
Fat + protein  (kg) 341 251 417
Fat (%) 3.77 3.54 4.11
Protein  (%) 3.28 3.14 3.44
Stocking  rate (L.U./acre) 0.99 0.72 1.35
Nitrogen  (units/acre) 261 168 370
Concentrates  fed (kg/cow) 625 200 1,175
Live weight  and condition  score
Table  3 shows  the average  live weight  and condition  score for the herds in 
the study pre-calving  and 30, 60 and 90 days post-calving.
Table  3
Pre- and post-calving  live weights  and condition  scores  for the herds  on the 
Moorepark  study  1999
Mean Min. Max
Pre-calving Live weight  (kg) 620 565 696
Condition  score 3.37 3.00 3.62
Day 30 Live weight  (kg) 538 486 603
Condition  score 2.95 2.72 3.25
Day 60 Live weight  (kg) 541 484 592
Condition  score 2.84 2.64 3.07
Day 90 Live weight  (kg) 549 484 594
Condition  score 2.82 2.56 3.03
The average  for pre-calving  condition  score was 3.37, varying  from 300 to 
3.62 on an individual  herd basis. The average  pre-calving  live-weight  was 
620kg  varying  from 565 to 696kg.  On average  herds lost 82kg and 0.42 units 
in condition  score from pre-calving  to 30 days into lactation.  On average  live 
weight  remained  static or slightly  increased  from day 30 to 90 post-calving  
while condition  score  continued  to reduce  slightly.
Grazing  management
During  the breeding  season  average  pre-grazing  herbage  yield  was 2,050  kg 
DM/ha,  ranging  between  1493 and 2,922 kg DM/ha.  Average  post-grazing  
sward  height  was 8.1 cm ranging  from 6.4 to 11.1 cm. The higher  post-grazing
26
sward heights  were to be generally  found in areas of wetter  soil type where  
turnout  to pasture  in spring  was delayed.  Average  pre-grazing  herbage  crude  
protein  content  was 20%, ranging  from 14.4%  to 24.9%.
Reproductive  performance  
Submission  rate (SR)
While the average  SR achieved  is low (70%) relative  to the target value of 
80% (Table 4), the wide variation  among  herds (33-96%)  suggests  higher 
values are achievable.  A high SR is critically  dependent  upon the previous  
years calving  pattern,  efficiency  of pre-breeding  season  and breeding  season  
heat detection  and prevalence  of ‘anoestrus ’ cows. Given  the fact that oestrus  
detection  practices  on the farms  were reportedly  very good (Table  1), and pre­
breeding  scanning  was carried  out on all cows in all herds,  late calving  cows  
and cows either not cycling  or expressing  weak signs of heat, (or for short  
periods),  are likely to have contributed  substantially  to lower SR in certain  
farms.
Table  4
Reproductive  performance  of the herds  on the Moorepark  study  1999
All herds Top 25% Target
Pregnancy  rate to 1st service  (%) 48 59 60
Submission  rate (SR) (%) 70 88 70 88 80
Services/conception(no.) 2.1 1.7 1.65
Calving  to 1st service  interval  (CSI) (days) 72 66 70
Calving  to conception  interval  (CCl)  (days) 89 82 85
Non-detected  oestrus  (%) 15 5 <10
Infertile  rate (%) 14 8 <10
Days breeding 104 77 91
Table  5
Reproductive  performance  ranked  on pregnancy  rate to 1st service  for the herds
on the Moorepark  study  1999
Top 25% Bottom  25%
Pregnancy  rate to 1st Service  (%) 59 36
Pregnancy  rate to 2nd Service  (%) 56 46
Submission  rate (SR) (%) 73 62
Services/conception 1.8 2.4
Calving  to 1st service  interval  (CSI) (days) 74 70
Calving  to conception  interval  (CCI)  (days) 88 93
Non-detected  Oestrus  (%) 13 20
Infertile  rate (%) 11 18
Days breeding 97 107
27
Pregnancy  rate (PR)
The first service  PR reported  here (Table  4) of 48% is well below  the target  
value (60%) set some years ago. However,  in the intervening  years, 
internationally  conception  rates have declined,  particularly  in populations  with 
a high proportion  of high genetic  merit Holstein  Friesians.  The variation  
between  herds (26 to 73%) for PR to first service  also suggests  that higher 
levels are achievable.  However  the characteristics  of the top quartile  who 
achieved  59% may not be the same as those  in the bottom  quartile  (36%).
A comparison  of the top and bottom  quartile  of herds on PR to first service  
(Table  5) showed  that second  service  was also higher  in the top 25% of herds,  
while services  per conception,  calving  to conception  interval,  non-detected  
oestrus,  infertile  rate and length of the breeding  season were lower. The 
calving  to service  was similar.
Calving  to service  and conception
In order to maintain  a 365-day  calving  interval,  the optimum  interval  in 
seasonally  calving  herds, cows need to be served within 60 to 80 days of 
calving  and conceive  within  80 to 85 days of calving.  Unlike  indices  such as 
PR the farmer  decides  the voluntary  waiting  period  after calving,  hence the 
calving  to first service  interval  (CSI) is highly  dependent  upon management 
breeding  policy.  The calving  to conception  interval  (CCI)  is determined  by the 
CSI and the conception  rate. In the present  study  the CSI ranged  from 59 to 91 
days. On average,  across  all herds  the CSI was within  target  although  the CCI 
at 89 days was indicative  of a 4 day slip in mean  calving  date. In one instance 
(CCI 115 days)  mean calving  date will have slipped  on average  1 month  later 
if all cows  bred in 1999 remain  in the herd. In 23% of herds  mean  calving  date 
has been pulled  back (CCI 77 days).
Infertile  rate, number  of services  and length  of the breeding  season
While  in the top quartile  of herds only 8% of cows were empty  at the end 
of the breeding  season,  those  in the lower  quartile  had on average  22%. It must 
be borne  in mind that the variation  in this parameter  is not only dependent  on 
SR and PR etc. but also on the duration  of the breeding  season.  A longer  
breeding  season  means  more services  per cow and thus a greater  chance  of 
conceiving.  The average  no. of services  received  per cow on the study was 2.1. 
Given the pregnancy  rates achieved  in the present  study (48% PR to first 
service)  it is not surprising  that the average  length  of the breeding  season  (15 
weeks)  was longer  than the recommended  (Dillon  et al., 1996) 13 weeks.  The 
range  was from 9 to 25 weeks  across  individual  herds.  Thus in the absence  of 
widespread  calving  induction,  late calving  cows will continually  be present  
unless  an aggressive  fertility  management  and culling  approach  is taken.
Pre-breeding  ultrasonography
Three quarters  (73.7%)  of all cows had normal  uterine  involution  by the 
start of the breeding  season  (Table  6), as expected  given the CSI of 72 days.  
However  16% of cows  were not cycling  regularly  at the start of mating.  In the
28
Table  6
Pre-breeding  utero-ovarian  ultrasonography  for the herds  on the Moorepark
study  1999
Scan result  (%) G code Mean Min. Max.
Cycling  (CL) 84.4
Normal  uterus 1 62.6 41.1 84.8
Mild endometritis 2 20.2 7.7 37.5
Moderate  endometritis 3 1.6 0 6.7
Anoestms  (no CL) 15.6
Normal  uterus 6, 8,9 8.0 0 21.0
Moderate  endometritis 4 2.3 0 13.7
Pyometritis  (CL) 5 2.2 0 7.8
Cystic 7 3.1 0 9.6
majority  of cases (10.3%)  the cows had not yet begun  to cycle after calving.  
In a minority  of cases the cows were cystic (3.1%)  or had pyometra  (2.2%).  
The proportion  of anoestrus  cows  detected  would  be considered  high but may 
reflect the limitation  of a single scan in detecting  true anoestrus.  Uterine  
infection/inflammation/delayed  involution  was detected  in a quarter  (26.3%)  
of cows based  on scanning  and palpation  of the tract. The majority  (20.3%),  
however  were  mild cases,  the relevance  of which  has not yet been determined. 
Pyometra,  on the other  hand,  is a definite  risk factor  for conception  failure  and 
although  over all it was uncommon  (2.2%),  the high incidence  in some herds  
(7.8%)  warrants  further  investigation  of possible  links with calving  history,  
post-partum  luteal function  and related  factors.
Blood  and milk biochemistry
In general  the energy  levels of the first lactation  animals  was normal  as 
assessed  by the blood betahydroxybutyrate  (OHB),  non-esterified  fatty acid 
(NEFA)  and glucose  concentrations  (Table  7). This is perhaps  not surprising  
given that the samples  were taken  during  the first three weeks  of the breeding 
season,  therefore  on average  >70 days post-calving.  Thus cows would be 
expected  to be in a positive  energy  balance.  This is supported  by the stable  
condition  scores and live weights  observed  between  60 and 90 days post­
calving  (Table 3). The protein  status of the first lactation  animals  was on 
average  normal  as indicated  by blood total protein  (TP) and blood urea and 
milk urea concentration  (Table  7). The tendency  for high TP reflects  the test 
used and the relatively  low normal reference  range. The blood urea 
concentrations  reflect  the milk urea values  (Table  7). Whether  the low milk 
urea levels  are representative  of Irish herds  in general,  or merely  a year effect,  
will be determined  following  analysis  of samples  collected  in 2000.
Blood  trace  elements
Both the copper  and selenium  levels  of the mature  cows were normal  (Table  
7). This may be explained  by the location  and soil types of the farms, the
29
inclusion  of trace  elements  in the diet of the lactating  cow or a carry  over  effect 
from such supplementation.  Quite different  results  have been reported  where  
animals  were sampled  in both the spring  and the autumn  due to this effect  
(Mee, O’Farrell  and Rogers,  1994).  The wide variation  in herd iodine  status,  
is due to the supplementation  of iodine containing  concentrates  during  the 
breeding  season  in some herds and herbage  iodine  levels.  Blood  iodine  levels  
do not reflect  long-term  iodine  supplementation,  but rather  intake  in the hours  
and days preceding  blood sampling.  Hence  very low levels were detected  in 
some herds. The reference  range used to assess iodine levels in cattle is 
currently  under  review.
Table  7
Blood  and milk parameters  measured  in the herds  on the Moorepark  study 1999
Analyte Ref. Range Mean Min. Max. Normal  (%)
6HB 0-0.95 0.54 0.30 1.13 98
NEFA 0-0.7 0.22 0.09 0,53 100
Glucose 2.8-4.0 3.99 3.60 4.29 70
Urea 3.5-7.1 4.90 2.01 7.88 92
Protein 59.8-78.9 78.00 63.70 85.60 58
Copper 10.7-19.4 12.9 11.1 15.4 100
Selenium 42-161 124 82.7 164.1 98
Iodine 105-285 118 2 302 49
Milk Urea 3.0-6.0 2.65 1.54 3.60
Genetic  Parameter  Estimation  
Heritability  (h^)
The observed  performance  of an animal (its phenptypic  value) for any 
given trait is a function  of its genotypic  value for that trait together  with the 
effect of environmental  effects. The heritability  value for a trait is the 
contribution  of the genetic  variation  as a proportion  of the total phenotypic  
variation  for the trait. Its value  ranges  from 0 to 1. The higher  the h^ for a trait 
the easier  it is to select  genetically  superior  animals  for that trait.
The h^ estimates  for a range of performance  traits measured  in the 
Moorepark  study are shown  on Table 8. The h^ estimates  are very similar  to 
that published  previously  (Veerkamp  and Brotherstone,  1997). The h^ 
estimates  for milk traits varied  from 0.24 to 0.57. The h^ estimates  for live 
weight  and condition  score  vary from 0.38 to 0.47.  As expected  the h^ estimate  
for pregnancy  rate was low at 0.05.
Daily  milk yield and associated  parameters  comprised  of the average  of at 
least 3 tests within 150 days post-calving.  Average  live weight  and condition  
score was calculated  in a similar  fashion.  Minimum  live weight  and condition  
score  was determined  from the lowest  value  observed  during  the 150-day  post­
calving  period.  Pre-calving  condition  score was taken to be the last condition  
score value  recorded  before  calving.  Condition  score  change  was calculated  as 
the difference  between  the pre-calving  and minimum  condition  score post­
calving.  Pregnancy  rate was determined  by rectal  palpation  in late autumn.
30
Table  1
Heritabilities  (h^) for performance  traits  measured  on the Moorepark  study  1999
Trait h'
Daily milk yield 0.25
Daily SCM milk yield 0.29
Daily fat yield 0.38
Daily  protein  yield 0.25
Daily  lactose  yield 0.24
Fat% 0.57
Protein  % 0.51
Lactose  % 0.43
Average  live weight 0.45
Minimum  live weight 0.38
Average  condition  score 0.47
Pre-calving  condition  score 0.36
Minimum  condition  score 0.41
Condition  score change 0.08
Pregnancy  rate 0.05
Genetic  correlation
Although  the h^ estimate  for pregnancy  rate is low there is general  
agreement  that there is considerable  genetic  variation  within  the trait. In recent 
years there has been great interest  in traits that may help predict  fertility  traits.  
A genetic  correlation  illustrates  correlation  between  the breeding  values  for 
two traits. As shown in Table 9, and as expected  the genetic  correlation 
between  milk yield and yields  of milk solids  is high.
Preliminary  results indicate  that high milk yield is positively  correlated 
with high live weight  and both of these traits are negatively  correlated  with 
pregnancy  rate. As milk yield increases  condition  score decreases.  Minimum 
condition  score postcalving  is correlated  with milk yield. As milk yield  
increases  minimum  condition  score decreases,  and minimum  condition  score  
in turn is negatively  correlated  with pregnancy  rate. Protein  percentage  is 
negatively  correlated  with yield, and positively  correlated  with pre-calving 
condition  score.
The preliminary  results  suggest  that both live weight  and condition  score  
might  be important  traits in the selection  process  for improved  reproductive 
performance  because  both have high h^ and are strongly  correlated  with 
pregnancy  rate.
The present  data set ranged  between  3,888 and 2,785  cows for the various  
traits investigated.  In order to strengthen  the reliability  of the h^ and genetic  
correlation  estimates,  further data will be added. As previously  outlined  
performance  information  from a potential  6,399 cows in 1999 is currently 
available.  Traits  pertinent  to the fertility  measures  must  be careful  defined  and 
time will also be given to improving/refining  the models  used to analyse  the 
data.
31
Table  9
Genetic  correlations  and regression  coefficients  between  some  performance  
traits  measured  on the Moorepark  study  1999
Traits Genetic  correlation Regression  coefficient
Yield * SCM yield 0.74 0.677
Yield * fat yield 0.46 0.023
Yield * protein  yield 0.80 0.025
Yield * lactose  yield 0.97 0.044
Yield * fat % -0.29 -0.052
Yield * protein  % -0,36 -0.028
Yield * Lactose  % -0.17 -0.008
Yield * mean live weight 0.42 7.662
Yield * min. live weight 0.49 8.517
Yield * mean condition  score -0.34 -3.770
Yield * PCCS  condition  score -0.19 -2.032
Yield * min. condition  score -0.43 -5.335
Yield * condition  score  change -0.51 -2.563
Yield * preg. rate -0.47 -0.019
Fat % * preg. rate -0.51 -0.101
Protein  % * min. condition  score 0.11 17.167
Protein  % * PCCS  condition  score 0.22 30.458
Live weight  * mean  condition  score 0.31 0.187
Live weight  * preg. rate -0.40 -0.001
Mean  condition  score * preg. rate 0.44 0.002
Min. condition  score * PCCS 0.91 0.835
Min. condition  score * preg. rate 0.56 0.002
PCCS  * preg, rate 0.39 0.001
Key observations
• The  results  to date are preliminary  and further  analysis  is required  before  
key results  are established.
• The  first service  pregnancy  rates of 48% is well below  the target  value of 
60% set some years ago for seasonal  calving  herds.
• The average  submission  rate achieved  was 70% which is below the 
international  and target  Irish value  of 80%.
• The top quartile  of herds for pregnancy  rate to first service  also achieved  a 
more favourable  pregnancy  rate to second  service,  no. of services  per 
conception,  calving  to service  interval,  infertile  rate and length  of breeding  
season.
• Both the calving  to conception  interval  of 89 days and the infertile  rate of 
14% indicate  that calving  date is slipping  by on average  4 days per year and 
the infertile  rate is greater  than the target 10%.
• The  h^ estimates  for milk traits varied  from 0.24 to 0.57. The h^ estimates
32
for live  weight  and condition  score vary from 0.38 to 0.47. As expected  the 
h^ estimate  for pregnancy  rate was low at 0.05.
• Preliminary  results  suggest  significant  genetic  correlations  between  milk 
yield, live weight,  condition  score and pregnancy  rate.
References
Arendonk,  J. A. M. van, Hovenier,  R. and de Boer, W. 1989. Phenotypic  and genetic  
associations  between  fertility  and production  in dairy heifers.  Livestock  Production 
Science  21: 263-275.
Dillon,  P. and F. Buckley,  1999. Optimum  cow for Irish milk production.  In: A new 
agenda  for dairying  Teagasc,  19 Sandymount  avenue,  Dublin  4, pp. 8 to 15.
Dillon,  P., S. Crosse,  G. Stakelum  and F. Flynn, 1995, The effect of calving  date and 
stocking  rate on the performance  of spring-calving  dairy cows. Grass and Forage 
Science  50: 286-299.
Hoekstra,  J., A. W. Lugt, J. H. J., Van der Werf  and Ouweltjes,  W. 1994. Genetic  and 
phenotypic  parameters  for milk production  and fertility  traits in upgraded  dairy 
cattle.  Livestock  Production  Science  40: 225-232.
Mee J. F, Fahey  J. and Crilly,  J. 1999. Breeding  the dairy cow of the future  - Today ’s 
challenges.  In: Dairying  in the New millennium.  Teagasc  National  Dairy 
Conference,  Adare,  pp. 7-16.
Pryce,  J. E., Nielson,  B. L., Veerkamp,  R. F. and Simm,  G. 1999. Genotype  and feeding 
system  effects  and interactions  for health and fertility  in dairy cattle. Livestock 
Production  Science  79: 1284-1291.
Veerkamp,  R. R, Brotherstone,  S. 1997. Genetic  correlations  between  linear  type traits,  
feed intake,  live weight  and condition  score  in Holstein  Friesian  dairy  cattle.  Journal  
of Animal  Science  64: 3853-92.
33
Embryo  Loss in Dairy  Cows:  
Implications  for Breeding  
Management
M. DISKIN,  V.SILKE>  , J. F, MEE^ & J. M. SREENAN'
' Teagasc,  Animal  Reproduction  Dept.,  Athenry,  Co. Galway.
- Teagasc,  Dairy  Research  Centre,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork
Reproductive  failure  in dairy cows results  in lower  milk production,  fewer 
calves born, slower  rate of genetic  progress  and consequently,  significant 
financial  loss to individual  producers  and the overall industry.  There is 
evidence  that dairy cow fertility  is declining  in association  with increased  milk 
yields, increased  herd size and decreased  labour investment  per cow. 
Following  insemination  early embryo  death is recognised  as the major  cause 
of reproductive  failure.  Artificial  insemination  of cattle is the most important 
reproductive  technology  developed  in the past 60 years and most dairy  
producers  use it to improve  the quality of their cows. However,  reduced 
conception  rates in lactating  cows substantially  reduces  the impact  of this 
technology  as well as increasing  the cost of using it. In this paper new 
information  relating  to the timing,  extent  and causes  of embryo  death as well 
as new research  technologies  to overcome  problems  with heat detection  are 
discussed.
Importance  of heat detection  and conception  rate in determining  herd  
reproductive  efficiency
For herds using  Al heat detection  rate and calving  rate are the two major 
determinants  of compactness  of calving  and the proportion  of cows  that fail to 
conceive  in a defined  13-week breeding  season  (Table  1) and ultimately  of the 
calving  to-calving  interval.
Heat detection  efficiency  and conception  rate are of equal importance  in 
determining  compactness  of calving  and ultimately  the proportion  of cows  
culled as infertile  at the end of the season.  Days lost as a result of low
Table 1
The effect  of heat detection  and conception  rates  on the % of the dairy  herd that 
is pregnant  at 90 days after onset  of breeding  season
Conception  Rate %
60 50 40 30
90 96 91 83 71
Heat Detection 70 89 82 73 61
Rate % 50 76 68 59 48
40 67 59 50 40
34
conception  rate can be offset  by improving  heat detection  or submission  rate. 
Improving  heat detection  efficiency  from 70 to 90% is equivalent  to the effect  
of increasing  conception  rates from 40 to 52%. However,  producers  are often  
much more concerned  about  low conception  rate than poor heat detection.
Long-term  trends  in conception  rate
Dairy cow fertility  is usually  measured  by calculating  the percentage  of 
cows that conceive  to a single service.  Conception  rate to a single service  
however  has dramatically  declined  over the past 5 decades  as production  per 
cows has increased  (Fig. 1). It is argued  that this decline  in conception  rate is 
the direct  result  of changes  in cow genetic  merit  for milk production.  However,  
there is no evidence,  over the same time period,  of a decline  in heifer  fertility  
(Fig. 2). This would  argue against  this particular  hypothesis  and suggests  that
Fig. 2 - Changes  in conception  rates in lactating  cows  and heifers  in the 
USA  from 1955 to 1995 (Source;  Pursley  et al. 1997)
35
the Holstein  is inherently  fertile but that its reproductive  performance  is 
significantly  compromised  by relatively  high levels  of milk production  (Nebel  
& McGilliard,  1993).
Factors  determining  conception  rate
Four  interacting  factors  determine  cow conception  rate viz., 1) Cow-related 
factors  such factors  as nutrition,  production  level and metabolic  load, 2) Bull 
factors such as semen quality,  3) Accuracy  of heat detection  and, 4) Al 
technique.  The interactive  effect of these factors on the probability  of 
conception  is presented  in Table  2.
Table  2
Interactive  effects  of four factors  that determine  conception  rate to Al in dairy
herds
Female
FertilityBull
FertilityAccuracy 
of heatsAl
TechniqueConception
rate
Heifers 80% 95% 95% 95% 73%
Lactating  dairy cows  
Lactating  dairy cows -t-55% 95% 95% 95% 47%
inaccurate  heat detection 
Lactating  dairy cows -i-55% 95% 80% 95% 40%
insemination  problems 55% 95% 95% 50% 25%
When  all factors  are optimised  as for heifers,  a projected  pregnancy  rate of 
73% is obtained.  However,  even in well-managed  herds  cow pregnancy  rate is 
reduced  as a result  of reduced  female  fertility  notwithstanding,  that all of the 
other three factors are optimised.  Insemination  at the wrong time due to 
inaccurate  heat detection,  improper  handling  of semen,  or poor insemination 
technique  can all substantially  reduce  pregnancy  rate. Although  fertility  varies  
among bulls the fertility  of semen acquired  through  Al organisations  is 
controlled  and should not generally  limit conception  rate. Of these four 
factors,  accuracy  of heat detection  and Al efficiency  can be maximised 
through  the adoption  of good management  practices.  Thus, most of the 
observed  differences  in fertility  between  heifers  and lactating  cows is likely  to 
be attributable  to “female ” factors.
Female  factors  affecting  conception  rate
Female-related  factors  affecting  conception  rate include  calving  to service  
interval,  energy  balance  and protein  nutrition.
Fertilisation  rate and early embryo  mortality
The extent  and pattern  of early embryo  loss has been established  for heifers  
and moderate  yielding  dairy cows.  Published  estimates  of fertilisation  rate of 
about  90%, and of average  calving  rates of about  55% indicate  an embryonic
36
and foetal mortality  rate of about 38% with little evidence  of a difference 
between  moderate-yielding  cows and heifers  provided  that calving-to-service 
interval  is greater  than 60 days. Of this total loss, 70 to 80% is sustained 
between  days 8 and 16 after insemination,  a further  10% between  days 16 and 
42 and a further  5-8% between  day 42 and tenu (see review,  Sreenan  and 
Diskin,  1986; Peters,  1997).
Studies  characterising  the time and extent ot early embryo  loss in high-  
yielding  dairy cows are difficult  and expensive  to conduct  and thus there is 
little published  information  on the pattern  of early embryo  loss in high genetic  
merit,  high yielding  dairy cows.
Late embryo  mortality
One US study (Vasconcelos  et al., 1997) indicates  that intensively  fed and 
managed  dairy cows, yielding  11,000  - 12,000  kg ot milk per cow sustain  a 
relatively  high increment  of late embryo  loss. These authors  reported  an 
embryo  loss rate of 20% between  28 and 98 days of gestation.  It is frequently 
suggested  that there is a high increment  of late embryo  loss in high yielding  
dairy cows in seasonal,  grass-based  calving  systems  in Ireland  but there is no 
published  evidence  to support  this. A study to measure  the extent and the 
pattern  of late embryo  loss in high genetic  merit,  high yielding  dairy cows and 
heifers  was conducted  by Teagasc  in 1999 (Silke  et al, 2000).  A total of 835 
lactating  dairy cows,  yielding  between  4,000  and 8,500  Kg milk and 158 dairy  
heifers  located  on seven farms  were used in the study.  Herd size ranged  from 
60 to 180 cows.  In order  to measure  the extent  and timing  of embryo  and foetal  
loss, cows  and heifers  that had been inseminated  and had not been observed  to 
repeat  and were,  therefore,  presumed  pregnant  were presented  for first scan on 
day 28 following  insemination.  Each animal  confirmed  pregnant  at day 28 was 
subsequently  scanned  at two-week  intervals  until day 84 of gestation.  
Diagnosis  of pregnancy  was based on the presence  of a competent  corpus  
luteum,  a viable  foetus  with heartbeat  evident  and clear  amniotic  fluid.  Results  
are presented  in Table 3.
Table  3
Embryo  survival  rate between  Days  28 and 84 of gestation  in dairy  cows and
heifers
Day of Gestation
28 42 56 70 84 Overall
No. Cows 601 581 569 565 557
Embryo  survival
% 100 97 95 94 93 7%
No. Heifers 132 130 127 125 124
Embryo  survival
% 100 98 96 95 94 6%
Silke et al., 2000
37
The extent  and pattern  of embryo  loss recorded  in this study is similar  to 
that previously  published  (see review,  Sreenan  and Diskin,  1986) for heifers  
and moderate  yielding  dairy cows and suggests  that the incidence  of late 
embryo  mortality  is relatively  small  (about  1/10th) compared  with incidence  of 
early embryo  mortality.  The higher  increment  of late embryo  loss reported  by 
Vasconcelos  et al (1997) may be due to the higher milk yield and other 
possible  environmental  factors  particular  to that study. It is probable  that the 
low conception  rates 30-40%  in high yielding  cows in grass-based  systems  of 
milk production  is the result  of a higher  incidence  of early embryo  loss.
Possible  causes  of embryo  loss in cattle
As indicated  earlier,  following  insemination,  there is an embryonic  and 
foetal mortality  rate of about  30-40%  in heifers  and moderate  yielding  cows,  
of which  about  V4 of it is sustained  between  days 8 and 16 after insemination.  
In high-yielding  cows it seems  that embryo  mortality  rate is about 50-60%.  
The biological  mechanisms,  which cause embryo  death especially  in high 
genetic  merit,  high yielding  dairy cows,  are poorly  understood.  Many factors  
have been implicated,  though  usually  wit a lack of supporting  experimental  
data. Progesterone,  secreted  by the corpus  luteum  is essential  for both the 
establishment  and maintenance  of pregnancy.
Progesterone  and embryo  survival
Progesterone  has also been shown to directly  affect the growth and 
development  rate of the bovine  conceptus  (Garrett  et al., 1988) and to be 
positively  correlated  with interferon-T  secretion.  In conjunction  with the 
trophoblastic  proteins,  endometrial  proteins  also constitute  part of the 
maternalembryonic  dialogue;  essential  for embryo  survival  and progesterone 
plays a major role in controlling  uterine  secretion  of proteins  and growth  
factors.  In sheep the concentration  and secretion  of a number  of endometrial 
proteins  has been shown  to be affected  by progesterone.  The specific  role of 
many  of these proteins,  which  may be modified  either  directly  or indirectly  by 
nutrition,  in facilitating  embryo  survival  is not yet established.  It is frequently  
postulated  however,  that the lower fertility  observed  in high yielding  dairy  
cows is the result  of a reduction  in systemic  progesterone,  resulting  from high 
rates of metabolism  associated  with lactation  and with high energy  intakes.
Negative  energy  balance  during  the early  postpartum  period
High producing  dairy cows  are in negative  energy  balance  for a period  after 
calving  and this is frequently  implicated  as the most significant  cause of the 
reduced  fertility.  At this time cows mobilise  their body reserves  because  they 
simply cannot consume  enough food to support  maintenance  and milk 
production.  Rapid mobilisation  of body fat may further depress  appetite  
causing  an even greater  increase  in the difference  between  the energy  required 
for milk synthesis  and maintenance  and the feed energy  intake.
The severity  of the NEB depends  not only on the milk production  level but 
also on the body  condition  score  at calving,  cow age and parity  and the amount
38
<.5 .5-1.0  >1.0
Body  Condition  Loss (units)
Fig. 3 - Body  condition  loss during  the first 30 days of lactation  and 
interval  to first ovulation  postpartum
and quality of feed available.  The consequence  of severe negative  energy  
balance  in early lactation  is excessive  loss in body condition  score (BCS)  and 
the delayed  resumption  of oestrous  cycles (Butler,  1999) (see Fig. 3). The 
number  of ovulatory  cycles  preceding  first ovulation  has in turn been shown  
to positively  influence  subsequent  conception  rate. Therefore  it is important  to 
ensure  that BCS score loss is minimized  after calving.
Relationship  between  BCS and conception  rate to 1st service  in lactating  
dairy  cows
Besides  the effects  that excessive  loss of body condition  has on delaying  the 
resumption  of oestrous  cycles post-calving  there is also evidence  that the 
decreased  fertility  seen in high yielding  cows  is associated  with excessive  BCS 
loss between  calving  and breeding.  In almost  all published  studies  each 0.5 
unit loss in BCS between  calving  and insemination  has resulted  in a decline  in 
conception  rate of 10-15%.
Possible  mechanisms  by which  energy  balance  affects  embryo  survival  rates
The mechanisms  by which negative  energy balance  during the early  
postpartum  period may affect subsequent  embryo  survival  rate are yet not 
established.  Ovarian  follicles  may be detrimentally  affected  by NEB during 
their early growth and development  (Britt, 1992) which could affect the 
secretion  of progesterone  which would directly  affect embryo  survival  rate. 
Another  possibility  is of NEB effects  on developmental  competence  of oocytes 
(Britt, 1992) and there is some recent  evidence  to support  this hypothesis. 
Lactating  cows  were fed high or low energy  diets after calving  and NEB lasted 
for three versus  seven  weeks  of lactation,  respectively  (Kendrick  et al., 1999)  
and oocytes  were aspirated  twice weekly between  30 and 100 days of 
lactation.  Cows  on the high-energy  diet produced  more  oocytes  and oocytes  of 
higher  quality  compared  with cows in greater  NEB. In a similar  study,  cows  
having more severe postpartum  NEB due to over-fatness  at calving,  
consistently  produced  lower developmental  ly potent oocytes  compared  to 
controls  (lO'uip  et al., 1999).
Another  important  link between  NEB and embryo loss may be the
39
carryover  effects  on blood  progesterone  concentrations.  Previous  studies  have 
shown  that progesterone  in the peripheral  circulation  increases  during  the first 
two or three postpartum  ovulatory  cycles.  Consequently,  if onset of regular  
oestrous  cycles  is delayed  cows may be inseminated  at a cycle when blood  
concentrations  of progesterone  are sub-optimal  for high embryo  survival  rates.
Concurrent  energy  nutrition  - metabolic  rate and embryo  loss
An inverse  relationship  between  energy  intake  and systemic  progesterone  
has been established  for pigs, sheep and dairy cows. The lower blood  
concentrations  of progesterone  in animals  fed the higher  diets and presumably  
having  the higher  metabolic  rate has been attributed  to increased  clearance  rate 
of blood progesterone  by the liver. Therefore,  lower  blood concentrations  of 
progesterone  would  in turn negatively  affect  embryo  growth  and thereby  could  
fatally  compromise  the embryo.  In dairy cows,  dietary  intake  increases  about  
two-fold  while metabolic  rate would increase  3-fold during  early lactation,  
which  in often situation  is coincident  with the onset  of the breeding  period.  In 
this situation  any increase  in progesterone  clearance  due to high dietary  intake  
(including  both energy and protein),  combined  with the aforementioned  
carryover  effects of NEB that result in lower plasma progesterone  
concentrations,  would act to further compromise  progesterone-dependent  
uterine  mechanisms  during  early pregnancy  and, thereby,  reduce  fertility  in 
cattle.  The reduced  progesterone  effect  may operate  either  at the follicle  level 
reducing  oocyte  competence  or by retarding  the growth  and development  rate 
of the embryo  or by controlling  uterine  secretion  of proteins  and growth  
factors  essential  for early embryo  development.
A heifer  model  was used by Dunne  et al (1999)  to determine  the effect  of 
changes  in energy intake near the time of insemination  on systemic  
progesterone  concentration  and directly  on early embryo  survival.  Embryo  
recovery  between  days 8 and 16 after  Al was used to measure  embryo  survival  
rate.
When energy intake was reduced  from a high level of twice their 
maintenance  requirement  to 0.8 times  maintenance  for two weeks  immediately  
after  Al, embryo  survival  rate in heifers  was consistently  less than 40%.  When  
heifers  were provided  with a constant  level of energy or when they were
Table  4
Effect  of nutrition  on embryo  survival  rate in heifers
Level  of pre partum  nutrition 
Low-Low Low-High High-High High-Low Pre X Post 
interaction
No. Heifers 66 65 60 56
Total Pregnant 46 46 39 21
Embryo  survival  rate 70% 71% 65% 38% p <0.05
Source  Dunne  et al., 1999
40
changed  from a low to a high level embryo  survival  was high at 65-70%.  In 
that study there was no indication  of any association  between  energy  intake  
and systemic  progesterone  concentration.  Unlike  the situation  in the sheep  and 
pig there was no change  in systemic  progesterone  following  either  an increase  
or reduction  in energy  intake.  Changes  in progesterone  metabolism  may have 
been balanced  by changes  in progesterone  production.
Delayed  progesterone  rise and embryo  survival  rate
In lactating  dairy cows there is some evidence  (Vasconcelos  et al., 1998)  
that high dietary intakes results in an acute reduction  circulating  
concentrations  of progesterone.  There  is also evidence  (Mann  et al., 1999)  that 
a delayed  rise in progesterone  concentrations  during the first 5 days after 
breeding  results  in smaller  embryos  that produced  lower  uterine  quantities  of 
interferon-r  and therefore,  would  be expected  to be less capable  of inhibiting  
luteolysis  and the cow returning  to oestrus.  These  studies  have been followed  
by progesterone  supplementation  studies where the cows that were given  
exogenous  progesterone  had a significant  but a small (5%) overall  
improvement  in pregnancy  rate. However,  in herds where pregnancy  rates 
were low (<50%)  a large improvement  in pregnancy  rate (+19.3%)  was 
obtained  whereas  not improvement  was obtained  in herds with was already  
high. In a more recent  study,  Starbuck  et al. (1999)  showed  that progesterone 
supplementation  of cows with a low (<2 ng/ml)  of milk progesterone  on day 5 
after breeding  resulted  in almost  a doubling  of pregnancy  rate from 28% to 
55% with no effect  in cows with higher  milk concentrations  of progesterone 
on day 5. Cumulatively,  these studies  would  suggest  that in lactating  dairy  
cows,  progesterone  concentrations  during  the early phase  of the cycle have an 
important  role in determining  the fate of the embryo,  and that progesterone 
supplementation  starting  at day 5 post breeding  may well improve  pregnancy  
rates in cows that have a low or delayed  rise in progesterone.
Elevated  body temperature  and embryo  survival  rate
The early embryo  is adversely  susceptible  to small increases  in maternal  
temperature.  While  heat stress is normally  associated  with climate  it can also 
arise if metabolism  is high and if animals  are unable  to quickly  dissipate  the 
extra heat produced.  High yielding  dairy cows on a high plane of nutrition  
have an increased  metabolic  rate and dissipating  heat takes longer.
Protein  nutrition  and cow fertility
Dairy cows respond  to high levels of protein  in early lactation  with an 
increased  milk output,  though  such increases  are dependent  on an increased  
intake  of energy.  There  is evidence  that the concentration  and type of protein  
in the diet can affect  dairy cow conception  rate (see review  by Butler  1999).  
During the metabolism  of excessive  quantities  dietary protein by rumen  
microorganisms  or during  the rapid mobilisation  of body protein  reserves  in 
early lactation  relatively  large quantities  of ammonia  are generated.  Rumen  
ammonia  not utilised  by rumen  microorganisms  is absorbed  through  the rumen
41
wall and must be rapidly  detoxified  to urea in the liver to prevent  ammonia 
toxicity.  High protein  diets elevate  plasma  urea nitrogen  levels.  In US studies 
plasma  urea nitrogen  (PUN)  in excess  of 19 mg/dl  has been associated  with a 
20% depression  in conception  rate in dairy cows. Ferguson  and Chalupa 
(1989)  concluded  that in most published  studies,  diets with a high content  of 
crude protein  decreased  reproductive  efficiency.  While the US studies  have 
shown  a clear  negative  association  between  elevated  blood  urea and pregnancy  
rates there is little European  data showing  such clear-cut  negative  associations. 
In Ireland,  well fertilized  Spring  pastures  would  have crude  protein  contents  of 
20-30%,  which  would  be expected  to result  in elated  blood  concentrations  of 
urea. We have recently  examined  the association  between  herbage  protein  
content,  blood  urea, and blood  ammonia  and embryo  survival  rate.
While  there  are several  reports  of putative  toxic  effects  of elevated  systemic 
urea and, or ammonia  on both gametes  and embryos  there is no published 
information  on the direct  effect  of protein  nutrition  on cattle embryos.  Kenny  
et al. (1999)  have concluded  from a study of the effects of high nitrogen  
pasture  that intakes  of such pasture  while leading  to significantly  elevated 
systemic  concentrations  of ammonia  and urea in heifers  do not affect  embryo 
survival  rate (Table  5).
Table  5
The effect of pasture  protein  content  and molassed  sugar beet pulp  
supplementation  on plasma  urea and ammonia  concentrations  and 
embryo  survival  rate in heifers.  Low- and high-nitrogen  pastures  and 
crude  protein  contents  of 13.0%  and 25.4%,  respectively.
High Nitrogen  High Nitrogen  Low Nitrogen  Low Nitrogen  
-I- 0 Pulp + 3 Pulp -I- 0 Pulp + 3 Pulp
No. heifers 44 44 43 44
Plasma  Urea (mmol/L) 7.41 5.89 2.68 2.84
Plasma  Ammonia  (mg/L) 0.45 0.33 0.27 0.21
No. Pregnant 29 31 28 36
% Pregnant 66 70 65 82
Kenny  et al., 1999
Even at systemic  concentrations  of blood urea nitrogen  as high as 25-27  
mg/dL  in heifers  embryo  survival  was not affected.  Clearly,  elevated  systemic  
concentrations  of ammonia  and urea per se do not reduce  embryo  survival  rate 
but there may be other modifying  factors  such as negative  energy  balance 
operating  in the high yielding  dairy cow.
Strategies  to minimise  the consequences  of early  embryo  loss
A major  challenge  facing  researches  is to gain a better  understanding  of the 
significant  factors  that affect embryo  survival.  This involves  studies  of the 
parameters  of cattle  embryo  growth  and determining  how these  are affected  by
42
protein and energy nutrition,  milk production,  metabolic  rate and energy  
balance.  Without  such information  it will not be possible  to reverse the 
downward  trends  in cow fertility.  In the mean-time  producers  must  concentrate 
on factors  directly  under  their control  and or use technologies  that have the 
potential  to increase  improve  reproductive  performance.
• Calve  cows in a moderate  BCS and minimise  BCS loss in early lactation.
• Have cows gaining  in BCS at breeding.
• Have heifers  well-grown  (350-380  kg) at 15 months.  Breed  to calve early.  
Consider  using synchronisation  for heifers.
• Minimise  the risk of calving  difficulty
• Increase  submission  rates by paying  particular  attention  to heat detection.  
Use tail-paint.  Carry  out pre-breeding  heat detection.
• Ensure  that the semen used is of high fertility  and that the storage  and 
handling  of semen  as well as insemination  technique  are all correct.  Do a 
refresher  Al course  every second  year.
• Inseminate  cows at the correct  time.
• Avoid  sudden  reductions  in dietary  intake  during  the breeding  period.
• Avoid  sudden  reductions  in concentrate  feeding  during  the dry period.
• Maintain  good records,  early identification  of and appropriate  treatments  of 
potentially  problem  cows.
• If using  natural  service  bulls be vigilant  to ensure  that bull(s)  is fertile.
New ongoing  research  on method  of heat detection
Heat detection  is a time consuming  repetitive  chore  that must  be carried  out 
up to 5-times  a day each day for as long as Al is used. Heat detection  rate, 
usually  measured  as submission  rate, is hugely  variable  from herd-to-herd  but 
between  40 and 70% of cows that exhibit  heat are actually  detected  in heat by 
the stockman.  About 10% of the reasons  for failure to detect heats can be 
attributed  to cow problems  and 90% to “management ” problems.  The latter 
would  include  too few observations  per day for checking  for heat activity,  too 
little time spent  observing  the cows or observing  the cows at the wrong  times  
or in the wrong place such as at feeding  time or in the collecting  yard al 
milking  time. Currently,  there are a number  of technological  methods  of 
oestrous  detection  that offer potential  to improve  heat detection  efficiency  at 
farm level and these are currently  being  studied.
Pressure  activated  heat mount  detectors
These  devices  including  those marketed  as KAMARs  are fixed to the tail 
head of the cow and change  colour  when pressure  is applied  by the mounting 
animal.  The relatively  low accuracy  (56-94%)  of heat detection  combined  with 
difficulties  in keeping  the devises  affixed  to the tail head limit the potential  of 
this approach.
Pedometers
Oestrus  in cattle is accompanied  by increased  physical  activity.  Cows in 
heat do walk 24 times more than non-oestrous  cows. Pedometers  are devices
43
that can be attached  to the leg of the cow to measure  the amount  of her activity  
over a certain  time span. New improved  pedometric  technology  has now led 
to improved  information  storage  systems,  improved  analytical  capabilities  to 
allow comparison  of current  with previous  physical  activity,  incorporation  of 
internal  power supply  to operate  the electronics,  the development  of self- 
contained  devices  to interrogate  the pedometers  in milking  parlour  and relay  
or store information  in a personal  computer.  Some systems  have an inbuilt  
alert system  such as a bleeper  or Hashing  light, which  alerts the farmer  when  
a cow is deemed  to be in heat. A number  of pedometric  systems  are 
commercially  available  in the US. While scientific  information  on their 
operating  efficiencies  is not yet available  these systems  would  appear  to have 
significant  commercial  potential.
HeatWatch  (DDX  Inc.)
The primary  sign of heat is standing  to be mounted.  A number  of research 
laboratories  have attempted  to develop  pressure  sensitive  devices  that measure 
such standing  activity.  Such a system  (HeatWatch;  DDX INC, Colorado,  
USA)  is currently  commercially  available  in the US and in a number  of other  
countries.  This system  involves  the location  of a pressure  sensitive  battery-  
powered  transmitter  on the cows tail head which, when activated  by the 
mounting  cow emits a radio signal  which  is picked  up by either  a receiver  or 
repeater  (see Figure  4) and relayed  to a buffer  and ultimately  to a personal  
computer  where  the information  is digitized  and stored.  The time, date and 
duration  of each mount  along  with the identity  of each cow are recorded.  From  
this information  the time of heat onset  is calculated.  The HeatWatch  software  
generates  management  and individual  cow reports that can be viewed  or
Buffer
Figure  4 - Components  of the HeatWatch  24h oestrus  detection  system.  
(Courtesy  DDx,  Inc.)
44
printed.  Periodically  during the day the farmer  checks  the computer  for a 
listing of cows in heat. The limited  data available  suggests  that HeatWatch  
operate  with both an efficiency  and accuracy  of almost 100% in detecting  
cows in heat. Teagasc  at Athenry  are currently  evaluating  the HeatWatch  
system for heat detection  in both dairy and beef cows. HeatWatch  is an 
extremely  powerful  research  tool, operates  well under  both indoor  and
Preliminary  results  from the Teagasc,  Athenry  study  is presented  in Table  6. 
Heifers  were also scanned  at 4-hour  intervals  to determine  time of ovulation.
Table  6
Heat  activity  and time of ovulation  date for heifers
No. heifers  23
No. observed  in heat 23
Average  number  of mounts  per heifer 39
Range  (6 - 98)
Average  duration  of heat 14.5 hours
Range  6 - 32 hours
Average  interval  from start of heat to time of ovulation 30.6 hours
The results of this study illustrate  the wide variation  in both mounting  
activity  and the duration  of standing  heat among  heifers.
The current  HeatWatch  system  is expensive  (£10,000  for a unit for 100 
cows excluding  cost of computer  and printer).  The cost is currently 
exacerbated  by low EuroiDollar  exchange  rate. The HeatWatch  system  is not 
yet commercially  available  in Ireland  or in any other country  within  the EU. 
DDX  Inc. is redeveloping  the system  to operate  on the radio band frequencies 
that are available  for such devices  within  the EU.
As a lower  cost alternative  to the complete  HeatWatch  system  DDX have 
recently  launched  a system  (MountCount)  that counts  the number  of mounts  
received  by a cow in heat. The MountCount  is a manual  version  of the current  
HeatWatch  transmitter.  The battery-powered  unit is affixed  to the tail head of 
the cow. It contains  a pressure  switch that is activated  when the cow is 
mounted.  When  a certain  threshold  of mounts  is reached  a light is activated  on 
the device the alerts the farmer that the cow is in heat and should be 
inseminated.  Different  flashing  light patterns  alert the farmer  when the cow is 
in suspect  heat, standing  heat and when she is considered  ideal for breeding.  
The cost of one MountCount  unit is about  £60 and is good to detect  up to 20 
heats.
Yet another  alternative  and cheaper  system  HeatWatch  Express.  This does 
not need a computer  or software  to process  and display  the data. Again  like the 
other DDX systems  a small batter-powered  radio transmitter  is affixed  to the 
tailhead  of the cow. The mount  data is relayed  to a radio receiver  and then to 
a buffer  in the farm office  from which  the data can be printed.  The cost of this 
product  is about  $2,000  or about  £1,700.
45
DEC (IMV  Technologies)
IMV Technologies  in France have also developed  a pressure  sensitive  
mount  count  detector.  This system  known  as DEC is commercially  available 
in Ireland.  The device is programmed  in such a way that when a certain  
number  of valid  mounts  have been  recorded  a light,  incorporated  into the DEC,  
starts  to flash.  The number  of flashes  is in proportion  to the time elapsed  since  
the first valid mount  was recorded.  The number  of flashes  in a 10-second  
period  indicates  the time of heat onset  and most appropriate  time to inseminate  
the cow. The unit cost of the system  is about  £60 and each unit is good for up 
to 30 heats.  This system  would  appear  to have potential  and is being  evaluated 
at Teagasc,  Athenry  this year.
Some of these systems  are being used in a research  programme  with dairy  
and beef cows and heifers  at Teagasc  Athenry  with the objective  of accurately  
defining  the parameters  of heat activity  and ultimately  with the objective  of 
finding  a practical  cost effective  system  for both dairy and beef farmers.
References
Britt, J. H. 1992. Influence  of nutrition  and weight  loss on reproduction  and early 
embryonic  death in cattle. Proceedings  of the XVll World  Buiatrics  Congress,  St. 
Paul, MN, August  31-September  4. Vol. 2: 143-149.
Butler, R. W. 1999. Nutritional  effects on resumption  of ovarian  cyclicity  and 
conception  rate in postpartum  dairy cows. Proc. BSAS  Conference  on Fertility  in 
the High Producing  Dairy  Cow. Galway.
Darwash,  A. 0., Lamming,  G. E. and Woolliams,  J. A. 1999. The potential  for 
identifying  heritable  endocrine  parameters  associated  with fertility  in post-partum 
dairy  cows.  Animal  Science  68: 333-347.
Dunne,  L. D., Diskin,  M. G., Boland,  M. P, O’Farrell,  K. J. and Sreenan,  J. M. 1999.  
The Effect  of pre-and  postinsemination  plane of nutrition  on embryo  survival  rate 
in beef heifers.  Animal  Science,  69: 411417.
Kenny,  D. A., Boland,  M.P, Diskin,  M. G. & Sreenan,  J. M. 1999. The effect  of crude 
protein  and fermentable  carbohydrate  intake  on blood  metabolite  concentrations  and 
fertility  in cattle  grazing  spring  pasture.  Proc. Research  Forum,  25: 95-96.
Kruip, Th. A. M., Meijer,  G. A. L., Rukkwamsuk,  Th. and Wensing,  Th. 1999.  
Investigation  into the mechanisms  of reduction  in fertility  of high yielding  cows.  
Proceedings  10th International  Conference  Production  Diseases  in Farm Animals,  
Utrecht,  1998 183-190.
Mann,  G. E. and Lamming,  G. E. 1999. The influence  of progesterone  during  early  
pregnancy  in cattle.  Reproduction  in Domestic  Animals.  34: 269-214.
Mann,  G. E., Lamming,  G. E., Robinson,  R. S. and Wathes,  D. C. 1999.  The regulation 
of interferon-tau  production  and uterine hormone  receptors  during early  
pregnancy.  Journal  of Reproduction  and Fertility  54 (suppl.)
Nebel,  R, L„ & McGillard.  1993. Interactions  of high milk yield and reproductive 
performance  in dairy cows.  J. Dairy  Sci. 76:3267.
Peters,  A. R. 1996. Embryo  mortality  in the cow. Animal  Breeding  64 (Abstr.)  587-598.
Pursley,  J. R., Wiltbank,  M. C., Ottobre,  J. S., Stevenson,  J. S., Garvarick,  H. A. and 
Anderson,  L. L. 1997. Pregnancy  rates per artificial  insemination  for cows and 
heifers  inseminated  at a synchronized  ovulation  or synchronized  estrus.  J. Dairy  
Science  80: 295-300.
46
Sreenan,  J. M.and  Diskin,  M. G. 1986. The extent  and timing  of embryonic  mortality  
in the cow. Embryo  mortality  in farm animals  Pp. 1-11. Ed. J. M. Sreenan  and M. 
G. Diskin.  Marinus  Nijhoff.  Dordiecht.
Staples,  C. R., Thatcher,  W. W. and Clark,  J. H. 1990. Relationship  between  ovarian  
activity  and energy  status during  the early postpartum  period  of high producing  
dairy cows. Journal  of Dairy  Science  73: 938-947.
Starbuck,  G. R., Darwash,  A. O., Mann,  G. E. and Lamming,  G. E. 2000.  The detection  
and treatment  of post insemination  progesterone  insufficiency  in dairy cows. In 
press.
Vasconcelos,  J. L. M., Silcox,  R. W., Lacerda,  J. A., Pursley,  J. R. and Wiltbank.  M. C. 
1997. Pregnancy  rate, pregnancy  loss and response  to heat stress after Al at 2 
different  timed  from ovulation  in dairy cows. Biol, Reprod.  56 (Suppl):  140).
47
Profitable  and Enjoyable  Dairy  
Farming
S. MAYNE
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  Co. Down
BT26  6DR
In an ideal world  most dairy fanners  would  set the objectives  of producing  
an acceptable  level of profit,  based  on return  on labour  and investment  on the 
farm, whilst  having  an enjoyable  lifestyle.  Whilst  dairy farming  needs to be 
profitable  to be enjoyable,  it can also be profitable  but not necessarily  
enjoyable,  for example  if the farmer  is committed  to long hours  of drudgery  in 
order to generate  an acceptable  level of profit. The aim of this paper is to 
examine  some of the key factors influencing  both the profitability  and 
enjoyability  of dairy farming  in the 21st century.  At the outset,  it is important  
to highlight  the increasing  opportunities  at present  for potential  young  farmers  
to move to other sectors of employment.  Many of these alternative  
employment  opportunities  offer relatively  short working  hours,  good working  
conditions  and high salaries  relative  to those sustainable  from dairy farming.  
It dairy farming  is to attract  bright,  young  entrepreneurs  into the industry  in 
future,  we need to demonstrate  that it has the potential  to generate  acceptable 
profit  levels  combined  with an enjoyable  lifestyle.
Key issues  affecting  profitability
Profit  margins
Profitability  of dairying  in Northern  Ireland  has declined  markedly  over the 
last 5 years as shown  in Table 1, in line with trends  throughout  the UK. These  
data are based on full farm accounts  information  for approximately  150 
specialist  dairy farms across  Northern  Ireland  (McBumey,  2000).  The major 
factors contributing  to the decline  in profitability  include  the strength  of 
sterling  versus  the euro, European  Union  dairy reforms  and the aftermath  of
Table I
Changes  in milk production  costs and farm  income  on Northern  Ireland  farms
92/93 93/94 94/95 95/96 96/97 97/98 98/99
Herd size (Cows) 48.3 49.3 50.9 52.6 53.7 54.3 55.2
Milk price (p/litre) 19.8 21.3 21.6 26.1 23.7 20.4 18.9
Total farm output  (£) 65116 68305 71628 77088 73497 63852 58218
Total fixed costs (£) 28280 26880 28260 29225 31292 31613 30056
Total variable  costs (£) 22700 24990 25990 25810 27290 24134 22651
Net farm income  (£) 14140 16430 17380 22055 14920 7283 3940
(McBurney,  1998 and McBurney,  20000
48
3?9hn
ok-
CL21690
12120
1997 1999 1998
, Year
Fig. 1 - Profit  trends  in dairying  - specialist  dairy  farms  in England  and 
Wales  (Axient,  2000)
the BSE crisis.  The net effect  of these changes  is that milk price has declined  
by 36% from a peak of 27.9p/litre  in January  1996 to the current  value of 
17.8p/litre  in January  2000.  In addition,  the value  of cull cows  and surplus  bull 
calves  has declined  by approximately  £200 and £55 per head over the same  
period.  These  reductions  in price have resulted  in a reduction  in farm output  of 
almost  £19,000  over the period 1996-1999.  Whilst  some of this reduction  in 
income  is partially  offset  by lower  input costs, many dairy farms  in Northern  
Ireland  are currently  struggling  to reach breakeven.  Similarly,  data from 100 
Axient-costed  dairy herds in England  and Wales  (see Figure  1), based  on an 
average  herd size of over 120 cows, indicate  that farm profit, adjusted  for 
inflation,  has declined  from £32,950  in 1997 to £12,120  in 1999.
Whilst  the data presented  above  highlight  changes  in profitability  for the 
“average ” dairy farm in recent years, one of the most significant  issues  
emerging  from all costing  schemes  on dairy farms is the massive  range in 
production  costs between  farms.  McBurney  (1998)  in a further  analysis  of the 
Northern  Ireland  Farm Business  Survey  showed  that 21% of farms had total 
input costs less than lOp/litre,  whereas  13% had input costs greater  than 
16p/litre.  The average  cost of producing  each litre was 13.3p  (excluding  family  
labour).  This huge range in production  cost per litre largely  reflects  the wide 
range in variable  and fixed input  costs per litre as illustrated  in Table  2.
What  are the Options?
The main  options  to maintain  profitability  with declining  milk and livestock  
prices  are:
i) Increase  output
ii) Increase  product  value
iii) Reduce  production  costs
Increasing  Output.  In theory,  increasing  milk output  offers  the opportunity
49
Table 2
Distribution  of variable  and fixed input  costs per litre of milk produced  on 
Northern  Ireland  farms  (1997/98)
Cost per litre 
(P)Variable  Costs Fixed  Costs
(% of farms  costed)
Less than 4.0 
4.0 - 4.9 
5.0-5.9  
6.0 - 6.9 
7.0-8.4  
8.5 - 11.5 
Average1 18
21 30
31 16
29 14
14 12
4 10
6.49 6.82
(McBurney,  1998)
to reduce  the cost of each litre or gallon of milk produced  by improving  
economy  of scale. For example,  fixed costs are spread  over a greater  number  
of litres, thereby  reducing  the fixed cost per litre. However  in practice  the 
benefits  of fixed cost dilution  on dairy farms are relatively  small, with most  
survey  data indicating  similar  fixed costs per litre across  a wide range  of farm 
size. There is also little point in producing  more of something,  if you are 
already  making  a loss on what you are producing  - the risk is that you will go 
under  more quickly.  The main advantage  of increasing  herd size is to improve  
the efficiency  of labour use and therefore  reduce labour costs per litre. 
Increasing  output can help to maintain/improve  profit levels in situations  
where  production  costs are already  low, and where  the value  of the extra  milk 
produced  is greater  than the variable  and quota  costs of the extra production,  
as shown  in Table 3. The data presented  in Table 3 indicate  that in the case of 
a high cost producer,  producing  an additional  100,000  litres of milk only
Table  3
Effect  of increasing  milk output  or reducing  production  costs  on farm margin  
assuming  a base quota  of 500,000  litres
Option A* Increase  milk output  by 100,000  litres
High Cost Producer Low Cost Producer
Milk price (p/litre) 18 18Leasing  cost (p/litre) 6 6
Variable  costs etc (p/litre) 8 6
Margin/litre  (p) 4 6
Farm margin  (£) +4000 +6000
* Assumes  no change  in fixed costs to produce  additional  milk
Option  B Reduce  costs of production  by 2p/litre
500,000  litres @, 2p = £10,000  increase  in farm margin.
50
improves  farm margin  by £4,000.  In contrast,  a similar  increase  in production  
by a low cost producer  increases  farm margin  by £6,000.  In both cases it is 
assumed  that increasing  production  by 100,000  litres results  in no change  in 
fixed  costs.  If fixed  costs were to increase,  the increase  in farm margin  through  
increasing  production  would decrease  accordingly.  However,  rather than 
increasing  production,  farm margin  could be increased  by £10,000  on both 
farms  if production  costs were reduced  by 2p/litre.
Increasing  Product  Value. Increasing  milk value or the value of cull cows  
and surplus  bull calves  offers  some opportunity  to maintain  farm profitability.  
For example,  development  of added value niche markets  and/or organic  
production  systems  offers scope for a very limited  number  of producers  to 
improve  the value  of farm output.  However,  such options  need to be carefully  
considered,  particularly  from a milk marketing  viewpoint,  as short term price  
incentives  may be eroded  very quickly  in the longer  term.
Reducing  Production  Costs. The primary  opportunity  to maintain  farm 
profit levels,  given  lower  farm output  value,  involves  cost reduction.  As shown  
in Table 3, reducing  production  costs per litre has much more impact  on 
overall  farm profitability  than increasing  milk output  in a quota  situation.  The 
key to surviving  and growing  the dairy farm business  in Ireland  today,  both 
north and south,  is firstly  to focus  on cost reduction  in the short term and then 
plan to expand  the business  in the longer  term.
Whilst  producers  will argue that cost reduction  is a difficult  route, it is 
worth noting that even in New Zealand,  renowned  for lost cost production  
systems,  milk producers  responded  to lower milk prices in 1989-1991  by 
reducing  their costs even further,  as shown  in Table  4. These  data indicate  that 
producers  responded  immediately  to a 24% reduction  in milk price between  
1989-1991  by reducing  variable  costs by 15%, and in the longer  term, fixed  
costs were reduced  by up to 22%. It is also worth  noting  the significant  longer 
term trend for a reduction  in fixed costs in New Zealand.  For example,  only 
27% of gross income  was spent on fixed costs in the 1994/95  season in 
comparison  with 42% in 1986/87.  In comparison,  data from the Northern  
Ireland  Farm Business  Survey  (McBurney,  2000)  indicate  that fixed costs,  as
Table  4
Response  by New Zealand  dairy  farmers  to lower  milk prices
88/89 89/90 90/91 91/92 92/93 93/94 94/95
Milk price ($/kg MS) 3.71 3.29 2.83 3.93 3.83 2.78 2.92
Gross  Farm Income 2621 2863 2090 2250 2687 2664 2556
($/ha)
Fixed  Expenditure 751 683 682
($/ha) 874 878 823 690
Variable  Expenditure 907 1036 882 945 1200 1267 1182
Farm Income  ($/ha) 1006 1056 416 672 779 747 691
Attrill  and Miller  (1996)
51
a proportion  of total farm output,  increased  from 43% in 1992/93  to 52% in 
1998/99.  The problem  on many dairy farms today is that over investment  in 
machinery  and buildings,  during  a period  of high milk price, has resulted  in 
greater  reliance  on higher  cost production  systems  (e.g. increased  use of silage  
and indoor  feeding  rather  than grazed  grass).  Given  the increased  pressure  on 
dairy farm incomes,  there is a real need to reduce  fixed costs and to replace  
purchased  inputs  with increased  management  expertise,  particularly  in the area 
of grazing  management.
One of the potential  difficulties  of moving  towards  milk production  systems  
with higher  reliance  on grazed  grass, in a high fixed cost environment,  is that 
it this is accompanied  by large decreases  in milk yield per cow, margins  over 
direct animal  costs (e.g." machinery  and housing  costs) become  too low to 
generate  an acceptable  level of profit. This effect is illustrated  in the data 
presented  in Table 5. When fixed costs per cow and milk price are relatively  
low, as in New Zealand,  increasing  milk yield per cow produces  relatively 
little benefit in total farm profit. In this situation  there is only 0.9 p/litre  
available  to cover  the increased  variable  costs  of production.  In contrast,  when  
fixed costs per cow are high, as in many dairy farms in Northern  Ireland,  
increased  farm profitability  can be obtained  by increasing  milk yield per cow, 
providing  less than £510 or 4.5 p/litre are incurred  in the increased  variable 
costs of increasing  production  from 4000 to 7000 litres per cow. These  data 
highlight  two key principles  which need to be taken into consideration  in 
developing  grass-based  production  systems:
• If the grazing  system  adopted  on the farm results  in a major  reduction  in 
milk yield per cow, e.g., high stocking  rate systems,  fixed costs of 
production  must be reduced.
• If fixed costs on the farm are relatively  high, and difficult  to reduce,  the 
grazing  system adopted  must be capable  of sustaining  relatively  high 
individual  cow perfonnance.
Table  5
Effect  of milk production  at two milk price levels
Milk price (pence/litre)
10 17
£/cow p/litre £/cow p/litre
Fixed  costs
40001 cow85 425
Milk sales 400 10 680 17
Margin  to cover  variable  costs & profit  
7000 1 cow315 7.9 255 6.4
Milk sales 700 10 1190 17
Margin  to cover  variable  costs & profit 615 8.8 765 10.9
Increase  in margin  available  to cover 
variable  costs and profit  by increasing 
yield/cow300 0.9 510 4.5
52
Moving  forward  with grazed  grass
One of the main advantages  of grazing  relative  to other systems  of milk 
production  is the potential  to significantly  reduce  production  costs through  
savings  on buildings,  machinery  and labour,  and in many  cases to improve  the 
lifestyle  for the farm family.  However,  effective  use of grazed  grass requires  
high levels of management  input, particularly  with respect  to knowledge  of 
grass growth  rates through  the season  and implications  for stocking  rate. This 
requires  a change  of mindset  from indoor feeding  where planning  of feed 
supply  etc has much lower  priority  relative  to undertaking  the actual  feeding  
out of silage  and/or  concentrates.
The critical  areas in relation  to effective  grazing  management  include:
1. Planning  next year ’s grazing  season  in the autumn.
2. Growing  high yields  of grass by attention  to sward  type and soil fertility
3. Ensuring  grass grown  is efficiently  harvested  by the grazing  animal.
4. Ensuring  animal  has appropriate  genetic  merit to efficiently  convert  grass  
to milk and to get back in calf within  80 days of calving.
Whilst  the top 5% of milk producers  in Ireland  are already  achieving  high 
levels of utilisation  and production  from grazed  grass, there is huge potential  
to increase  production  at a national  level. In order to fulfil this potential  
researchers  and advisors  need to deliver  more accurate  prediction  of grass  
growth  and better  guidelines  for grass budgeting  through  the season.  There  is 
also a need to recognise  that grazing  can have a major  role in a wide range  of 
production  systems  - ranging  from the low cost New Zealand  approach  to high 
yielding,  high genetic  merit  cows.  Eor example,  recent  work at Hillsborough, 
presented  in Figure  2, indicates  that high yielding  cows offered  grazed  grass  
plus 5.7 kg concentrates/day  produced  over 40 litres milk/day  in early May 
and were still producing  over 25 litres milk/day  in late September.
Fig. 2 - The real milk  yield potential  from grazed  grass  
(Sayers,  et al., 2000)
53
Consequently,  production  from grazed grass peaked at approximately  35 
litres/day  in April/May,  declining  to 20 litres/day  m mid September.  These  data 
indicate  that grazed  grass can play a very important  role, even with very high 
yielding  cows,  whilst  significantly  reducing  production  costs  relative  to labour 
and capital  intensive  indoor  feeding  systems.
Controlling  Costs
Current  reductions  in milk price have really  focussed  attention  on the need 
to control  costs in dairying.  This implies  much  tighter  financial  budgeting  on 
farms  than has been the case previously.  However  the reality  is that on many  
dairy farms,  financial  records  and forward  technical  and financial  budgets  take 
second  priority  to the day-to-day  management  of the farm. This is despite  the 
fact that the return  on time spent on forward  planning  is many times greater 
than time spent  on routine  manual  tasks.
Effective  technical  and financial  planning  involves  three main areas:
1. Preparing  a five year  forward  plan
This involves  preparing  a five year technical  and financial  plan, setting  
targets  and detailing  levels of technical  performance  (cow numbers,  herd 
yield,  milk composition,  replacement  rate etc) and yearly  financial  budgets  
(based  on anticipated  milk prices  and changes  in variable  and fixed costs).
2. Monitoring  physical  and  financial  performance
This involves  continual  monitoring  of technical  and financial  performance 
in addition  to bench  marking  with other  farmers  using  a similar  production 
system.  Given  the current  pressure  on dairy farm incomes,  justifying  every  
£ spent  off the farm and assessing  comparative  rates  of return  on investment  
is essential  if reasonable  profit  margins  are to be obtained  from dairying.  
Bench  marking  provides  the opportunity  to compare  technical  and financial  
performance  with other farms,  enabling  identification  of the strengths  and 
weaknesses  of the farm business.
3. Revise  forward  plan
Regular  updating  of the five year forward  plan is required  to adjust for 
changes  in levels of physical  or financial  performance.  Examination  of 
what if scenarios  also allows preparation  for planned  changes  in the 
production  system  if individual  farm circumstances  change.
With  continued  pressure  on milk  price,  through  EU reforms,  over the period  
2000-2006,  reductions  in cost coupled  with forward  technical  and financial  
planning  will become  increasingly  important  if profit margins  on dairy  
farms are to be maintained.  Increased  emphasis  in these areas is likely to 
lead to a greater impact on overall farm profitability  than small 
improvements  in the level of technical  efficiency.
Enjoyable  Dairy  Farming
Defining  enjoyable  dairy farming  is difficult  as every individual  farmer  has 
their own definition  of enjoyment.  Nonetheless,  enjoyable  dairy farming  is
54
likely  to be characterised  by a number  of common  features,  irrespective  of the 
actual  production  system  being  used:
1. Dairying  should  provide  a reasonable  return  for the labour  and investment  
input into the business.
2. Must have low or tolerable  levels  of stress.
3. Must provide  opportunity  for quality  leisure/family  time.
I would suggest  that, in order to sustain  these aspirations,  dairy farming  
systems  should  be characterised  by the following  goals:
i)
ii)System  used should  be based on a simple,  effective  production  base.  
Systems  should  be relatively  easy to manage  with clearly  defined  targets  
and goals and avoiding  the need for complex  decision-making  on a daily  
basis.
Labour  input needs  to be sustainable.  Whilst  stressful  work routines  can 
be tolerated  for short periods,  prolonged  periods of high stress  
inevitability  reduce  both productivity  and enjoyment, 
iii) Cows of appropriate  genetic merit should be selected  to suit the 
production  system  being  used.  The system  should  involve  using  efficient,  
healthy  cows that calve down and rebreed  when required,  preferably 
avoiding  cows that are continually  on the knife edge in terms of feeding  
and management.
Having  identified  these goals,  I would  contend  that block,  seasonal  calving 
with maximum  use of grazed  grass offers the best opportunity  of delivering  
profitable,  enjoyable  dairy farming.  Furthermore,  this system  with its reduced  
labour  and capital  investment  requirements,  is much  more likely  to attract  the 
next generation  of young farmers  into the industry,  compared  to the high 
labour  and capital  input alternatives.
Conclusions
Profitability  of dairy farming  in Northern  Ireland  has declined  substantially  
over the last 5 years with net farm income  for a typical  55 cow herd declining  
from over £22,000  in 1995/96  to £3,940  in 1998/99.  Furthermore,  current  EU 
reforms  imply that incomes  will continue  to be under  pressure  until at least 
2006. In order to continue  to attract  bright,  young entrepreneurs  into dairy  
farming  in the future,  we need to ensure  that we are using  production  systems  
that generate  acceptable  profit levels combined  with an enjoyable  lifestyle.  
The key to profitable  dairy farming  at present  is to focus on cost reduction  in 
the short term, whilst  at the same time planning  to expand  the business  in the 
longer term. This inevitably  means that average  herd size will continue  to 
increase  in the future,  putting  more  pressure  on family  labour.  Enjoyable  dairy  
fanning  involves  reducing  stress levels,  producing  an acceptable  profit level 
and providing  opportunity  for time off from the day-to-day  routine.  I would  
contend  that the twin objectives  of profitable  and enjoyable  dairying  can best 
be achieved  by using  block  seasonal  calving  systems  designed  to maximise  the 
use of grazed  grass with cows that will efficiently  convert  grass to milk and 
get back into calf within  80 days of calving.
55
References
Attrill,  B. J. and Miller,  D. B. (1996).  Trends  in farm income  and expenditure.  In:
Proceedings  48th Ruakura  Farmers ’ Conference  Ruakura,  pp. 1-4.
Axient  (2000).  Axient  Farm Business  Accounts  - Summary  of results  1998/99.  Axient  
Report  No 9.
McBurney,  S. A. (1998).  Competitive  milk production  in a world  market.  Proceedings  
Northern  Ireland  Dairy  Conference  1998, pp. 1-21.
McBurney,  S. A. (2000).  Farm Incomes  in Northern  Ireland  1998/99.  Department  of 
Agriculture  and Rural Development,  Economics  and Statistics  Division,  pp. 87. 
Sayers,  H. J., Mayne  C. S. and Bartram,  C. G. (2000).  The effect  of the level and type 
of supplement  and changes  in the chemical  composition  of herbage  as the season  
progresses  on herbage  intake and performance  of high yielding  dairy cows. In: 
Proceedings  British  Grassland  Society  Grazing  Conference,  Harrogate.
56
Growing  a Business  from  a Dairying
BaseM. SCULLY
Ardfield,  Clonakilty.  Co. Cork
In addressing  the issue of “growing  a business  from a dairying  base”, I 
intend  to give a short outline  of where  we have come from as dairy farmers,  
where  we are now. the direction  we decided  to take, and why. A look at some  
of the issues involved  in taking  that decision  and the issues involved  going  
forward.
My wife Helen  and I are farming  in our own right for a period  of 8 years.  
In 1992 we took over the family  dairy farm near Clonakilty,  West Cork.  At that 
stage the farm had 127 adjusted  acres,  90 cows  and a quota  of 108,000  gallons.
We quickly  realised  that the business  had to grow substantially  to deliver 
the sort of free cash surplus  we required  to achieve  our goals.
At this stage I should  add that our principal  financial  goal is to deliver  a 
comfortable  lifestyle,  a comfortable  retirement  (whenever  that may come)  and 
a significant  start in life for our 3 children.  There  is nothing  special  with these  
goals, and I am confident  that they are in common  with the vast majority  of 
people  here today.
Financial  goals,  of course,  are only a small part of the equation.  They are 
not the most important,  or the most difficult  to achieve,  but they are what we 
are discussing  here today.
It was essential  that we grow the business.  While  the farm was delivering  a 
reasonably  healthy  free cash surplus,  this was not sustainable  over time.  
Falling  dairy returns,  rising overheads  and the reduced  purchasing  power  of 
farm profits,  as a result of inflation,  meant that the status quo was not an 
option.  Looking  forward  over  a 20-year  period,  in order  to achieve  those  goals,  
we had little option  but to grow the business.
Over the past 8 years we have grown  the farm business  at a steady  pace.  
Quota  has gradually  been added  through  both purchase  and lease to bring the 
farm up to sufficient  scale. Most necessary  investments  have been made in 
infrastructure,  such as roadways,  milking  facilities  and grassland.  Next year 
we expect  to farm 195 acres with 220 cows producing  a quota of 290,000  
gallons.  The farm has been set up as a milking  platform  of cows only, 100%  
autumn  calving,  with special  emphasis  being placed on milking  and calf 
rearing facilities.  Replacements  are reared on a separate  unit 100 miles  
away.
In practice  we have achieved  compounded  growth  in net worth of 24.5%  
pa. This excludes  land values  on the home farm, as we only see ourselves  as 
trustees  for the next generation.
Before  attempting  to grow the business,  there are a number  of factors,  
which  had to be addressed  before  any decisions  were taken.  These  needed  to 
be addressed,  irrespective  of whether  growth  was to take place  on or off farm.
The primary  objective  was to set up the farm so that it could  be sustainably
57
managed  at arms length.  This necessitated  major  changes  to the farm business  
structure  and the way I approached  my attitude  to time and knowledge  
management.
The move  to 100% autumn  calving  was principally  done for this reason.  In 
order to have a sustainable  system  over time it was necessary  to simplify  the 
system  as much  as possible.  As the farm is supplying  liquid  milk, the move to 
100% spring  calving  was not an option.  Also, because  of the limited  land base,  
a low cost spring  calving  system  could not sustain  the level of quota on the 
tarm. We saw split calving  in winter  and spring  as unsustainable  in the longer  
term. Too many conflicts  of interest,  and a difficult  business  to run from a 
management  point of view.
Quality  labour  is one of the major constraints  to growth  within farming  
today. To address  this issue we have invested  in a simple,  low cost, labour  
efficient  parlour.  Good facilities  and working  environments  such as this are 
essential  in order  to attract  the right calibre  of staff.  Another  related  change  has 
been a much-simplified  calf  rearing  system,  with all cows now calving  outside.
We have been working  towards  these decisions  over the past 3 years and it 
can be said that this was the start of a constantly  evolving  strategic  planning  
exercise.  At around  the same stage we realised  that we had reached  an impasse  
as regards  the strategic  direction  of the business.
In developing  this strategic  plan, we had 2 options  for growth.  Options  
which  every  farmer  here will face sooner  or later.
To continue  vertical growth within farming,  or pursue a strategy  of 
horizontal  growth  into other areas. (By vertical  growth,  I mean growing  one 
single business,  which in our case is dairy farming,  and concentrating  all 
growth  in that single  area).  But pure vertical  growth  was becoming  increasingly  
more  difficult.  Vertical  growth  within  farming  would  have been within  our area 
of expertise,  the area that we know  best. But it is in a relatively  low return  area. 
We would  have been putting  all our eggs in one basket,  in an industry  where  we 
are price takers  rather  than price makers.  The business  would  have been 100%  
exposed  to the vagrancies  of GATT,  and other areas outside  of our control.  
Strategically  we felt that this was not the correct  option.  We wanted  to maintain  
control  over the growth  of our business.  We wanted  the decisions  that we make,  
not the decisions  of others,  to be the ones which  influence  the direction  of our 
lives. There  are a number  of key steps,  which  we took to control  that direction.  
Firstly  we sat down and had a good look at where  we were. We clarified  our 
goals in life, which helped  us to decide  where we wanted  to be. Then we 
decided  on a strategy  to get from where  we were, to where we wanted  to be. 
This strategic  plan is our road map for growth.  Like any road map, it has to be 
referred  to occasionally  to confirm  direction,  and is absolutely  essential  if one 
is to arrive  in the correct  place at the right time. When  we looked  at our plan, 
it became  clear that the option  of horizontal  growth  (which  I would  define  as 
growing  the business  simultaneously  in a number  of different  areas)  was what 
we needed  to achieve  our strategic  objectives.
By doing  this;
Assets  were spread  across  sectors,  reducing  risk.
58
We were able to achieve  a higher  return  on equity  than in farming.
We were able to continue  farming,  which  is still first choice.
We were able to operate  in an environment  not controlled  by quotas,  etc.
We would  end up with more liquid  type assets  spread  across  different  sectors.  
And most importantly  of all, the challenge  was exciting.
It is one thing  to talk about  doing  this; it is an entirely  different  matter  to do 
it successfully.  The first step was for me to increase  my knowledge  in the area 
of growth  outside  farming.  If there is one message  to be taken from today,  it is 
that this step is absolutely  vital. As Bill Clinton  said, “Knowledge  is power ”.
Informed  decisions  can only be taken with sufficient  knowledge.  Strategic  
plans can only be addressed  with knowledge  of the options.  Detailed  research  
and planning  is only possible  with sufficient  knowledge.  This careful  research  
and planning  is paramount  to reducing  risk and maximizing  returns.  I would  
place such emphasis  on what I call knowledge  management,  that now at least 
50% of my time is spent  on study and research.  It is an ongoing  process,  one 
which is never complete,  but one which I find hugely stimulating  and 
enjoyable.
All this of course,  takes one major  input, which  is time. Very early on we 
had identified  the need to free up time for what I call knowledge  management.  
This single decision  of course had far reaching  implications  for the farm 
business.  It was the driving  force  behind  the decision  to move  to 100%  autumn  
calving,  the decision  to set up a milking  platform  and a simple,  labour  efficient  
environment  on farm. These decisions  were not taken lightly,  and resulted  
from a hard-earned  lesson.  The move from on farm manager  to off farm was 
one of the most difficult  transitions  that I have ever made. I felt that I could  
easily delegate,  with efficiency  to follow.  Nothing  could have been further 
from the truth. The complicated,  split calving  unfocused  system  put enormous  
pressures  on everyone  concerned.  Lessons  learned  include  the need for 
measurement,  monitoring  and regular  communication  with top quality  staff 
At this stage  I will outline  what  we consider  to be the critical  factors  which  
are necessary  to grow a farm business.
- Firstly,  a clear, precise  well thought  out strategic  plan is essential.  If we 
don’t know where we want to go, or if we don’t have a road map to get 
there, we have little chance  of reaching  our destination.
- Competency.  Going  outside  one’s area of expertise,  (which  in our case is 
dairy farming)  is fraught  with risk. We have to be very clear  and honest  with  
ourselves,  in making  sure that we have the competency  to achieve  a certain  
goal. Competency  can only be achieved  by setting  aside time for study  and 
research.
- We target return on equity  as the benchmark  when evaluating  investment  
decisions.  (This is the return we get from our own money  invested,  as 
opposed  to return on capital,  which would be total money  invested  in a 
business).  A good example  can be got when comparing  total returns  from 
properly  or equity investment.  Return  on capital employed  is normally  
higher for equities,  but when  the higher  gearing  is taken  into consideration,  
property  investment  quickly  catches  up.
59
- We try to maximise  free cash in all areas of the business.  I would  describe 
free cash as the surplus  available  for reinvestment  each year after paying  all 
costs. These  costs would  include  taxation,  drawings  and necessary  capital  
expenditure.  Free cash can also include  money introduced  from other  
sources.  As the saying  goes, “cash is king”. This is the driving  force  behind  
all business  growth  and should  not be understated.  Every  effort should  be 
made to maximise  free cash from a business.
- It is important  to get scale in any investment.  One is left with far more  profit  
by getting  a return  of 15% on an investment  of £100k  rather  than a return  
of 25% on an investment  of £5k.
- Prudent  risk analysis  is one of the keys to successful  investing.  Generally 
speaking,  the higher  the potential  returns,  the higher  the risk. Risk has to be 
analysed  very carefully,  and it possible  ring fenced  against  damaging  other  
parts of the business.  Properly  planned,  spreading  one’s risk across  asset  
classes  greatly  reduces  overall  risk. We believe  that it never  pays to put the 
overall  business  at risk.
- Proper  tax planning  is essential  as a business  grows.  While  it rarely  makes  
sense  to invest  from a pure tax saving  point  of view,  one should  always  bear 
in mind the tax consequences  of any investment.  I would  also add that it 
never  makes  sense to operate  outside  the system.  All business  transactions 
should  be totally  legal.  In the relatively  benign  taxation  environment,  which  
we operate  in, the moral  and financial  consequences  of doing  otherwise,  are 
sheer lunacy.
- Time is precious.  As a business  grows  time becomes  a very limiting  factor.  
For that reason  we would  have a bias towards  passive  investments.  These  
would include  equities  and certain  types of property  investment.  Time is 
our greatest  limiting  resource,  and has to be jealously  guarded.
- In today ’s environment,  people  are among  the most valuable  assets  of any 
business.  A trusting,  open, 2-way  relationship  is essential  with all people 
involved  with the business.  This includes  farm management,  staff, bankers,  
accountants  and fellow  professionals.  Time  should  also be taken  to identify  
the correct  people  to work with on an ongoing  basis.
So you may ask, what have we done to grow the business  over the last 2 
years?
We are reasonably  happy  with progress  to date. The farm itself  bas been set 
up as a springboard  for growth.  Scale has been achieved  on farm, and 
efficiencies  are such that we would  expect  a sustainable  cash flow. This free 
cash will be used to drive other areas of the business.  Off farm at present  we 
have a 3-pronged  approach  to growth.
- We have set up a fledgling  properly  development  company.  We would  look
at this enterprise  as a driver  of free cash, for investment  in other  areas  of the 
business.  While the returns  are not as regular  and predictable  as a dairy  
farm, they are quite acceptable  if the deal is correct.
- Property  investment.  Two years ago we made a commercial  property  
investment.  We would  regard  this investment  as low risk, and because  it is 
in a different  asset class, it fits well with the overall  strategic  plan.
60
- Equity investment.  We would regard short-term  equity investment  as 
relatively  high risk, so it has to be managed  very carefully.  A lot of time and 
effort  has to be put into researching  the best companies.  This is particularly 
true in the technology  area. While  there are some great opportunities,  there  
are a lot of over hyped  companies  in this sector,  with poor fundamentals  and 
a poor business  model,  so great care has to be taken.  Viewed  over the longer  
term, we would  consider  equity  investment  in blue chips as being low risk. 
Properly  managed,  the returns  from this type of investment  are just too high 
to ignore.  We would  expect  to average  at least 15% compounded  on capital,  
while  in practice  to date, we have exceeded  this figure.
As dairy farmers  we see ourselves  as being in a perfect  position  to exploit 
these opportunities.  Efficient  dairy farmers  should  be a banker ’s dream,  with 
regular  cash flow and a large  asset base for security.  This gives  ample  scope  for 
debt servicing.  We would regard money  as a commodity,  to be traded and 
bargained  for in the same way as we may trade with a feed compounder.  It is 
essential,  of course,  to get a return substantially  higher  than the cost of that 
money.  Using the bank ’s money,  in the form of leveraging,  is the key to 
achieving  a high return on equity.  This is an approach,  which may not suit 
everybody,  but we are fortunate,  in that we both have a high sleep factor  when  
it comes  to borrowings.
Going  forward,  there  are many  options  for the business  to grow.  We will not 
rule out expansion  in dairying,  as it is the business  that we know  and enjoy  best. 
As the home farm is producing  close to maximum  capacity,  the next move  
would  have to be a stand-alone  operation.  In the future  it is a distinct  possibility 
that all farm machinery  will be sold, (bar the quad),  and all work  contracted  in. 
When calculated,  the opportunity  cost of owning  machinery  is huge. This 
would  free up cash for investment  in growth  areas,  while  allowing  staff  time to 
focus  on the important  jobs of grass and cow management.  We would  also see 
quota  purchase,  at realistic  prices,  as making  excellent  commercial  sense.
We would  view continued  equity  investment  as the core part of the strategy.  
Excellent  returns  over time, combined  with liquidity  and deferred  taxation,  
make  this form of business  growth  compelling.
We will make sure that any decisions  we take will fit in with the overall  
strategic  plan. We will continue  to prioritize  knowledge  management,  setting  
time aside to upgrade  competence  and skills.
When  it comes  to evaluating  an opportunity,  these decisions  will be based  
on what we call the REST  principal.
R RISK Evaluate  risk
E EQUITY  Benchmark  return  on equity
S SCALE  Look  for scale
T TIME Guard  our time jealously.
Success  for us is in achieving  our goals. We strongly  believe  that if we 
adhere to these principals,  we will, over time, achieve  the personal  and 
financial  goals that we desire.
61
Breeding  High  Quality  Forage  For 
Sustainable  Dairy  Farming  - 
A Multidisciplinary  Approach
M. HUMPHREYS,  L. MILLER  & J. MOORBY
Institute  of Grassland  and Environmental  Research,  Plas Gogerddan,  
Aberystwyth,  Ceredigion,  Wales, SY23 3EB, UK
At around  £45 t-> dry matter,  grazed  grass is about half the cost of grass  
silage and one-third  the cost of concentrates.  Reseeded  swards  containing 
improved  modern  ryegrass  varieties  produce  dry matter  yields  approaching  15 
t ha‘* over a grazing  season.  For a 250 day grazing  season  this amounts  to an 
average  grass yield of 60 kg ha-id- ‘. At a stocking  rate of around  2 cows ha-' 
and with good grazing  management,  daily intakes  of 15 kg DM per cow, are 
reasonable  to attain  and should  be sufficient  to achieve  a daily milk yield of 18 
litres.  A potential  target  would  be 20 kg DM intake  per day supporting  a daily  
milk yield of 30 litres. The maximum  yield potential  of ryegrass  in temperate  
regions  has been estimated  (Cooper,  1969) as 29 t DM ha-‘ for a grazing  
season  - around 100 kg ha^'id'k  The best diploid  ryegrass  varieties  on the 
current  UK Recommended  List produce  annual yields of 17 t DM and in 
Ireland  this increases  to over 18 t. Under  a 5-cut  system  with 350 kg N, some  
of the newest  IGER ryegrass  varieties  produce  as much as 25 t. It has been 
estimated  (Humphreys  1999) that the average  rate of genetic  gain for dry 
matter  yield in forage  crops is 4% decade"'  and therefore  we should  expect  
continued  improvement  in yield over at least the next 30 years. Past 
improvements  have been aided by greater  understanding  of grass growth  and 
development  and by better  measurement  techniques,  including  the use of plot 
harvesters  which  enable  rapid  evaluation  of sward  performance  rather  than  just 
relying  on spaced  plant  measurements.  In the future  progress  will be aided by 
better understanding  of the genetics  of important  traits. Grass is a complex  
crop and in assessing  its value,  attributes  other  than total dry matter  yield are 
important  to consider.  The overall  measure  of progress  in forage breeding  
should  be measured  in terms of its impact  on the production  efficiency  and 
quality  of milk and meat and the sustainability  of production  systems  taking  
into account  animal  welfare  and the agricultural  environment.
Breeding  objeetives
Initially  grass breeding  at the Welsh Plant Breeding  Station,  in common  
with other  European  breeders,  concentrated  on increasing  dry matter  yield and 
growth potential  during the period up to flowering.  Over-production  of 
ruminant  products  from the early 70’s onwards  led to breeding  objectives  
being targeted  more towards  increasing  the efficiency  of ruminant  production
62
in order to maintain  farm profitability  without  increasing  output.  Good dry 
matter  yield was still necessary,  but traits like nitrogen-use  efficiency  (Wilkins  
et al., 1997),  nutritive  quality  (Humphreys,  1995)  and compatibility  with white  
clover  became  increasingly  important.  Also from the mid 60’s onwards  there  
was a rapid decline  in the use of species  other  than ryegrass  and the situation  
at present  is that over 90% of the grass seed sown in N.W. Europe  comprises 
Italian,  perennial  and hybrid  ryegrasses.  As we start the new Millennium,  there  
is increasing  emphasis  on sustainability  in farming  systems  with on-farm  
produced  feed assuming  greater  importance.  A key element  in the efficiency  of 
these systems  is to optimise  the protein/energy  balance  in the rumen and 
associated  input  costs.  The survival  of livestock  producers  will be linked  to the 
production  from fewer,  better  quality  animals  giving  a better  quality  product.
High quality  forage  for ruminant  production
Forage  crop breeders  have made significant  advances  in improving  the 
energy  value of grasses  through  increased  digestibility  and sugar  content  but 
there is also a need to produce  more on-farm  plant protein.  Increasing  use of 
legume  protein  will help in this respect  but sustainable  systems  of ruminant 
production  are impeded  by generally  low utilisation  of forage  protein.  Up to 
40% of the protein  in fresh forage  may be lost as ammonia  because  of the 
inability  of rumen microbes  to capture  the nitrogen  released  during the 
breakdown  of plant proteins.  If sources  of readily  available  energy  such as 
sugars  are limited  in the rumen,  large quantities  of ammonia  may be absorbed  
before  microbe  assimilation  into protein  occurs.  Significant  improvements  in
Fig. 1 - Grass  sugar  content  (annual  field data).  The upper  line is from  a 
hybrid  perennial  ryegrass  (AberDove)  bred for elevated  sugar  content  
and is compared  to the lower  line from  a normal  (control)  hybrid  ryegrass  
(AberElan).  Line breaks  indicate  where  grasses  were cut for silage  (Data  
courtesy  of L. A. Miller and J. M. Moorby,  members  of the LINK  
Sustainable  Livestock  Production  sugargrass  consortium).
63
the use of forage protein  can be made by providing  additional  energy to 
increase  the N capture  by rumen  microbes.  Development  of high-sugar  grasses  
which accumulate  10-15%  more sugars in leaves and stems (Figure 1) has 
achieved  this (Humphreys,  1989).  The benefits  of feeding  high-sugar  grasses  
(which  have only a slightly  reduced  crude protein  (%CP)  content)  to dairy  
cows are evident  in terms of milk production  and milk protein  content  (Table  
1).
Further  potential  to increase  utilisation  of forage protein  by breeding  to 
reduce  the rate of protein  breakdown  may also exist. The important  role that 
plant enzymes  have in rumen protein  degradation  has only recently  been 
appreciated  (Theodorou  et al. 1996) and breeding  grasses  to modify  plant  
enzyme  activity  could therefore  have far reaching  consequences  in terms of 
efficient  use of N in animal  production.
Table 1
Effects  of water-soluble  sugar  content  (WSC)  of grass  on milk yield and the 
protein  content  of milk (after  Miller  et al. 1999a)
WSC
%CP
%Milk yield  
kg d-‘Tme protein  in 
milk g d"'
High sugar  ryegras 20.1 9.2 15.3 512
Normal  ryegrass 12.9 10.6 12.6 417
Table  2
Effects  of water-soluble  sugar  content  (WSC)  of grass  on nitrogen  partitioning  
into milk and urine  (after  Miller  et al. 1999b)
WSC
%CP
%N intake  g d'' N output g d '
Milk Urine
High sugar  ryegrass 20.1 9.2 268 82  71
Normal  ryegrass 12.9 10.6 278 69 100
As well as direct  nutritional  effects,  there are environmental  benefits  to be 
gained from incorporating  high-sugar  grasses  into the diet of ruminants.  
Increasing  the availability  of energy  in the rumen alters N metabolism  and 
utilisation  and reduces  the partitioning  of excess  N into excreted  dung and 
urine (Table 2). In turn this reduces  the production  of pollutants,  such as 
ammonia  volatilized  from excreted  urea and nitrous  oxide produced  from 
urine derived  N, and in grazed  swards  reduces  potential  for nitrate  leaching.  
Improving  the efficiency  of rumen  fermentation  with high-sugar  grasses  may 
also reduce  methane  emissions.
Supermarkets  and consumers  are increasingly  dictating  the quality  of the 
product  they require  and both animal  and plant breeders  must consider  traits 
which  improve  the acceptability  and nutritional  benefits  of milk and meat.  For
64
example,  ruminant  nutritionists  in IGER  have shown  that grasses,  especially 
Italian  ryegrass,  contain  high levels of poly-unsaturated  fatty acids (PUFAs)  
which  may be incorporated  into ruminant  products  and help to reduce  blood  
cholesterol  levels  in consumers.  This is encouraging  grass  breeders  to develop  
selection  criteria  for increasing  the levels of omega-3  linoleic  acid in their 
breeding  material.  Past breeding  programmes  have been successful  in 
increasing  the mineral  content  of forage (Moseley  and Baker, 1991) but, 
undoubtedly,  considerable  potential  remains  to be exploited.
The value  of extending  grazing  seasons
As stated  earlier,  increased  reliance  on grazed  grass for milk production  is 
a key element  in reducing  the costs and increasing  the profitability  of dairy  
enterprises.  To facilitate  this farmers  can develop  the infrastructure  and 
management  practices  that allow  them to extend  the grazing  season  both in the 
spring  and into the autumn.  This may include  the development  of improved 
access to pastures  with cow tracks;  extra  field entry  points  to reduce  the impact 
of poaching;  and systems  of rotationally  grazed paddocks  with constant 
monitoring  of grass cover  to ensure  a continuous  supply  of fresh grass in front 
of the cows.  There  is also considerable  potential  for grass breeders  to produce  
new varieties  to assist  with this.
In spring,  the main limitation  to grass growth  in the UK is low temperature 
as the amount  of sunlight  is relatively  high. However  in autumn,  growth  is 
more restricted  by lack of light especially  when there is also cloud  cover.  On 
average  the daily sunlight  level at the end of the growing  season  is 25% of that 
at the beginning.  Potential  for growth  in late autumn  and early spring  is also 
conditioned  by the developmental  state of the grass. Initiation  of flowering  
acts as a stimulus  to leaf growth  and early spring  growth  in grasses  is often  
linked with early flowering.  However  an early heading  date can be 
disadvantageous  in terms  of quality  as digestibility  is significantly  reduced  in 
stemmy as compared  to leafy spring growth.  Humphreys  (1984) and 
Wilkins  (1985) used crosses  between  early and late flowering  plants from 
different  parts of Europe  to improve  spring  yield  without  an early heading  date 
in perennial  ryegrass  and to improve  the general consistency  of yield  
throughout  the year. This resulted  in the development  of varieties  such as 
AberDart.
Italian ryegrasses  also demonstrate  a favourable  relationship  between 
spring growth and heading  date in that although  they generally  have 
intermediate  heading  dates, spring growth is greater  than in many early  
heading  perennial  ryegrasses.  This characteristic  has been exploited  in 
tetraploid  hybrids  between  Italian and perennial  ryegrass  (Jones and 
Humphreys,  1993) and there is increasing  appreciation  of the extent  to which  
tetraploid  hybrid ryegrasses  such as AberLinnet  can maintain  productive 
swards  during  extended  growing  seasons.  Hybrid  ryegrasses  combine  good  
establishment  and early growth  characteristics  from Italian ryegrass  with 
greater  persistence  and tillering  capacity  from perennial.  During  the growing  
season,  hybrids  generally  behave  in a similar  way to Italian  ryegrass  up to ear
65
emergence  after which  there  is a tendency  to switch  towards  perennial  ryegrass  
traits and a high tillering  leafy regrowth  is produced.  This confers  advantages  
both in terms of persistency  and mid-late  season  nutritive  quality.  The first 
hybrid  ryegrass  tended  to be more similar  to Italian than perennial  ryegrass.  
However,  more intermediate  types  with a range  of heading  dates  are now being  
developed  to allow greater  flexibility  in cutting  and grazing  managements  
(Jones and Humphreys,  1999). There are also indications  that the seasonal  
growth  of swards  may be improved  further  by growing  mixtures  of different  
hybrid varieties  which express  different  degrees  of Italian and perennial  
ryegrass  characteristics  and have a range  of heading  dates.
Potential  for extending  the growth  of perennial  swards  into the autumn  is 
generally  associated  with late flowering  in perennial  ryegrass  but is also found  
in persistent  tetraploid  ryegrass  hybrids  which have intermediate  heading  
dates.  In order  to reduce  sward  damage  by grazing  animals,  grass breeding  for 
late season  growth  should  ensure  that high tiller numbers  are maintained  in 
swards  together  with a prostrate  growth  habit and strong  root growth.  These  
characteristics  are rather neglected  in many European  perennial  ryegrass  
breeding  programmes  which  tend to emphasise  yield potential  associated  with 
reproductive  development  during  the early part of the growing  season.
This has tended  to result in varieties  with an erect growth  habit which  
produce  fairly  open swards.  Another  major  objective  should  be to maintain  the 
nutritive  value  of grass at a higher  level towards  the end of the grazing  season.  
The digestibility  of perennial  ryegrass  declines  during  the late summer  and 
autumn  approaches  levels of around  60% despite  a high leaf content  partly  
because  of low sugar levels.  Also as growth  rates decrease  in the autumn,  the 
proportion  of senescent  leaves  in grass swards  increases.  Therefore  staygreen  
grasses  with a high sugar  content  would  be desirable  breeding  targets.
Environmental  stress  tolerance
As greater  demands  are made  on swards  in terms  of production  and quality  
over an increasing  number  of years, the importance  of tolerance  to diseases,  
climate  and soil increases.  Fortunately  grasses  occur naturally  over a great  
range of environments  and geographical  areas and a large range of genetic  
variation  for environmental  stress tolerance  can be found.  While ryegrasses  
have many desirable  attributes,  in terms of nutritive  value, seasonal  
productivity  and response  to nitrogen  fertiliser,  they are not highly  adapted  to 
cope with extreme  stress  conditions  although  a considerable  range  of ecotypic  
variation  can be found.  Fescues  often have better  persistency  than ryegrasses  
when exposed  to severe stresses  but have major agronomic  weaknesses  
including  slow establishment,  poor regrowth  potential  and low nutritive  
quality.  Therefore,  a combination  of traits from ryegrass  and fescue  species  
could  help to extend  useful  seasonal  production  and breeding  from ryegrass  x 
fescue  hybrids  is proving  to be successful.  Controlled  introgression  between  
ryegrasses  and fescues  has been successful  in transferring  good summer  
growth  from meadow  fescue into perennial  ryegrass  (Humphreys  1993) and 
drought  tolerance  from tall fescue  into Italian  ryegrass  (Thomas  et al. 1995).
66
Improved  winter  hardiness  has also been transferred  from meadow  fescue  into 
ryegrasses  (Humphreys  & Honne  1995).
Future  opportunities  for grass breeding  using  new genetic  information
Genetic  improvement  through  breeding  depends  on the extent to which  
breeders  can identify  and select desirable  genes. Important  agronomic  traits  
are often governed  by a number  of genes  whose  effects  merge  into each other 
and which  cannot  be determined  individually  from normal  measurements  on 
individuals.  However  progress  can be made on identifying  individual  genes  
through  genetic  mapping  based  on molecular  markers,  the identification  of so- 
called quantitative  trait loci (QTL)  and the use of marker-assisted  selection.  
The concept  of genetic  fingerprinting  is now well established  in many areas  
from forensics  through  to plant and animal  breeding.  It depends  on being  able 
to detect  differences  in the DNA  composition  of individuals  through  a variety  
of techniques  and thus produce  genetic  markers  which  can be associated  with 
genes  of value  to breeders.  Such  work  is progressing  with ryegrass  in a number 
of countries  including  UK, France,  Belgium,  Holland,  Japan and Australia.  
Some of this is being  done as part of European  projects  such as EGRAM  and 
NIMGRASS  and also by collaboration  in an International  Lolium  Genome  
Initiative  (ILGI, Forster,  2000). At IGER good progress  is being made in 
mapping  genes  associated  with sugar  accumulation  in the leaves  and stems  of 
ryegrass.  Marker  selections  are being made to confirm  the value of specific  
genes in selecting  for consistent  expression  of high sugar levels in leaves.  
Marker  assisted  introgression  has also been used to monitor  the transfer  genes  
from fescues  into ryegrass  (Thomas  et al. 1995).
Evidence  of the benefits  of grass  breeding  in practice
Demonstration  trials to illustrate  the benefits  of improved  varieties  have 
been set up in various  parts of the UK as part of a ‘Practice  into Profit ’ 
initiative  supported  by MAFE,  MDC, MLC and a number  of commercial  
organisations  including  Germinal  Holdings.  Results  are emerging  (Moseley  
pers. com.)  which  show  that good utilisation  of improved  grassland  can result 
in considerable  savings  in production  costs. For example,  the higher  yields  
achieved  from new hybrid and perennial  ryegrass  mixtures  on dairy farms  
allowed sufficient  silage  to be made  from 2 cuts rather  than 3. This reduced  the 
unit cost of silage from around  £80 f' DM to £60 overall.  New grazing  
mixtures  have also proved  very suitable  for the extended  grazing  now being  
practised  by some of the best UK dairy farmers.  Sward  growth  rates in spring  
were up to 40% greater  in areas as diverse  as Cumbria  in the North and 
Cornwall  in the South  and, on average,  the farms  turned  out 33 days earlier.  At 
Gelli Aur in Carmarthen  they recorded  an increase  in milk yield of 1.51 
cow'd'*  and a reduction  of 3.5 kg cow'd ”' in silage  intake.  The combined 
value of this was 56 p cow'd ’' and for the 100 cow herd total savings  during  
spring was £1900.  Mixtures  of improved  grasses  together  with appropriate 
management  has, on average,  increased  milk yield from forage  from 50% to 
63% and yield from grazed  grass from 30% to 43% while maintaining  an
67
average  production  of around  6500 1 cow'. All this information  provides  
strong justification  for forage breeding  as farmers receive considerable 
benefits  from improved  varieties  at no extra cost.
Conclusions
It is clear  that breeding  high quality  grasses  for sustainable  dairy farming  is 
a complex  subject  which  requires  a multidisciplinary  approach.  Breeding  work  
at IGER  has benefited  considerably  from bringing  together  expertise  in plant  
genetics  and breeding  with expertise  in rumen microbiology  and animal  
nutrition.  This was a desirable  consequence  of the amalgamation,  in the early  
1990s, of the Welsh Plant Breeding  Station with the Grassland  Research  
Institute  and part of the National  Institute  for Research  in Dairying.  The 
benefits  of this are now emerging  in work demonstrating  the value of high-  
sugar grasses which serves as a model for future research.  However 
investment  in research  on forage crops is increasingly  viewed in an 
international  context.  Although  forages  (apart from maize and lucerne)  are 
often regarded  as low-profit  crops by the international  seed industry,  they 
underpin  ruminant  livestock  industries  which  account  for a high proportion  of 
national  agricultural  output  in many western  European  countries,  particularly  
the UK and Ireland.  They are also important  in Eastern  Europe,  Australia,  
South America,  and S. Africa, vital to New Zealand  and of increasing  
importance  in developing  countries  seeking  to improve  human nutrition.  
International  collaboration  is vital to achieve  the progress  which  is necessary  
and attainable.  Eorage  breeders  in Europe  have a long history  of collaboration  
through  organisations  such as EUCARPIA  (European  Association  for 
Research  on Plant Breeding)  and it is evident  that this is spreading  beyond  
Europe.  European  projects  such as NIMGRASS  (Lower  Nitrogen  Losses  in 
Dairy  Earming  through  Marker  Assisted  Breeding  for Nitrogen  Use Efficiency  
and feeding  Value  in Ryegrass)  have arisen  out of EUCARPIA  and links have 
spread to other countries.  Eor example,  the International  Lolium  Genome  
Initiative  (ILGI)  is coordinated  out of Australia  and involves  Japan  and USA  
as well as several  European  countries.  Breeder ’s privilege,  which is part of 
Plant Breeders  Rights legislation,  ensures  fairly free movement  of genetic  
resources,  although  the impact  of patents  will need to be assessed  in the future.  
With regard  to work on ruminant  nutrition  there are good opportunities  for 
further collaboration  on grazing  and forage conservation.  Similarities  in 
grassland  utilisation  between  the west of the UK and Ireland  makes  them ideal 
research  partners  as the recent ‘SWEETGRASS ’ Framework  V EC proposal  
illustrates.  Grassland  is an extremely  valuable  resource  and deserves  to be 
treated  as a proper  crop. The nutrition  it can provide  ruminants  in terms of 
energy  and protein  should  be regarded  in the same way as feed concentrates 
and its potential  to support  sustainable  livestock  farming  should be fully 
exploited.
Acknowledgements
Some of the research  reported  in this paper arises from a MAFE  LINK  
Sustainable  Livestock  Programme,  involving  industrial  support  from MDC,
68
MLC and Germinal  Holdings.  Other  IGER  research  referred  to is also funded  
by BBSRC  and the EC.
References
Cooper  J. P. (1969).  Potential  forage production.  Occasional  Symposium  No. 5, British  
Grassland  Society,  pp.5-13
Forster.  J. (2000).  The International  Lolium  Genome  Initiative  Forum,  Plant & Animal  
Genome  VIII conference  January  9-12, 2000, San Diego,  California.
Humphreys,  M. O. (1984). Breeding  for seasonal  consistency  in perennial  ryegrass  for 
pastures.  In; Proceedings  of the Eucarpia  Fodder  Crops Section Meeting.  Freising-  
Weihenstephan  1984. (Ed. U. Simon)  57-70.
Humphreys.  M. O. (1989).  Water-soluble  carbohydrates  in perennial  ryegrass  breeding.  II. 
Cultivar  and hybrid  performance  in cut plots. Grass  and Forage  Science.  44, 237-244,
Humphreys,  M. C). (1993).  Genetic  resources  for improved  climatic  adaptation  within  the 
ryegrass/fescue  complex.  In: Proceedings  of COST  814 Workshop.  Aberystwyth  pp. 281- 
287.
Humphreys.  M. O. (1995)  Variation  in the carbohydrate  and protein  content  of ryegrasses:  
Potential  for genetic manipulation.  In; Breeding  for Quality  (Eds. D. Reheul & A. 
Ghesquiere).  Proceedings  of 19th Eucarpia  Fodder  Crops Section  Meeting,  Brugge,  
Belgium,  pp. 165-172.
Humphreys,  M. O. (1999).  The Contribution  of Conventional  Plant Breeding  to Forage  Crop 
Improvement.  Proceedings  of XVIII  International  Grassland  Congress,  Canada.  Vol. HI, 
pp. 71-78.
Humphreys,  M. O. & Honnie,  B. 1. (1995). Potential  for improved  winterhardiness  in 
ryegrass  through hybridisation  with fescues. In: Adaptation  in Plant Breeding.  
Proceedings  of XIV Eucarpia  Congress  Jyvaskyla,  Finland,  July 31 - August  4, 1995,  
University  of Jyvaskyla,  pp. 79.
Jones. M. LL. & Humphreys,  M. O. (1993). Progress  in breeding  interspecific  hybrid  
ryegrasses.  Grass  and Forage  Science.  48, 18-25.
Jones. M. LL. & Humphreys,  M. O. (1999).  Harnessing  hybrids  for home produced  feed. 
IGER  Innovations  3, 30-33.
Miller,  L. A., M.A. Neville,  M, A., Baker,  D. H., Evans,  R. T., Theodorou.  M, K., Macrea,  J. 
C,, Humphreys,  M. O. & Moorby.  J. M. (1999a).  Milk production  from dairy cows  
offered  perennial  ryegrass  selected  for high water soluble  carbohydrate  concentrations  
compared  to a control grass. British Society  of Animal Science  Annual Meeting,  
Scarborough.
Miller,  L. A., Theodorou,  M. K., Macrea,  J. C., Evans,  R. T., Adesogan,  A. T., Humphreys,  
M. O., Scollan  M. D. & Moorby.  J. M. (1999b).  Milk production  and N partitioning  
responses  in dairy cows offered perennial  ryegrass  selected  for high water soluble  
carbohydrate  concentrations.  . IX International  Symposium  on Ruminant  Physiology,  17- 
22 October,  Pretoria.  South  Africa.
Moseley,  G. & Baker,  D. H. (1991).  The efficacy  of a high magnesium  grass cultivar  in 
controlling  hypomagnesaemia  in grazing  animals.  Grass  Forage  Sci. 46: 375-380.
Theodorou,  M. K., Merry,  R. J. & Thomas,  H, (1996).  Is proteolysis  in the rumen  of grazing  
animals  mediated  by plant enzymes?  British  Journal  of Nutrition  75, 507.
Thomas,  H., Humphreys,  M. W., Ghesquiere,  M., Humphreys,  M. O. & Mousset,  C. (1995).  
Improvement  of drought  resistance  in Lolium by introgression  from Festuca.  
Proceedings  of  a Congress  on Integrated  Studies  on Drought  Tolerance  of  Higher  Plants,  
Montpellier,  France,  August  31-2 September  1995.
Wilkins,  P. W. (1985). Breeding  for dry matter yield in perennial  ryegrass  by wide 
hybridisation  and recurrent  selection.  Pages 25-30 in J. Sjodin, ed. New methods,  
techniques  and applications  in fodder  crop breeding.  Proc. 13th Eucarpia  Fodder  Crops  
Section  Meeting,  Svalov,  Sweden.
Wilkins,  P. W., Macduff,  J. H., Raistock,  N. & Collison,  M. (1997).  Varietal  differences  in 
perennial  ryegrass  for nitrogen  use efficiency  in leaf growth  following  defoliation:  
perfonnance  in flowing  solution  culture  and its relationship  to yield under simulated  
grazing  in the field. Euphytica  98. 109-119.
69
Grazed  Grass  as a Feed  for 
Dairy  Cows
P. DILLON  AND G. STAKELUM  
Teagasc,  Dairy  Research  Centre,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
The dairy industry  in Ireland  is facing  a far more competitive  environment  
than ever before.  Driven  by changes  in the Common  Agricultural  Policy  and 
World  Trade Agreements,  the industry  is undergoing  massive  changes  both 
nationally  and internationally  and faces  many  new challenges.  Grassland  is the 
single  most important  agricultural  resource  in Ireland  and is the pivot around  
which  the dairy industry  revolves.  Successful  dairy farming  in Ireland  is due 
to a large extent  to the efficient  conversion  of grass  to milk.  Grass  when  grazed  
efficiently  is by far the cheapest  feed available  on the dairy farm (Dillon,  Cliffe  
and Hurley,  1991). Grazing  management  should  aim to provide  a supply  of 
nutritious  herbage  over the grazing  season,  at low cost, avoiding  wastage  and 
inefficient  utilisation  of herbage  by the animal,  and maintaining  the productive  
capacity  of the sward.  The needs  of both the animal  and the sward  need to be 
considered,  and severe  adverse  effects  on either  should  be avoided.
Our understanding  of the feeding  and management  of the dairy herd has 
improved  in recent  years. Some of the changes  that have occurred  have been 
influenced  by the application  of the EU milk quota regime.  Considerable 
changes  in our thinking  in relation  to calving  date, pasture  quality  and more  
recently  in relation  to the use of pasture measurement,  have occurred.  
Likewise  there is the realisation  that the cow of today is not the same as that 
of yesterday.  The blueprint  for efficient  milk production  in Ireland  
recommended  from Moorepark  has changed  to reflect  this new reality.  This 
paper attempts  to highlight  the most important  issues in relation  to grazed  
grass as a feed in Irish milk production  systems.  These  include:
Nutritive  value  of grazed  grass
Cost competitiveness  in relation  to other  available  feeds  
Potential  production  from grass  
Improving  cow performance  from grass
1. Nutritive  value  of grazed  grass
Table 1 shows  the nutritive  value of well managed  grazed  grass for milk 
production.
Table 1
Chemical  composition  of grazed  grass (g/kg  dm)
Cmde  Protein  (CP)
Neutral  Detergent  Fibre (NDF)
Acid Detergent  Fibre  (ADF)
Water  soluble  carbohydrates  (WSC)180-250
350-400
180-250
150-200
70
Fig. 1 - Chemical  composition  of grazed  grass  over a grazing  season
Figure 1 shows the chemical  composition  of grass (pre-grazing  samples  
above 4 cm) across the season for 1997 from a grazing  experiment  at 
Moorepark  (Buckley,  1999).  Digestibility  is a key nutritive  parameter  and is a 
major determinant  of the metabolizable  energy  content  of grass. Control  of 
grass digestibility  and hence  metabolizable  energy  content  is a critical  element 
of grazing  management  for milk production  in Ireland  (Stakelum  and Dillon,  
1991). This approach  is very different  to other countries  (for example  New 
Zealand  and Australia)  which also produce  a large proportion  of their milk 
from grazed  pasture.  Neutral  detergent  fibre concentrations  of 50 to 60% are 
not uncommon  in New Zealand  and Australian  pastures  in mid-summer 
(Ulyatt  and Waghorn,  1993). Mid season  digestibility  can be as low as 65% 
OMD (Ulyatt, 1980). This is mainly  as a result of the high mid summer 
temperatures  combined  with moisture  deficits. Pastures  in these hotter 
environments  also contain  many sub-tropical  species  (Paspalum  and Kikuyu  
as examples)  which  can be quite low in digestibility  in summer.  Therefore, 
animal  production  from grazed  pasture  in Ireland  has a big advantage  over 
those countries.  It is possible  with good  grazing  management  to produce  a feed 
of high quality  over the whole  grazing  season.  This feed is equal to, and at 
times superior  to, the feed value of concentrate  rations.
2. Cost competitiveness  of grazed  grass
Grazed  grass  has the advantage  of being  a low cost feed.  Additionally,  a low 
fixed cost system  of milk production  can be built around  the utilisation  of 
grazed grass. Both of these factors are equally important  for the 
competitiveness  of systems  of milk production  based on grazed grass. In 
recent  years  a number  of attempts  have been made  to estimate  the comparative 
costs of grazed grass, grass silage and concentrate  feeds in Irish milk
71
production  systems (O’Kiely, 1994, Keady,1999,  Sheehy,1999).  O’Kiely  
(1994)  showed  that grazed  grass was 66% and 40% cheaper  than home  grown  
barley and first cut silage,  respectively.  Keady (1999)  estimated  that grazed  
grass was 23% cheaper  than a three-cut  silage system  while Sheehy  (1999)  
showed  that grazed grass was 50% cheaper  than purchased  concentrate  at 
£ 140/tonne,  while  grass silage  ranged  from being 15% cheaper  to being 23% 
more expensive.  Looking  to the future,  the competitiveness  of grazed  grass  
should  be maintained  even if the intervention  prices of cereals  fall by ?5%.  
However,  increased  silage  costs  due to increased  machinery,  labour  and energy  
costs may outstrip  concentrate  costs.
The common  conclusion  of all these studies is that grazed  grass is the 
cheapest  feed available  and will continue  to be well into the future.  Systems  of 
milk production  in Ireland  in the future  should  continue  to be based  on srazed  
grass. Developments  in grazing  management  cow type, labour use, farm 
infrastructure  and milk harvesting  technology  should  all facilitate  this.
3. Potential  production  from grazed  grass
The optimum  production  (per cow and per unit area) from any system  of 
milk production  across  the world  will depend  on the constraints  in which it 
operates.  These include  milk price regulations,  cost structure  and resources  
available.  World  wide we can see how different  milk production  systems  have 
developed  depending  on these circumstances,  e.g. California  in the U.S.,  
Waikato  in New Zealand,  Friesland  in Netherlands  etc. In all these 
environments  there is an overall  blueprint  for the particular  system  of milk 
production  that is considered  optimum.  Similarly  for Ireland  there is an overall  
blueprint  that we consider  optimum  e.g. The Moorepark  blueprint.  Achieving 
high cow performance  from grazed  pasture  is central  to this system  in Ireland.  
This high cow performance  is achieved  in conjunction  with high rates of grass  
utilisation.  Table  2 summarises  the herbage  allowance  by herbage  intake/milk  
yield relationship  for a series  of experiments  carried  out at Moorepark  (Maher 
et ah, 1997, 1998).
The results  show that the optimum  daily herbage  allowance  above  4 cm is 
20kg DM for dairy cows with a RBI (95) of 110. The lower  grass allowance  
(16 to 17kg DM) resulted  in a very low post-grazing  height.  This in turn results
Table  2
Effect  of daily grass  allowance  (kg dm/cow/day)  on milk production,  milk 
protein,  grazing  severity  and intake  of grass
Grass  Allowance  (>4cm)
16-17 20 23-24
Daily  milk yield 22.5 23.6 24.5
Milk protein  % 3.33 3.37 3.39
Post-grazing  sward  height  (cm) 4.5 5.5 6.6
Daily  grass  dmi (kg) 15.3 16.4 17.1
72
in reduced  grass growth for the subsequent  regrowth  periods.  High cow 
performance  is achieved  by maintaining  a constant  supply  of grass  for the herd 
on a daily basis.  Weekly  monitoring  of farm grass  cover  has been shown  to be 
essential  in order  to achieve  this objective  (O’Donovan  et al, 1997).
Increasing  the efficiency  of production  is essential  in order to reduce  the 
cost of food to the consumer.  It is also important  for the economic  and physical  
sustainability  of farming.  Presently,  output  of milk is increasing  at more than 
twice  the growth  in animal  numbers  (Cunningham,  1996).  There  are a number  
of issues  in relation  to the use of high genetic  index sires in Ireland.  These  are 
as follows:
1. Their  performance  on grass based  systems
2. Their  suitability  for seasonal  calving
3. Issues  in relation  to genotype  by feeding  system  interactions  
Results  from our studies  so far indicate  that the current  high genetic  index
cows will achieve  high performance  in our grass based system.  There is no 
indication  of any genotype  by concentrate  feeding  level interaction.  Table 3 
shows how much improved  management  and breeding  has contributed  to 
increased  output  per cow and per hectare  since 1983 in controlled  full lactation  
experiments  at Moorepark.  “Moorepark  1983 ” refers to the performance  that 
was being achieved  when the EU milk quotas were introduced  in 1983.  
“Moorepark  MGI ” and “Moorepark  HGI” refers  to the performance,  which  is 
now achieved  from cows of medium  genetic  index (MGI) and very high 
genetic  index  (HGI),  in similar  feeding  systems.  This has led to an increase  of 
50% and 28% in milk yield per cow and per hectare,  respectively.  It is not 
possible  to separate  precisely  how much  of this increase  resulted  from genetic  
improvement  and how much  from management  plus feeding.
The maintenance  requirement  of the Moorepark  cow of 1983 accounted  for 
44% of its total feed requirements.  The figure  for the HGI cow in these  studies  
is 36%. This has resulted  in an increase  in feed efficiency  of 16%. An increase
Table  3
Evaluation  of the Moorepark  milk production  technology
Moorepark  83 
Pre QuotasMoorepark
MGI*Moorepark  
HGI **
Milk Yield kg/cow 5076 6585 7640
gal/cow 1084 1407 1632
Stocking  Rate cow/ha 2.90 2.60 2.40
Nitrogen kg/ha  380 380 380
Grazed  Grass t DM/cow  3.30 3.69 3.88
Silage t DM/cow  1.40 1.56 1.65
Cone. t DM/cow  0.63 0.63 0.63
Total Intake t DM/cow  5.3 5.9 6.2
* MGI = Medium  Genetic  Index ** HGI = High Genetic  Index  
73
of 500 kg in milk yield without  any changes  in health  and reproductive  costs  
would  increase  margin  per litre by 0.6p (3p/gal)  in a milk quota  environment.  
In a series  of experiments,  carried  out at Moorepark,  daily herbage  intake  was 
measured  from late April to early September  with spring-calving  dairy cows.  
No supplements  were fed to the cows during  this period  and the herds grazed  
to a post-grazing  sward height of between  5.5 and 6.5cm. The production  
characteristics  of the cows  used in this study  are shown  in Table  4. The average  
total lactation  yield was 5440 kg. The range in yields  was from 3867 to 7366  
kg. Multiple  linear regression  analyses  showed  that for each extra 1 kg of 
solids corrected  daily milk yield, daily herbage  intake increased  by 0.41 kg. 
The analyses  also showed  that for each extra 1 kg of body  weight  that an extra  
0.0176  kg of extra herbage  was eaten each day (1.76 kg/extra  100 kg of 
bodyweight).  This indicates  that grass,  as the sole feed, is adequate  from late 
April to early September  for herds of average  total lactation  milk yields of 
5440 kg. This of course  implies  very good grazing  management  in order to 
achieve  the required  farm cover  and post grazing  sward  surface  height  targets.  
We are presently  defining  these relationships  for the higher  index  cows.
Table  4
Production  characteristics  of the cows used in the multiple  linear  regression
analyses
Mean Range SD
Days in milk 134 30-227 41.7
Lactation  Number 3.51 1 -9 2.2
Bodyweight  (kg) 541 399-694 53.5
Grass  DM Intake  (kg) 16.2 8.9-22.3 2.4
Daily milk yield (kg) 20.6 9-32 3.7
Total lactation  milk yield (kg) 5540 3867-7336 785
4. Improving  performance  from grazed  grass
Numerous  experiments  have been conducted  around  the world  to examine  
the effects  of concentrate  supplementation  on the performance  of grazing  dairy  
cows.  Milk production  responses  (kg milk / kg concentrate)  ranged  from 0.32 
(Leaver  et al. 1965),  0.40 (Journet  and Demarquilly,  1979) to 0.50 (Stakelum  
et al. 1988). However,  most of these studies  were carried  out with moderate 
yielding  dairy  cows  with milk  yields  in the region  of 15 to 25 kg/cow/day.  Very 
few studies  have been carried  out with cows yielding  30 to 40 kg/cowMay.  It 
might be expected  that cows with higher yield would partition  a greater 
proportion  of their extra energy  intake  towards  milk rather  than live weight.  
Also, it could be suggested  that grass  per se might  limit potential  intake  with 
such animals.  Because  of the higher  intake requirement  of higher  yielding  
cows, their optimum  daily herbage  allowance  is higher  than lower yielding  
cows (Butler  et al., 1999).  Therefore  at equal stocking  rates, higher  yielding  
cows are at an effectively  higher  grazing  pressure  than lower  yielding  cows.
74
Table  5
Effect  of level of concentrate  input & genetic  merit  (milk yield)  on the 
performance  of springcalving  dairy  cows
MM HM MM HM
Cone,  fed (kg) 695 695 1,340 1,340
Milk yield (kg) 6,576 7,632 7,221 8,142
Fat(%) 4.11 3.76 3.96 3.97
Protein  (%) 3.39 3.37 3.45 3.41
Fat yield (kg) 266 286 285 321
Protein  yield (kg) 222 257 249 277
HM = High Merit,  MM = Medium  Merit
Table  5 shows  the total milk production  for cows  of high (HM)  and medium  
(MM) genetic  merit on two concentrate  input levels (0.7 and 1.3 t/cow).  All 
treatment  groups  were grazed  to similar  postgrazing  sward  heights  in order  to 
equalise  grazing  pressures  across the genetic merit groups. The average  
response  was 1.12 and 0.92 kg milk per kg of extra  concentrate  fed to the HM 
and MM cows,  respectively.  The MM cows in this study would  be considered 
very high yielding  cows in comparison  to cows used in the studies  referred  to 
above.  When  pre-experimental  milk yield was regressed  on experimental  milk 
yield, (ignoring  genotype),  similar  relationships  were found between  pre- 
experimental  and experimental  milk yields  for both concentrate  feeding  levels.  
The slopes  of the two lines were identical  (Figure  2). This indicates  that the 
response  to the extra  concentrate  feeding  level was similar,  regardless  of initial  
milk yield. Milk production  responses,  similar  to that achieved  in this study,  
have been found in a more recent  study at Moorepark.  However  the overall  
responses,  of over a 1 kg of milk/kg  of concentrate  fed, is much higher  than 
published  previously.  Hoden  et al. 0991)  suggest  that the region  for higher 
responses  now, compared  to the older  data, is the substantially  higher  genetic  
merit of the cows. The technology  of grazing,  under  experimental  conditions 
at Moorepark,  is more geared  to achieving  high daily intakes  of grass.  It is not 
at all clear why the immediate  and total lactation  responses  of cows today,  is 
higher  than before.  It would  have been expected  in situations  where  herbage 
intake  was higher,  due to advances  in grass quality  and grazing  management, 
that responses  should  be somewhat  less. Concentrate  type is known  to be 
important  as a factor in determining  both substitution  rates and production 
responses  (Stakelum  and Dillon, 1990). Rumen  overloading  with ammonia 
due to the intake  of excessive  amounts  of degradable  herbage  nitrogen  may 
also be an issue. This can arise due to very high intakes  of herbage  of 24% 
crude  protein  of higher.  Easily  fermentable  supplementary  carbohydrates  may 
be beneficial  in alleviating  this.
Higher  levels  of concentrate  feeding  may be an option  on some  dairy farms  
in the future  where  milk quota  is not limiting  and where  a high stocking  rate
75
^ 30.0 y
E n 25.0 • . 5
® 20.0 • . 
— 2
® ® 15.0. .
9* >»
10.00.71 cone
20.0♦♦
-+- -H
22.0 28.0 30.0 32.0 34.0 36.0 38.0 40.0
I 30.0..
^ 25.0. .
E3 I 20.0 . .
c o>I e 15.0..1.34 1 cone
♦♦
H- -4- -H —I—
36.0-h
20.0 22.0 24.0 26.0 28.0 30.0 32.0 34.0
pre-experimental  milk yield
Fig. 2 - Relationship  between  pre-experimental  and experimental
is carried  in order  to increase  farm production  of milk.  The cost of purchased  
concentrates  may be lower than present  day prices. This may be a more  
competitive  energy  source  than grass silage.
Summary
Grazed  grass is and will remain  the cheapest  feed available  to Irish dairy  
farmers.  In Ireland  it is possible  to achieve  high intakes  of grazed  grass over a 
long grazing  season.  This is equal  to or better  than most temperate  grass areas  
of the world.  The system  facilitates  the operation  of a large herd size with 
relatively  low fixed and labour  costs. For future competitiveness,  issues in 
relation  to the cow best suited  to this system  of milk production  will need to 
be addressed.  Additionally,  the production  system  will need to be compatible  
with the environmental  constraints,  which  are likely  to be imposed  in the near 
future.
References:
Butler,  S. B., Stakelum,  G. K., Murphy,  J. J., O’Mara,  F. P. and Rath,  M. (in press).  The 
relationship  between  milk production  potential  and herbage  intake  of grazing  cows.  
Irish Journal  of  Agricultural  Research.
Buckley,  F. (1999). Effect of genotype  of cow and system of feeding  on milk 
production,  feed intake  and nutrient  utilisation  of spring-calving  Holstein-Friesian 
Dairy  Cows  in Ireland.  PhD thesis.  National  University  of Ireland.
Cunningham,  E. P. (1996). Genetic  diversity  in domestic  animals:  strategies  for 
conservation  and development.  In: Miller et al (Eds.), Proc. XX Beltsville  
Symposium:  Biotechnology ’s Role in Genetic  Improvement  of Farm Animals,  
ilSDA,  pp 13-23.
Dillon,  R, Cliffe, D. and Hurley,  C. (1991).  Scope for reducing  the costs of milk 
production.  Irish Grassland  & Animal  Production  Association  Journal,  25: 68-79.
76
Hoden,  A., Peyraud,  J. L., Muller  M. and Faverdin,  P. (1991).  Simplified  rotational  
grazing  management  of dairy cows: effects  of rates of stocking  and concentrate.  
Journal  of Agricultural  Science,  Cambridge.  116: 417-428.
Journet,  M. and Demarquilly,  C. (1979).  Grazing  In: Feeding  strategy  for the high 
yielding  cow (Eds. W. H. Broster  & H. Swan ), pp. 295-321,  St. Albans  Canada 
Publishing.
Keady,  T. (1999).  “High quality  grass silage production:  How, Why and it’s value  
relative  to grass ”. Unpublished  paper  delivered  to the Feed  Forum  at the Green  Isle 
Hotel,  Dublin,  10/11/99.
Leaver,  J. D., Campling,  R. C. and Holmes,  W. (1969).  The influence  of flexible  and 
rigid  grazing  managements  and of supplementary  feed on output  per hectare  and per 
cow. Animal  Production  11:161-172.
Maher,  J., Stakelum,  G. and Rath, M. (1997).  The effect  of daily herbage  allowance  on 
the performance  of spring-calving  dairy cows. Proceedings  of Irish Grassland  & 
Animal  Production  Association,  pp. 217-218.
Maher,  J., Stakelum,  G. and Rath, M. (1998).  Effect  of lactation  stage, season  and 
herbage  allowance  on the performance  of dairy cows. Proceedings  of Irish 
Grassland  & Animal  Production  Association,  pp. 171-172.
O’Donovan,  M. Dillon,  P. and Stakelum,  G. (1998).  Grassland  Management  - the effect  
on herd performance.  Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Association  Journal,  
pp. 45-53.
O’Kiely,  P. (1994).  “The cost of feedstuffs  for cattle ”, R. & H. Hall.  Technical  Bulletin,  
No. 6, 1994.
Sheehy,  S. J. (1999).  Costs  of energy  from grass,  silage  and concentrate,  (per. Comm.)
Stakelum,  G. and Dillon,  P. (1995).  Supplementary  feeding  of grazing  dairy cows. R. 
& H. Hall Technical  Bulletin,  No. 2, 1995.
Stakelum,  G., Dillon,  P. and Murphy,  J. (1988).  Supplementary  feeding  of grazing  dairy  
cows.  Moorepark  Dairy  Farmers  Conference,  pp. 25-27.
Ulyatt.  M. J and Waghorn,  G. C., (1993).  Improving  the quality  and intake  of pasture 
based diets for lactating  dairy cows. Occasional  Publication  No. I, Massey  
University,  pages 1131.
Ulyatt, M. J. (1980).  The feeding  value of temperate  herbages.  Grazing  animals,  
Morley,  F. H. W. ed. Amsterdam,  Elsevier,  pp. 125-141.
77
Profitable  Milk  Production  from  
Pasture
J. PENNO
Dairying  Research  Corporation.  Ruakura,  New Zealand
“Only the most productive  companies  are going  to win. If you can’t offer  
a top quality  product  at the world ’s lowest  price,  you’re going  to be out
of the game. ”
JACK  WELCH,  CEO, General  Electric.
The New Zealand  Dairy Industry  owes its success to a continual 
improvement  in the efficiency  of milk production  from pasture.  However,  this 
improvement  has been driven  by the need to increase  productivity  in order  to 
maintain  profitability  in the face of low and declining  milk prices. When  
adjusted  for inflation,  the rolling  3-year  average  Dairy Company  milksolids  
(milkfat  + milk protein)  payout  has declined  from NZ$4.63/kg  to NZ$3.74/kg  
over the last 15 years  (LIC, 1998).  Farm  profitability  has been maintained  only 
because  over this period  milksolids  production  per hectare  has increased  by 
40%, and total milksolids  production  per farm has increased  by 85%. New 
Zealand  dairy farmers  have learned  to produce  milk at a fraction  of the cost of 
other  countries  because  they have been forced  to.
Nevertheless,  it is very unlikely  dairy farmers  in other parts of the world  
should  attempt  to duplicate  the New Zealand  pastoral  system.  Optimal  farm 
systems  depend  on the milk price,  and the relative  costs of the land, feed, herd 
and labour  resources  available.  Even within  New Zealand,  milk production  
systems  have become  increasingly  diverse  between  regions and between  
farms. However,  despite this diversity,  the vast majority  have the same  
purpose:
Maximising  the margin  between  total income  and total costs
In general,  dairy farmers  have maintained  and increased  profitability  
through  a relentless  drive to produce  more milk per hectare,  per cow and per 
labour unit. Many are ruthlessly  efficient,  yet they continue  to strive to 
increase  efficiency.  Best practice  seasonal  dairy farmers have made 
remarkable  improvements  in productivity  over the past decade.  Some now 
achieve  in excess  of 1500 kg MS/ha/year,  400 kg MS/cow/year  and 75 000 kg 
MS/person/year.  The best farmers  make economic  farm surpluses  (profit  
before  tax, drawings  and debt servicing)  in excess  of NZ$2500/ha  (van der 
Poel, 1999).  Rather  than describe  these various  systems  to you, I will discuss  
the principles  of profitably  producing  milk from pasture.  These  principles  are 
successfully  imbedded  within  all profitable  New Zealand  farm systems.  My 
challenge  to farmers  and their advisors  at this conference  is to consider  how 
Aey might  best be implemented  to increase  the profitability  of dairy farming  
in Ireland.  While in New Zealand  these principles  are usually  applied  to
78
increase  production,  in Ireland  it may be more appropriate  to apply them to 
produce  a given amount  of milk at minimum  cost.
What  are we farming  for?
New Zealand  Dairy farmers  generally  have three common  objectives 
(MacLean  er a/. 1997);
1) Increasing  the profitability  of their farm businesses.
2) Increasing  the efficiency  of labour  use on the dairy farm.
3) Maintaining  high standards  of animal  welfare  and environmental  protection.  
Although  all farmers  will have different  sets of personal  and business
objectives,  all these  objectives  are inevitably  underpinned  by profitability  (van 
der Poel, 1999).  In contrast,  the amount  of labour  necessary  to operate  a more  
profitable  farm system may conflict  with family and personal  objectives.  
Labour  requirements  now often exceed  that available  from the farming  family  
because  the average  dairy farm is now 91 ha milking  229 cows (LIC, 1999).  
Farmers  are concerned  with both the availability  of good staff, and the 
complexity  of farming  systems  when  a significant  proportion  of labour  is from 
relatively  unskilled  employees.  Therefore,  changes  to farm systems  to increase  
profit must now consider  the implications  for labour  requirements,  animal  
welfare  and environmental  sustainability.
Maximising  milksolids  income
Increasing  production  is virtually  the only means  of increasing  income  on 
dairy farms.  Although  the price received  for milk is an important  variable,  in 
New Zealand  little can be done by the individual  to increase  milksolids  price  
other  than maintaining  high milk quality  standards  to avoid  grading  penalties. 
Nevertheless,  increasing  milk supply  has not been totally  unrestricted.
While we have no Government  imposed  milk quota, farmers  have been 
required  to own 2 dairy company  shares  for each kg of milksolids  supplied.  To 
increase  production  and supply additional  milk, the farm must purchase 
additional  Dairy Co-operative  shares (a one-off,  redeemable  investment  of 
about  60% of the value  of the additional  milk supplied).  It has been signalled  
that the cost of extra  dairy  company  shares  is likely  to increase  markedly  from 
now on. However,  progressive  farmers  have continued  to increase  production 
to increase  income  and expand  their businesses  anyway,  and they will continue 
to expand  in future.  Although  the easiest  way to increase  production  in New 
Zealand  is to buy more land, I will concentrate  on increasing  production  from 
an existing  area of land.
Total annual  milksolids  production  from a farm system  is controlled  by 
three key variables;
1) The  total amount  of feed available  to the milking  herd  over  the year.
2) The  proportion  of this feed that is eaten  by the milking  herd.
3) The efficiency  that feed eaten  is converted  to milksolids.
In practice,  if total milksolids  production  is poor, the cause will be related 
to one of first two factors.  Efficiency  of production  is important,  particularly 
from an economic  point  of view, but has somewhat  less influence  on yield per
79
Table 1
Some  results  from the systems  for high milksolids  production  farmlet  study  
conducted  at No. 2 Dairy  averaged  over the three  years  of the trial
Farmlet 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Stocking  rate (cows/ha) 3.3 3.3 3.3 4.4 4.4 4.4 4.4 4.4
N fertiliser  (kg N/ha/yr) 
Feed  supply  (t DM/ha/year)0 200 400 200 400 200 200 200
Pasture  grown 16.7 18.2 20.2 18.3 20.6 18.9 19.2 19.1
Maize  grain 6.6 2.0
Maize  silage 5.6 2.9
Balanced  ration 1.6
Total  feed suply 16.7 18.2 20.2 18.3 20.6 2.0 24.8 25.6
Milksolids  (kg/ha/yr) 1040 1208 1317 1190 1325 1785 1606 1800
hectare  than how much  feed is available  and how much of the available  feed 
is eaten.
The importance  of feed supply  in determining  total milksolids  production  
was clearly  demonstrated  in the results  of a three year farmlet  study  conducted  
at the Dairying  Research  Corporation  No. 2 Dairy  at Ruakura  from 1995/96  to 
1997/98  (Table 1). The trial was designed  to investigate  the economics  of 
intensifying  our pasture  based  dairy systems  with inputs  of nitrogen  fertiliser 
and purchased  supplements.  The farmlets  had different  stocking  rates, grew  
different  amounts  of pasture and compared  three types of purchased  
supplementary  feeds (Table 1). However,  despite the wide range in 
management  systems and feeding regimes imposed,  total milksolids  
production  was almost  totally explained  by the differences  in the total feed 
supply  (Figure  1). According  to this relationship,  the amount  of feed that is
Total  feed supply  
(t DM/ha/year)
Fig. 1 - The effect  of total annual  feed supply  on total milksolids
production
80
required  in a year to produce  a given amount  of milk (quota)  could be 
predetermined.  Maximising  profits will arise from attaining  this feed at 
minimum  cost.
Maximising  potential  pasture  growth
Once a pastoral  dairy farm has been purchased,  the pasture  grown  on that 
farm will always  be the cheapest  form of feed available  to the dairy herd. The 
principles  of achieving  high levels  of pasture  production  have been understood 
for many years. Soil fertility,  the use of nitrogen  fertiliser,  soil moisture 
conditions  (drainage  and irrigation),  and the pasture  species  present  in the 
sward  can largely  explain  the differences  in potential  pasture  growth  between 
farms within a region. If pastures  are not growing  as much as those on 
surrounding  farms,  the problem  is usually  one of these factors  and there will 
be a straight  forward  solution.
Maximising  future  production  within  the system
The amount of pasture that is eaten by the herd, or harvested  as 
conservation,  has a large effect on the difference  in apparent  pasture  
production  between  different  farms  within  a given region.
Pasture  production,  as discussed  in relation  to dairy farm research  and 
management,  is determined  by the increase  in pasture  mass on ungrazed 
paddocks  over time. For example,  if the post grazing  pasture  mass of a 
paddock  is measured  as 2000 kg DM/ha,  and the pregrazing  pasture  mass of 
that paddock  is 3000 kg DM after 30 days regrowth,  the growth  rate would  be 
calculated  as 33 kg DM/ha/day.
3000 kg DM/ha  - 2000 kg DM/ha
30 days
Annual  pasture  production  is the sum of these successive  growth  rates over 
the year. However,  it is imperative  to understand  that this method  actually  
measures  the amount  of pasture  harvested  and only provides  an estimate  of 
true pasture  growth.
Pasture  is a short shelf-life  product.  Over  time, new leaves  appear  from the 
base of the grass tillers,  grow and then die and decay.  In the spring  a new leaf 
appears  about  every 7 days, and in the winter  every 30 days. Each tiller can 
only support  3 leaves  at any one time. Therefore,  in spring  leaves  are turning 
over every  21 days, and in winter  every  90 days. Evidence  of this turnover  of 
grass leaves  can be seen as dead and decaying  leaves  through  the sward.  In 
moist conditions  the dead leaves quickly  rot away and disappear.  During  
summer,  the dead plant material  often builds up in the sward as conditions 
become  too dry to allow  the material  to decay.
All the available  pasture  must be eaten at each grazing  to achieve  high 
utilisation.  Because  of the dynamic  nature of pasture,  ungrazed  leaves will 
often not remain  until the next grazing.  Rather,  extra pasture  that is left after 
grazing  will simply  increase  the proportion  of material  that will die and rot. If 
we return  to our understanding  of pasture  growth,  the increase  in pasture  mass
81
between  grazings  is the sum of new DM appearance,  minus  the old DM which  
is dying  and rotting  away:
Increase  in pasture  mass = New DM - Loss of old DM
If a high pasture  mass of old material  (> 21 days in spring)  is left after 
grazing  this will increase  the amount  that will die and rot, and therefore  
decrease  measured  growth  rates.
The implication  of this for dairy farmers  is that the amount  of pasture  eaten  
by he herd has an enormous  influence  on apparent  pasture  production.  In the 
extreme,  if a pasture  was never  grazed,  the pasture  mass would  increase  until 
the amount  of old material  rotting  away equalled  the amount  of new material  
growing.  In essence,  pasture  production  would  be measured  as nil.
Optimising  feed utilisation
To maximise  pasture  utilisation,  there must be enough  cows to eat all the 
feed that is available  each year. However,  increasing  the number  of cows  
milked  increases  the amount  of feed used for maintenance.  Further,  a high 
proportion  of the variable  costs of milk production  is directly  related  to the 
number  of cows being milked.  Therefore,  a stocking  rate that maximises  
pasture  utilisation  is likely to be too high to maximise  the biological  and 
economic  efficiency  of the whole  farm system.
It has been suggested  from calculations  based on farm systems  trials, that 
the optimum  annual  per cow production  to maximise  biological  and economic  
efficiency  is currently  400 to 430 kg MS/cow  in New Zealand  (assumes  500 
kg Friesian  cows) (Penno,  1999).  An important  component  of the increased  
economic  efficiency  from increased  productivity  per cow is the improved  
labour  use efficiency.
Increased  per cow productivity  requires  increased  feeding  levels. Recent  
calculations  have suggested  that to attain  milksolids  yields  of over  400 kg/cow  
will require  stocking  rates of 80 to 85 kg LW/t DM. In traditional  terms,  for a 
farm with a total feed supply  16t DM/ha/year  this stocking  rate equates  to only 
2.7 cows/ha  (500 kg cows),  which is considerably  lower  than stocking  rates 
that have been recommended  in the past (Penno,  1999).
As yet these associations  of lower stocking  rates and higher levels of 
performance  per cow remain largely untested.  For this reason two major 
farmlet  trials have been initiated.  The first is with Friesian  cows at the DRC  
No 2 Dairy,  representing  the climate  typical  of the Waikato,  with mild winters  
and some degree  of summer  drought.  The second  is with Jersey  cows at the 
Stratford  Demonstration  Farm in Taranaki,  representing  a cold winter,  wet 
summer  climate.  Both trials have completed  their first season  of three. Data 
from the first year of the Stratford  Demonstration  Farm is contained  in Table  
2. The responsiveness  of high genetic  merit  cows  to reductions  in stocking  rate 
is already  apparent.  Based on the first year ’s results,  the stocking  rate for 
optimum  milksolids  production  is as low as 85 kg Lwt/t  DM. The stocking  rate 
for optimum  EFS is expected  to be even lower.
It is important  to remember  these changes  in stocking  rate can be achieved
82
Table  2
First  year ’s results  from a trial to optimise  stocking  rate (kg Liveweight/t  DM)
for EFS
Farmlet 1 2 3 4
Stocking  rate (cows/ha) 2.5 3.2 3.7 4.2
Stocking  rate (kg liveweight/ha) 925 1150 1370 1550
Stocking  rate(kg  liveweight/t  DM) 73 86 101 118
Pasture  grown  (t DM/ha) 13 13.3 13 12.1
Supplement  bought-in  (t DM/ha) -0.4 0.1 0.6 1
Total available  feed (t DM/ha)
Milksolids  Production12.6 13.4 13.6 13.1
kg/cow 366 321 256 225
kg/ha 922 1019 946 923
kg/tDM 73 76 70 70
kg/kg  Lwt 1.00 0.89 0.69 0.60
by reducing  the number  of cows  per hectare,  increasing  pasture  production,  or 
introducing  supplementary  feeds. Often,  if supplementary  feed is available  at 
a sufficiently  low cost this may provide  the best solution  because  it can be 
provided  in the shoulders  of the season  to extend  lactation,  encouraging  higher 
milksolids  production  per cow.
Maximising  DMI at high stocking  rates
To ensure  high levels of pasture  utilisation  are achieved  throughout  the 
season,  stock policy, grazing  management  and any supplementary  feeding 
must  ensure  that at each grazing  during  the year the available  pasture  matches 
pasture  requirements.  The herd must be offered  sufficient  pasture  to be well 
fed, but not leave  a high post grazing  residual  full of clumps  and ungrazed  leaf 
material.  High stocking  rates alone  are often cited as a reason  for low per cow 
performance  within  pastoral  dairying  systems.  However,  survey  data in New 
Zealand  continually  suggest  that the farms with the highest  stocking  rates 
maintain  the highest  per cow performance.  Within  reason,  it is likely that 
policy and management  decisions  have a greater effect on per cow 
performance  than stocking  rate.
Poor per cow performance  is caused by low annual dry matter intake  
(DMI).  Of course  some farms are simply  over stocked,  and low performance 
per cow is simply  a symptom  the farm simply  not having  enough  total feed 
available  to feed the herd properly.  However  on the majority  of farms poor 
DMI and animal  performance  is a result  of a mismatch  in the timing  of feed 
supply and herd requirements  during the season. The seasonal  nature of 
pasture  production  means that even at optimum  stocking  rates, too much  
pasture  will be available  at some times of the year, while at other times 
insufficient  will grow to feed the herd.
83
Manipulating  herd requirements
The DM requirements  of dairy cows are highest  about 6 weeks after 
calving,  and are at their lowest  while the cow is dried off. At a given stocking  
rate, calving  and drying off decisions  have the greatest  influence  over the 
annual feed requirement  pattern of the herd. Herds with high per cow 
performance  generally  have early mean calving  dates relative  to peak spring  
pasture  growth  to ensure  peak DM requirements  coincides  with peak pasture  
growth.  Because  of the lag between  calving  and peak intake,  the mean calving  
date of the herd should be about 6 weeks before the date when expected  
growth  rates exceed  herd requirements.
Drying  off cows and removing  cull cows from the herd can be used to 
reduce  feed requirements  after spring  growth  slows. In areas where autumn  
pasture  growth  is late or irregular  this will often be more profitable  than 
underfeeding  the whole herd. The annual  pattern  of pasture  production  and 
quality  necessitate  high performance  per cow in the first 150 days of lactation.  
This is even more critical  in areas which expect  a period of summer  dry. 
Therefore,  spring cow condition  and pasture cover targets cannot be 
compromised  by milking  too many cows for too long in the autumn.  Again,  
supplementary  feeding  may be justified  if the costs are low enough,  and 
autumn  growth  is reliable.
Manipulating  pasture  supply
Nitrogen  fertiliser  is one of the few tools available  to increase  the supply  of 
pasture  during  the season.  Under  New Zealand  conditions  nitrogen  responses  
in the order of 10 kg DM/kg  N applied  will generally  be achieved  when  
moisture  is not limiting  plant growth.  Applications  in winter  and early spring  
can be a cost effective  source  of extra feed to fill spring  feed deficits  created  
by a high stocking  rate, or early calving  date. Autumn  responses  are more  
variable,  particularly  after a long dry summer  period.  Recent  research  has 
demonstrated  the applications  of nitrogen  in late spring/early  summer  dry 
periods  can be an effective  means of providing  extra feed for periods  of 
summer  drought  (Penno,  1998).
During  spring  when  more  pasture  grows  than can be eaten by the herd, the 
surplus  pasture  must be removed  from the grazing  area. If pasture  that is not 
required  is left as a high post grazing  residual,  it will increase  the amount  
which  is wasted  through  death  and decay,  and reduce  the quality  of the pasture  
offered  at subsequent  grazings.  Accurately  identifying  surplus  pasture  and 
harvesting  high quality  pasture  silage  can provide  a high quality  and cost effect  
supplementary  feed.
Manipulating  feed supply  with supplements
Pasture  grown  on the dairy farm will not always  be the cheapest  form of 
feed available  for milk production.  Indeed,  calculations  which include  the 
capital  costs of owning  land often make pasture  look expensive.  However,  it 
must be remembered  that once the farm has been purchased,  and the pasture  
has been grown,  this argument  becomes  irrelevant.  Even  at times  when  pasture
84
Table  3
Recent  farm systems  experiments  investigating  the use of supplementary  feeds
Reference Supplement Cows/ha Calving
dateMilkfat Protein 
(g/kg DM) (g/kg DM)
Clark 1993 Pasture  silage 3.8 5/7 40 22
Penno  era/.. 1996 Rolled  maize  grain 3.2 15/7 37 39
Penno  era/., 1996 Rolled  maize  grain 4.5 15/7 50 38
Thomson  er a/., 1997 Concentrate  pellets 4.2 20/6 76 58
Thomson  er al., 1998 Maize  silage 3.8 27/6 55 37
Penno  era/., 1998 Maize  grain 4.4 12/7 51 40
Penno  era/., 1998 Maize  silage 4.4 12/7 46 31
Penno  era/.. 1998 Balanced  ration 4.4 12/7 52 42
Average 51 38
cost more to grow than other  feeds it must be utilised  as and when it becomes 
available  because  of its short shelf life. Nevertheless,  at times it will be 
economic  and sensible  to integrate  feeds  other  than pasture  into pasture  based  
systems.
Table 3 contains  a summary  of five recent  farm systems  trials that have 
investigated  the use of supplementary  feeds. On average  the use of 
supplements  have increased  milkfat  production  by 51g/kg DM, and milk 
protein  production  by 38g/kg  DM. There  is a trend for larger  responses  from 
concentrate  feeds compared  to maize  and pasture  silage.  This is a result  of the 
extra energy  concentrates  supply  in each kg DM. There is also a trend for 
larger  responses  at higher  stocking  rates, and with earlier  calving  dates. The 
larger  the feed deficit  the larger  the response  to extra feed will be. The largest 
response  that has been reported  (Thomson  et al,, 1997) was achieved  by 
combining  a high stocking  rate with a very early calving  date. In all these  
experiments  gaining  extra days in milk was a critical  factor leading  to good  
responses  to supplementary  feeds.
The response  determines  how much  can be paid for the additional  feed. The 
extra milk must be sufficient  to pay for the purchase  and storage  of the feed,  
feeding  out, the costs associated  with extra days in milk, and the required 
profit margin.  I suggest  that because  of the risks associated  with biological 
production  systems,  a profit margin  of 100% is necessary.  Use the cheapest 
forms  of feed first. In most  cases  this will be extra  pasture  grown  with nitrogen  
fertiliser.  In New Zealand  maize silage and by-products  are also sometimes 
cheap  enough  to allow  their profitable  use.
To effectively  incorporate  large amounts  of additional  feed into a farm 
system,  key components  of the system  must change.  If the feed supply  and 
demand  is in balance,  introducing  extra feed is likely to simply  reduce  the 
efficiency  of feed utilisation.  To maintain  pasture  utilisation  extra  demand  for 
feed must be created.  The most efficient  way to utilise  additional  feed is to
85
extend  lactation  length  to improve  per cow performance.  Using  extra feed to 
increase  performance  per cow reduces  the proportion  of feed is used for 
maintenance.  Whether  the extra days in milk should  be in spring  or autumn  
depends  on the source  of feed.
Conclusion
New Zealand  dairy farmers  have learned  to produce  milk cheaply  by 
continuously  striving  to increase  productivity  per hectare,  per cow and per 
labour  unit. Our seasonal  milk production  systems  are underpinned  by growing  
and grazing  large amounts  of pasture.  Total milksolids  production  is determined  
by the total amount  of feed available,  and the proportion  of this feed that is 
eaten.  Although  pasture  is not always  the cheapest  fomi of feed, it is a short  
shelf  life product  and must be eaten as and when it grows.
Feeds other than pasture  can be successfully  integrated  into pasture  based  
systems  and will yield about  50 g milkfat  and 40 g milk protein/kg  DM offered.  
To attain  large responses  to supplements  they must be considered  as part of the 
total feed supply,  and the stocking  rate must be sufficient  to utilise the total 
amount  of feed available  each year.
Stocking  rates traditionally  recommended  in New Zealand  may be too high 
to maximise  the biological  and economic  efficiency  of the whole  farm system.  
Current  recommendations  are that under  New Zealand  condition  stocking  rates 
should allow Friesian  and Jersey cows to attain 400 and 350kg MS/cow,  
respectively.  Research  suggests  that whole farm efficiency  is optimised  at 
stocking  rates of about  85 kg of herd liveweight  DM of total annual  feed supply.
Maximum  profits  will arise from producing  as much milk as is possible  at 
the least possible  cost. In Ireland,  where  quota  restricts  total milk production,  it 
is likely that profits  will be maximised  by maximising  the proportion  of milk 
production  that is produced  from grazed  pasture,  while  minimising  the number  
of cows required  to efficiently  utilise  the total amount  of feed required.
References
Clark, D. A. 1993. Silage for milk production.  Proceedings  of the Ruakura  Farmers ’ 
Conference,  45: 4146.
LIC 1998. Economic  survey of factory supply dairy farmers 1997/98.  Livestock.  
Improvement  Corporation  Limited,  Hamilton,  New Zealand.
Lie 1999. Dairy statistics  1998-1999.  Livestock  Improvement  Corporation  Limited,  
Hamilton,  New Zealand.
Penno,  J. W., Macdonal,  K. A., Bryant,  A. M. 1996. The economics  of the No. 2 Dairy  
systems.  Proceedings  of the Ruakura  Farmers ’ Conference  48: 11-19.
Penno,  J. W. 1998. Principles  of profitable  dairying.  Proceedings  of the Ruakura  Dairy:  
Farmers  Conference  50: 1-14.
Penno,  J. W. 1999. Stocking  rate for optimum  profit. Proceedings  of the South Island  
Dairy  Event 1 :2542.
Thomson,  N. A., Davis, K. L., McGrath,  J. M., Hainsworth,  R. J., Clough,  J, C. 1998.  
Impact  of feeding  maize silage on dairy production.  Proceedings  of the New Zealand  
Grasslands  Association  60: 51-55.
Thomson,  N. A., Hainsworth,  R. J., Clough,  J. C., McCallum,  D. A. 1997. Effect of 
nitrogen  fertiliser  and concentrate  feed on dairy production.  Proceedings  of the New 
Zealand  Society  of  Animal  Production  57:172-175.
van der Poel, J. 1999. Achieving  growth  in an unregulated  environment.  Principles  & 
lessons  for any environment.  Proceedings  of the Irish Grasslands  Association.  In Press.
86
Improving  Milk  Solids  by 
Management
D. ANGLESEY
Tourin  and Moore  Hill Farms,  Lismore,  Co. Waterford
This paper  describes  how we at Tourin  and Moore  Hill farms  try to achieve 
high milk solids  production  per cow. Tourin  farms  is owned  in partnership  by 
John Maxwell  and Kristin  Jameson.  My career  at Tourin  began  in 1975. Dairy  
stock from Northern  Ireland  were bought  as the basis of a new dairy herd.  
Soon after their purchase  66% of these animals  contracted  brucellosis  and 
were slaughtered.  Replacements  were bought  from local stock (Shorthorn  and 
other breeds),  from this period  we initiated  our own herd register,  since then 
the ancestry  of each animal  produced  at Tourin  can be traced.  Our breeding 
programme  in the herd has evolved  through  this register,  proven  bulls have 
been used except  for one 3-year  period.  Irish bulls were used in 1982, New 
Zealand  bulls in 1985. Since the early 1990 ’s our breeding  policy has 
concentrated  on improving  milk solids production.  With Co-op payment 
systems  now biased  in favour  of milk protein  the rewards  of our breeding 
policy have shown  a return on investment.  Improving  milk solids is not an 
easy job, there are many issues involved  in getting  it right. The cow, her 
genetic  make up, diet, calving  date, drying  off date, condition  score, grass  
allowance,  and finally  how well she’s managed  are, I believe  the main issues  
involved  to increase  milk solids.
Outline  of farm and management
360 milking  cows, 47% autumn  calving  (MCD 10 November);  53% spring  
calving  (MCD  7 March)
115 ha Grass,  29 ha Maize,  SR 2.5 cows/ha
Manager,  2.5 labour  units, 1 Tractor  driver.  I have responsibility  for the dairy  
unit, calf unit, heifer  rearing  and 1200 mid season  lambing  ewe flock.
Objective:  To increase  kg milk solids  production  per cow (primarily  milk
protein)
Management  for milk protein  
Cow - Breeding/Performance
The base of the herd has been bred from non-Holstein  and Holstein  bulls  
from (1980-1990).  Bulls such as AFP, JCE, FSM, SRD and SAL. Since 1990 
to the present  day we have concentrated  on breeding  the herd to high milk 
solids bulls with reasonable  milk volumes.  Our present  day herd consists 
mainly of INU, BGI, PRE, EBZ and ARN daughters.  The percentage 
Holstein  of the herd is now increasing  which we may have to suppress.  We
87
have taken a policy decision  to use some NZ semen on both herds. The 
selection  of sires for the herd is for sires positive  in milk protein %, 
milk < 700 kg and negative  for milk fat %. Sires used on the herds  for the past 
two years are;
Autumn  herd - BGI, ICN, SKT, DTV, DRH,  SPK, HZE and OYE
Spring  herd - OUF, OYE,  RFE, LYE, and WSE.
In any autumn/spring  herd a percentage  of animals  are carried  over from 
one herd to the next. Usually  these  are the better  animals  in the herd. We try to 
minimize  this as much  as possible  however  when  it happens  the animal  is then 
inseminated  to a beef bull. This avoids  breeding  replacements  from carryover 
animals.
Calving  date
The calving  date in both herds is targeted  to increasing  the amount  of 
grazed  grass in the calved  animals  diet. The MCD  (mean  calving  date) of the 
spring  herd is currently  March  7. Calving  usually  begins  the 15th of February  
and finishes  the 20th of April. Once calved  the animals  have access  to grass  
initially  for 2-3 hours until '/2 day turnout and then full time turnout.  
Previously  our spring  calving  date was slightly  earlier  i.e. (late January).
The MCD  in the autumn  herd is November  10. Calving  begins  in October  
and continues  until mid December.  This is slightly  late by autumn  calving  
standards  and we plan to begin calving  earlier.  The majority  of animals  calve  
outdoors.  These  animals  are grazed  until mid December.  Their  winter  ration  is 
fed once calved.  When  grass is not part of the diet it is replaced  by maize  and 
grass silage. The grazing  management  employed  with the autumn  herd is 
flexible  depending  on weather,  ground  conditions  and grass supply.  A target  
grass intake  of 4-5 kg grass DM is the aim while  this herd is grazing.
Grass
Grazed  grass plays an important  role as a feed to both herds.  With lower  
milk price and high input costs on the farm we aim to use this feed to our 
advantage.  Our target  for the future  is to increase  the amount  of grazed  grass  
to 80% of the spring  herds  diet. The autumn  herds  diet may be increased  to 65- 
70% grass at a maximum.  In the past we have managed  pasture  with little 
emphasis  on feeding  the cow. With the onset  of work  on grass  allowance,  post 
grazing  sward  height  and farm cover  we are now feeding  our animals  better.
It is worth noting  that both herds are managed  as two entities.  The herds  
have separate  grazing  areas, grazing  area crossover  takes place during  the 
drying  off period  or periods  of excessive  grass growth  when the autumn  herd 
may graze  behind  the spring  herd.
We have learned  to our cost about  the absence  of grass on the farm in the 
spring  period.  A lot of work  is put into planning  and implementing  the closing  
strategy  of the farm,  setting  it up for the spring.  Closing  begins  in mid October  
and ends in mid December.  Turnout  takes place the latter days of February.  
Initially  only for 2-3 hours.  All animals  are grazing  by mid March.  Investment
88
has been made in the past year accessing  more pasture  with a network  of farm  
roadways.
The entire land area of the farm can be cut for silage. This gives  
considerable  flexibility  in closing paddocks  for silage. Surpluses  can be 
harvested  readily  as they appear.
Grass  allowance  to the spring  herd during  the main grazing  season  averages 
19-2 1kg DM/cow/day.  The grass allowance  to the autumn  herd is much the 
same until mid June.  This herd is then grazed  on a strict  allowance  of between  
15-17 kg DM/cow/day.  Body condition  score is usually  good at this time so 
imposing  a lower  allowance  keeps these animals  from getting  over fat. The 
autumn  cows when dry are grazed  on an outside  farm for the months  of 
August/September  and part of October.  This allows  for grass supply  to build  
up for the autumn  on the home farm and can occasionally  allow for a larger 
second  cut to be harvested.
Grass  supply  in the autumn  is always  large i.e. the farm cover  is high (1400-  
1500 kg DM/ha).  The spring herd is usually supplemented  from late 
September  (irrespective  of grass supply).  Grazing  with both herds continues 
until grass supply  reduces.  At this stage the autumn  cows get preference  to the 
main grass  area on the farm.  The spring  cows  clean up the paddocks  as part of 
the closing programme.  Housing  of the spring herd takes place in late 
November.
Clover
Clover  makes  up a proportion  of our grass  swards  (ranging  from 30% to 5% 
on a DM basis).  It is such a seasonal  plant,  one cannot  rely on it to continually 
produce  DM. Its is sown in the swards  with tetraploid  grasses  so that it can 
establish.  It establishes  itself firmly in the swards  in mid summer.  We have 
reduced  nitrogen  input because  of its presence  in previous  years,  however  this 
has not been a consistent  trend.
Cow Nutrition
Spring  herd  (Lactation  length  290 days)
Feeding  regime
Maize  silage  plays  an important  role in the diet of the spring  herd, until the 
amount  of grazed  grass increases  8-kg maize  DM is fed. It is reintroduced  in 
October  when grass supply  is declining  (5 kg DM/cow).  The concentrate  mix 
fed to the spring herd is based on maize gluten,  beet pulp and molasses, 
concentrate  is fed to a maximum  of 5.5 kg with maize  silage in the diet. At 
pasture  a mixture  of molasses,  minerals,  cal mag and bloat guard  is fed. This 
mix is supplemented  when the herd is on grass only. Over the total lactation 
approximately  580 kg of concentrate  is fed to the spring herd. In 1998 the 
spring  herds feed input was 1.2t grass silage  DM, 0.3t maize  silage  DM, and 
4.6t grass DM (allowed).
The spring  herd have a 25-30  day shorter  lactation  length  than the autumn  
herd, the lactation  length  is mainly  controlled  by quota,  monthly  supplies  in 
November  and December  dictate  their drying  off date.
89
Autumn  herd  (Lactation  length  320 days)
Feeding  regime
The aim with this herd is to maintain  total dry matter  intake  at a high level 
from the beginning  of lactation.  We find that this can be achieved  with a mix 
of feeds - concentrate,  maize  silage,  high DM grass silage,  grazed  grass and 
straw.  A diet feeder  is used to mix the feed. No in-parlour  feeders  are on the 
farm so the performances  recorded  are achieved  with group feeding.  Maize  
silage is a large part of the autumn  herds diet (10.5-kg  cow/day)  this is an 
exceptional  feed at maintaining  high DM intake.  Grass silage is offered  at a 
level of 4-5 kg DM/cow/day.  The concentrate  mixture  is designed  to balance  a 
diet based  on maize  silage  containing  25% to 30% starch.  Factors  considered  
are protein  solubility,  sources  of digestible  fibre and sugars,  absence  of anti­
nutritive  substances,  palatability  and ingredient  cost. The concentrate  fed is as 
follows;  Molasses  0.9 kg DM, Premix  (Distillers,  Soya, Rapeseed  and Citrus  
pulp) 5 kg DM, straw (wheaten)  0.5, minerals  0.22. This concentrate  can be 
offered  at levels of 8 kg concentrate/cow/day  during the full-time  indoor  
feeding  period.  At grass post calving  the autumn  calvers  are offered  80% of 
their total winter ration. On average  over their total lactation  the autumn  
calvers  are offered  1000 kg of concentrate.  In 1998 the total feed allowance  of 
the autumn  herd was 0.8t grass  silage  DM, 1 .Ot maize  silage  DM and 3.8t grass  
allowed.
Herd  performance
Table 1
Milk yield,  milk fat and milk protein  (%), kg milk fat, kg milk protein  and kg 
total milk solids  for the spring  herd
Spring
COWSMilk yield  
(gals/cow)Milk fat %Milk protein  % kg milk kg milk 
fat proteinkg total 
milk solids
1994 1305 3.82 3.38 233 207 440
1995 1314 3.59 3.39 221 209 430
1996 1469 3.64 3.37 250 232 482
1997 1512 3.92 3.43 278 243 521
1988 1455 3.70 3.48 252 237 489
Heifers
1994 1230 3.95 3.38 227 195 422
1995 1042 3.81 3.34 186 163 349
1996 1128 3.91 3.59 206 190 396
1997 1253 4.05 3.43 238 201 439
1998 1186 3.84 3.49 212 192 404
90
Table  2
Milk yield,  milk fat and milk protein  (%), kg milk fat, kg milk protein  and kg 
total milk solids  for the autumn  herd
Autumn
cowsMilk yield  
(gals/cow)Milk fat %Milk protein  % kg milk 
fatkg milk 
proteinkg total 
milk solids
1994 1427 3.63 3.27 242 218 460
1995 1448 3.63 3.33 246 225 471
1996 1490 3.87 3.35 263 228 491
1997 1646 4.11 3.49 317 269 586
1998 1711 4.26 3.52 341 282 623
1999 1717 3.99 3.54 321 285 606
Heifers
1994 1138 3.11 3.26 201 174 375
1995 1215 3.77 3.34 214 190 404
1996 1237 3.90 3.43 226 199 425
1997 1372 4.11 3.57 264 229 493
1998 1424 4.24 3.51 283 234 517
1999 1401 3.97 3.50 260 230 490
Cow and heifer  management  
Cow condition  score
We maintain  our animals  in a large body condition  score throughout 
lactation.  This can be achieved  by calving  them down in adequate  body  
condition  score.  The targets  which  we try to reach with both herds are;
Calving  3.5 - 3.75
Breeding  2.9-3.1
Drying  off 3.3 - 3.5
During  the dry period  if some specific  animals  (first calved  heifers,  older 
cows)  are in poor condition  2.25 - 2.75. We split the dry cow mobs into two 
individual  groups.  We feed these animals  then to improve  their  body condition 
scores.
Heifer  weights
The majority  of our heifers  calve  down  at 22 - 24 months  of age. We place 
particular  emphasis  on growing  the heifers  well to reach adequate  weights  at 
bulling  and calving.  We try to calve the heifers  where  possible  at an average 
bodyweight  of 580 kg. At these weights  these heifers  are not under  as much  
pressure  post calving  in large herds which  we run.
Stockmanship
The herdsmen  employed  at Tourin  have a high level of stockmanship.  This 
is something,  which we are pleased  about and is very difficult  to acquire  in
91
these days of labour  shortages  on dairy farms.  Sticks  and kick bars, ropes etc 
are not used in the parlour.  The animals  while indoors  have mats on their 
cubicles,  which  are cleaned  twice daily. Lame cows are identified  early and 
treated.  We have a set of lame cow paddocks  located  near the parlour  where  
the treated  cows can graze.  A key issue on the farm is to reduce  the stress on 
dairy herd where  possible.  This policy  has served  us well thus far.
Summary  and Conclusions
I have said previously  in this paper that increasing  milk solids cannot  be 
achieved  by alternating  one element  in the system.  In our case at Tourin  a 
number  of key elements  are in place,  they are now having  a positive  effect  on 
the milk production  and composition  on the farm. A brief outline  of these  
elements  are;
Breeding  and genetics,  long lactation  length,  adequate  cow nutrition,  maize  
silage and molasses,  calving  date and grazed grass, cow condition  score,  
applying  research  results to improve  milk solids, excellent  advice, daily  
management  carried  out precisely  and finally  splitting  the milk solids  sample  
daily and testing  it independently.
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge  the encouragement  and support  of John 
Maxwell  and Kristin  Jameson  and also the help and guidance  of Dr. Tom 
Butler  (Farm  Business  Advisors).
92
Lessons  from  Kerry  
Agribusiness/Teagasc  “Focus  on 
Profit ” Programme
T. SHANAHAN
Kerry  Agribusiness,  Cattle  Breeding  Station,  Castleisland,  Co. Kerry
Introduction
In 1995, Kerry  Agribusiness  undertook  a protein  improvement  programme 
on 35 monitor  farms  in co-operation  with Teagasc.  Both organisations  have a 
common  objective  of helping  farmers  to improve  their incomes.  As there were 
no quota restrictions  on milk protein, Kerry Agribusiness  and Teagasc  
identified  the potential  for increasing  the profitability  and viability  of Kerry  
farms  through  a programme  aimed  at increasing  the milk protein  from 3.20 to 
3.40%  by the year 2000. The programme  also sought  to reduce  the costs of 
milk production  by 5p/gallon  over the same period.
Kerry Agribusiness  milk suppliers  are located  in counties  Kerry, Cork,  
Limerick  and Clare.  Milk supplies  were restricted  by the availability  of quota;  
the high cost of production  and, in many  cases,  poor farm structure  and small  
scale.
Methods
The 35 farmers  were selected  to represent  each category  of milk supplier  to 
Kerry Agribusiness.  The factors considered  for selection  were scale of 
production,  size of holding,  soil type, farm management  practices  and farm 
location.  Herds were milk recorded.  Milk volume,  protein and butterfat 
concentration,  production  costs, farm characteristics  and management  
practices  were monitored.  Current  information  from research,  on improving 
milk protein content and reducing  costs, was communicated  to monitor 
farmers  by means of farm visits, farm walks, demonstrations,  discussion 
groups,  clinics,  seminars,  newsletters,  booklet,  press articles  and the radio,  by 
advisors  and research  personnel  from Kerry  Agribusiness,  Teagasc,  Munster 
Cattle  Breeding  Society,  Department  of Agriculture  and New Zealand.
Grazing  techniques
Several  different  grazing  techniques  were adopted  in order  to have grass in 
the cows  diet in early and late lactation;  these  included  paddock  grazing,  block  
grazing,  strip grazing,  back  fencing,  spokes  of wheel,  grazing  from the back  of 
paddocks,  pre-cutting  grass.
Information  from research
Breeding
The breeding  the relative  breeding  index (RBI) places three times more  
value on protein  yield than on fat yield. High RBI bulls with a high positive
93
predicted  difference  (PD) for protein  % should be used when breeding  to 
produce  more milk protein.  These  bulls should  be crossed  with high protein  
producing  cows to have sufficient  good quality  replacements.  This will allow  
the culling  from herds of cows producing  less than 3% protein  and 125 kg of 
protein  and, if this culling  could continue  over a 3 year period,  it would  
increase  milk protein  content  by 0.15%.
Calving
Research  data show that ,over a three year period,  delaying  calving  from 
January  21st to March  15th increased  milk protein  by 0.17%.  Mealing  feeding  
was reduced  by an average  of 435kg.  The margin  per gallon of quota was 
increased  by 8p.
Grass
Adding  grass to a diet of silage  and meals  in spring  increased  milk protein  
by 0.11%.  Likewise,  grass in a silage  diet lifted milk protein  in the autumn  by 
0.24%  compared  to a silage  only diet. Research  data also show that increasing  
the amount  of grass offered  to a cow from 16 kg dry matter  (DM)  per day to 
20 kg DM per day, milk protein  increased  from 3.24%  to 3.30%,  furthermore  
when  the allocation  was increased  to 24 kg DM per day milk  protein  increased  
to 3.36%.
Intakes  will increase  by an average  of 0.6 kg DM for every one-unit  
increase  in grass  digestibility.  Digestibility  is a key parameter  and is the major  
determinant  of metabolizable  energy (ME) content.  The difference  in ME 
value between  70 and 80% DMD grass is 1 MJ/kg DM, however,  the 
difference  in intake  is 3 kg DM/cow/day  resulting  in 2 gallons/cow/day  more  
milk and a protein  percent  increase  of over 0.1%.  Increasing  the energy  in the 
diet increases  the protein  content  of the milk.
Silas  e
The silage  quality  fed to lactating  cows has a major  influence  on protein  %. 
Research  data show that if quality  improves  by 7 DMD units milk protein  
percent  will increase  by 0.1%.
Meals
Increasing  the energy content  of the diet with additional  meals boosts  
protein  by 0.05%  for each 1 kg fed. The usual  economical  rate of meal feeding  
is 7 kg per cow per day while  cows are fed indoors.
Results
Lactation  length
Lactation  length  on the monitor  farms  was 260 days in 1995;  however,  this 
increased  to 269 days by 1999. Cows  must have lactation  lengths  of greater  
than 280 days to express  their full genetic  potential  to produce  protein.  Cow 
numbers  must be matched  to available  quota; this may mean reducing  cow 
numbers.  This provides  an opportunity  to cull low protein  cows and to have 
more grass available  for the remainder  of the herd.
Grass  allocations
Most  farmers  were willing  to graze  cows  for 3-4 hours  and bring  them  back
94
to the yard, to avoid poaching,  when the grass is grazed  off. Monitor  farmers 
also increased  their grass  allocations  to cows  from an average  of 16 kg DM per 
eow to more the 20 kg DM per cow per day, particularly  from early May 
onwards.  This extra  grass has a major  influence  on improving  protein  levels  in 
milk. Twenty  four hour allocation  of grass rather  than 12 hour allocation  has 
become  the practice  on some farms as it allows  cows with high demand  for 
grass and shy feeders,  such as first calvers,  to increase  their grass intakes.
Grazing  season  leneth
The number  of grazing  days on monitor  farms increased  from a 227-day 
average  in 1994 to 256 days in 1999;  24 of the 29 additional  grazing  days were  
achieved  in the spring  (Tables  1 & 2).
Table 1
Number  of days on which  cows grazed  grass  - 1994 to 1999
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
Average 227 239 248 258 2 51 256
Ranges 194-276  221-279 201-318 223-323  171-339 194-307
Table  2
Number  of extra  days grazing  Spring  1994 - 1999
1994 vs 1997 1994 vs 199 1994 vs 1999
Extra  days 26 33 24
Range 0 - 66 13 - 68 0- 65
Re-seeding
A number  of changes  had to be made on farms to achieve  early grass and 
increase  the number  of days cows can graze.  All the monitor  farmers  have re­
seeded  pasture  since 1994. This has given  earlier  growth,  higher  yields,  better 
quality,  quicker  recovery,  a better  response  to fertiliser  and later growth  into 
the autumn.  The monitor  farmer  with the lowest  protein  (2.97%)  at the start of 
the programme  has lifted protein  to 3.27%;  this meant  an additional  6p/gallon 
from protein as a result of improving  drainage,  soil fertility  and sward  
composition.
Table  3
Protein  (%) as affected  by reseeding
Date grazed Old pasture Re-seed Difference
30/06/99 3.22 3.27 0.05
16/07/99 3.24 3.31 0.07
01/08/99 3.32 3.37 0.05
24/08/99 3.38 3.53 0.15
95
The data in Table  3 show  the protein  concentration  prior  to and after  grazing  
re-seeds.  The protein  concentration  increased  by 0.05%  and upwards  when  re­
seeded pasture was grazed after an old sward. On each occasion,  the 
composition  of the sward grazed  prior to the re-seeds  contained  over 50% 
perennial  ryegrass.
Autumn  and spring  ^rass manasement
Closing  off paddocks  from mid-October  enabled  grass  covers  build up over 
the winter.  Applying  lime, phosphorus  and potash  improved  the vigour  of the 
swards.  Nitrogen  applications  in early to mid-January  boosted  grass growth.  
All Terrain  Vehicles  (ATV ’s) were widely  used to apply fertiliser  on heavy  
soils.
Good roadways  or cow paths are essential  in order to graze grass in the 
spring.  Access  to drier areas of the farm helped  monitor  farmers  to increase  the 
grazing  days in spring  by over 20 which  resulted  in a saving  of £21 per cow 
due to less meal fed and better  quality  milk.
Grass yields above 6cm and grass quality were measured  on the next 
paddock  to be grazed.  Overall,  both yield  and quality  varied  considerably  from 
month  to month  and year to year. However,  variation  was greatest  in June and 
July and there was very little difference  between  the months.  The data in Table  
4 show grass yields  for June.
Table  4
Average  and range  of pre-grazing  grass  yields  (kg/ha)  - 1996-1999
Year Average Range
1996 2631 892 - 4901
1997 2227 1026-  3657
1998 2105 880-4122
1999 2381 1271 -4224
The yield of grass suitable  for grazing  was between  2000 and 2500 kg 
DM/ha.  The data in Table  4 show that the average  yield was within  that range  
for each year except 1996. Nevertheless,  when the range of yields for 1999 
varied  from 1271 to 4224 kg DM/ha.  The lowest  yield (1271 kg DM/ha)  was 
aftergrass;  the highest  yield (4224 kg DM/ha)  was much too strong for 
grazing.  Quality deteriorates  rapidly as yield increases  due to stem 
development  and senesence  at the base. Spring grass, up to mid-May,  
aftergrass  and late autumn  grass had digestibility  values greater  than 80%.  
Grass  average  DMD  in June each year was consistently  over 78%.
The data in Table 5 show a difference  in digestibility  of almost 10 units 
(from 74.8 to 84.5) in 1999. This difference  was over 13 units in 1996. High  
digestibility  grass is high in energy  and also leads  to high intakes.  Milk yields  
and milk protein  increased  as grass digestibility  increased.  Milk protein  was 
very much influenced  by grass digestibility  and intakes. Good grazing  
management  in spring, i.e., grazing  to 6cm maintained  grass quality.  Lax
96
Table  5
Mean  and range  of DMD-values  (%) of June pre-grazing  grass
Year Average  DMD Range  of DMD
1996 78.7 70.6 - 83.8
1997 78.1 73.3 - 81.9
1998 79.4 73.7 - 85.8
1999 78.9 74.8 - 84.5
grazing  led to stem development;  grazing  too tightly lead to slow grass  
recovery,  low intakes  of poor quality  grass and low protein  in milk.
Cutting  overgrown  paddocks  for silage  and topping  paddocks  as dung pats, 
stemmy  grass and weeds  increase  in the pasture,  improved  grass digestibility.  
Best results  were got from topping  when it commenced  in early to mid-May 
and when  grass  was cut low at 6cm, and the tractor  travelled  slow and the flails 
were well edged. Nitrogen  helped to increase  the leaf content  of swards 
particularly  in mid season,  applying  small amounts  of nitrogen  gave more  leaf
digestibilities  at over 80% on monitor  farmers.
Table  6
Protein  percent  by month
1994 1999 Increase  in
Month protein  % protein  % protein  %
January 3.06 3.28 0.22
February 2.91 3.29 0.38
March 2.86 3.08 0.22
April 2.95 3,06 0.11
May 3.09 3.17 0.08
June 3.13 3.26 0.13
July 3.18 3,29 0.11
August 3.22 3.34 0.12
September 3.40 3,52 0.12
October 3.60 3.68 0.08
November 3.47 3.70 0.23
December 3.21 3.52 0.31
Average 3.17 3.30 0.13
The data in Table  6 show that the average  milk protein  content  was 3.17%  
in 1994 and had improved  to 3.30%  by 1999. The milk protein  content  was 
less than 3% in February,  March  and April of 1994. By increasing  the energy  
content  of the diet,  i.e., more  grass  and better  quality  silage,  the protein  content 
improved  by 0.38%,  0.22%  and 0.11%,  respectively,  in these  months  by 1999.
97
The lowest  increase  in protein  since 1994 (0.08%)  was in May and October.  
However,  the average  protein  content  for May 1996 was 3.21% when grass  
growth  and quality  were good.
The average  protein  percent  for 1999 was 3.30%.  The range of protein  
content  between  the highest  and lowest  milk protein  producer  was 3.12%  to 
3.48%;  this difference  of 0.36%  extra protein  was worth 7.2p/gallon.  Milk 
proteins  level were less than 3% in February,  March,  April and"May  in the 
lowest  protein  producers.  The difference  between  the lowest  and highest  milk 
protein  producer  was 0.90%,  0.63%  and 0.62%  in February,  March  and April,  
respectively.  This extra  protein  was worth  an extra 18.0, 12.6 and 12.4p/2allon 
in February,  March  and April,  respectively.
Table  7
YEAR 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Change
Protein  (%) 3.17 3.19 3.22 3.25 3.28 3.30 +0.13
Butterfat  (%) 3.52 3.56 3.57 3.64 3.76 3.76 +0.24
Protein/
1000 gallons  (kg)148.3 149.1 150.9 152.3 153.7 154.5 +6.17
Fat/
1000 gallons  (kg)164.7 166.6 166.9 170.3 175.9 176.1 + 11.41
Milk value  (p/gallon)* 94.72 95.43 96.24 97.51 99.24 99.59 +4.87
*Protein  @ £4.11/kg and fat @ £2,05/kg
The data in Table 7 show that the weighted  average  protein  concentration  
increased  by 0.13% (from 3.52% to 3.76%)  since 1994. Now, every 1,000  
gallons  of milk has >6 kg more  protein  and >11 kg more butterfat.  Milk value  
increased  from almost  95p per gallon  to lOOp/gallon.
Table  8
Number  of farmers  in different  protein  bands  in 1994 and 1999
Protein  bands(%) 1994 1999
3.45+ 0 1
3.40-3.44 0 3
3.35 - 3.39 0 8
3.30-3.34 0 3
3.25 - 3.29 2 12
3.20-2.24 10 5
Total  > 3.20 12 32
3.15-3.19 12 1
3.10-3.14 6 2
3.05 - 3.09 4 0
3.00 - 30.4 0 0
<3.0 1 0
Total  <3.20 23 3
98
The data in Table  8 show  that 12 of the 35 monitor  farmers  had milk  protein  
content  greater  than 3.20%  in 1994. However,  by the end of 1999, 32 farmers 
had milk proteins  >3.2%;  15 farmers  had milk proteins  >3.30%  and 4 farmers 
had milk proteins  >3.40%.
Table  9
Numbers  of farmers  with increased  and decreased  milk protein  content
Protein  % increase Number  of farmers
0.30 + 2
0.20 - 0.29 8
0.10-0.14 12
0.01 0.09 li
Total 33
Protein  % decrease
-0.1 - 0.09 2
Thirty-three  monitor  farmers  increased protein %; 10of these have
increased  milk  protein  by over 0.2% which  has added  4p per gallon  to the milk
value.
Table 10
Meal  and fertiliser  costs (p/gallon)
Year Mean & Range Meal Fertiliser Total
1995 Mean 12.35 9.41 21.79
Range 4.25 - 26.39 4.85 - 18.11
1997 Mean 6.34 7.36 14.00
Range 1.80 - 11.30 4.80- 10.40
1998 Mean 9.22 9.30
Range 0.02- 19.80 5.30- 13.43 18.52
1999 Mean 9.94 7.34
Range 4.31 - 15.53 3.03 - 11.16 17.28
The data in Table 10 show the average  cost of meal and fertilisers  was 
21.79p/gallon  in 1995 with meal costing  over 12p per gallon.  However,  by 
1997 the cost of meal and fertiliser  was 14p/gallon.  The adverse  weather 
conditions  in 1998 and the Spring  of 1999 increased  the costs.  Overall,  the cost 
of meal and fertilisers  in 1999 was 4.5p/gallon  less than in 1995.
Conclusion
The main lesson  from the Kerry  Agribusiness  -Teagasc  “Focus  on Profit ” 
programme  was that producing  good quality grass and feeding  sufficient 
amounts  of this grass to cows, which  have the genetic  potential  to produce 
high concentration  of protein  in milk, have increased  the value of milk by 
5p/gallon  and reduced  the cost of meal and fertiliser  by over 4.5p/gallon.
99
Breeding  Quality  Cattle  for Europe
M. DRENNAN  & G. KEANE  
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath
Market  requirements
With almost  90% of beef exported  it is important  that the animals  (or 
carcasses)  produced  are suitable  for the highest  priced  markets.  The highest  
priced  markets  available  are in continental  EU and the carcasses  receiving  the 
highest  prices  in these markets  are those which  are of good conformation^and  
lean. Eor example,  in the French  market  (Bord  Bia, May 2000),  steer  carcasses 
grading  U for conformation  were priced  at 26 p/kg (270 v 244) more than R 
grade, while the difference  for bulls was 20p (259 v 239). Likewise,  the 
difference  in that market  between  carcasses  grading  R and O was 61p (264 v 
203) for heifers  and 50p (240 v 191) for cows. As breed is the main factor 
influencing  conformation  and leaness,  it is important  to make  maximum  use of 
the continental  breeds  which  are superior  for these traits. Thus, the aim is to 
produce  animals  (carcasses)  similar  to that of the purebred  Charolais  and 
Limousin  herds in France.
Breed  compositiou  of the Natioual  Herd
A desirable  feature  of cattle breeding  over the last 25 years has been the 
substantial  increase  in the proportion  of the calf  crop which  were late-maturing 
breeds.  Late maturing  continental  breeds  increased  from 6 to 8% of the calf 
crop in the late nineteen  seventies  to 52% in recent  years.  However,  trends  in 
breed usage in AI show that the proportion  of late maturing  breeds  averaged  
only 36% in the period  1996 to 1998 indicating  the greater  reliance  on natural  
service  for continental  breeds  than with other  breeds.
Calves  from the dairy  herd
There  are 2.46 million  cows in the National  herd, 52% of which  are dairy  
cows.  Ninety-eight  % of dairy cows are Friesian/Holstein  and the most recent  
available  data indicates  that 46% are bred to Friesian/Holstein,  28% are bred 
to early maturing  breeds and 26% are bred to continental  breeds.  Thus,  
approximately  300,(X)0  from the dairy herd are late maturing  breed crosses  
containing  50% continental  breed genes.
Calves  from the suckler  herd
There  are 1.18 million  suckler  cows in the country.  The proportion  of late 
maturing  crosses  in the suckler  cow herd was shown  to be 52% in 1998 having  
increased  from 29% in 1992. Eighty-two  % of the suckler  herd are bred to late 
maturing  breeds  with the remaining  18% bred to early maturing  breeds.  Thus  
almost  880,000  calves  from the suckler  herd are continental  crosses,  64% of 
which  are three-quarters  or more continental.  Therefore,  the important  source  
of animals  for the higher  priced  continental  EU market  is the suckler  herd.
100
Bull breed  comparisons
Sire breed comparisons  have clearly  shown  that the late maturing  breed  
crosses  have higher  growth  rates,  a greater  proportion  of muscle  in the carcass, 
better  carcass  conformation  scores  and lower  carcass  fat scores  compared  to 
Friesians  and early maturing  crosses.  As an example  when compared  to 
Friesians,  Charolais  x Friesian  steers  had 11 % greater  carcass  weight  for age, 
18% more muscle  weight  at the same age, 44% better  carcass  conformation 
scores  and 5% lower  carcass  fat scores.
Cow breed  comparisons
At Grange,  beef (Limousin  and Hereford)  x Friesian  were compared  with 
upgraded  Charolais  (at least 7/8 Charolais)  as suckler  cows. Charolais  cows  
were over lOOKg heavier  than the beef X Friesians.  Based on intakes  and 
weight  changes  it was estimated  that the energy  requirement  of a 600 kg beef 
X Friesian  cow during  pregnancy  is equivalent  to that for a 660 kg Charolais 
cow. Colostrum  yield was greater  for the beef x Friesian  cows than for the 
Charolais  and as a result  their progeny  had higher  immunoglobulin  (Ig) levels.  
Milk yields  of the Charolais  cows was only about  two-thirds  that of the beef  x 
Friesians  and as a result growth  rate of their progeny  to weaning  was lower 
resulting  in a liveweight  difference  at weaning  in favour  of the beef  x Friesian  
progeny  of 22 kg. The steer progeny  of Charolais  and Hereford  x Friesian  
cows bred to Charolais  sires were taken to slaughter  at 2 years  of age and the 
pistola  (hind-quarter)  of one side of each carcass  was dissected  into muscle,  fat 
and bone. Carcass  weights  were marginally  greater  for the progeny  of the 
Hereford  x Friesian  cows  than for the Charolais  progeny  part of which  was due 
to being 5 days older at slaughter  (Table 1). Carcass  conformation  was better 
for the Charolais  progeny  than for the Hereford  x Friesian  progeny.  When
Table 1
Liveweight  and slaughter  data for the steer  progeny  of Charolais  and Hereford  x
Friesian  cows
Charolais Hereford  x Friesian
Weanling  weight  (kg) 304 328
Carcass  weight  (kg) 384 393
Age at slaughter  (days 724 729
Kidney  + channel  fat (kg) 11.4 15.7
'Carcass  fat score 3.8 4.1
^Carcass  conformation  score 3.7 3.4
Pistola  (% of carcass) 46.8 45.6
Meat (% of carcass) 67.5 64.3
Fat (% of carcass) 15.3 18.1
Carcass  value  (p/kg) 194 181
Scale 1 to 5 (5 fattest) '"’Scale 1 to 5 (5 best conformation)
101
expressed  as a proportion  of carcass  weight,  the pistola  (higher  priced  cuts) of 
the Charolais  progeny  was greater  than for the Hereford  x Friesian  progeny.  
The Charolais  progeny  had a greater  proportion  of meat and a lower  proportion  
of fat than the Hereford  x Friesian  progeny.  If the carcass  is valued  on muscle  
(meat) yield with pistola  muscle  valued  at 454 p/kg, and fore quarter  (and 
flank) muscle  at 155p/kg  then the carcasses  of the Charolais  progeny  were 
worth 13 p/kg, or about £50 more for a 380 kg carcass  than the Hereford  x 
Friesian  progeny.  Similar  calculations  showed  a difference  in value  of 20 p/kg 
of carcass  between  Hereford  x Friesian  and Charolais  x Friesian  steers.
Hybrid  vigour
While  the carcasses  from the Charolais  (almost  purebred)  were excellent,  
such a breeding  programme  obviously  does not avail  of hybrid  vigour  and milk 
production  is low. Hybrid  vigour  (or heterosis)  is defined  as the superiority  of 
the crossbred  over the average  of the two parent  breeds  for a particular  trait. A 
summary  of the available  data shows  that the overall  advantage  expected  from 
using  a crossbred  suckler  cow as opposed  to a purebred  in terms  of kg of calf 
weaned  per cow put to the bull is 13 percent.  This advantage  results  from a 
combination  of improved  fertility,  lower calf mortality  and higher calf 
liveweight  gain to weaning.  In addition,  the available  data indicate  that using  
a sire of a third breed  increased  the weaning  weight  by a further  8 percent.
Table 2
Ranking  of top of AI beef  bulls from  different  breeds  based  on growth  rate
Breed Bull  name Code Growth Conformation  
EPD Score  EPD
(kg carcass)Fat Killing-out  
score % EPD 
EPD
Charolais Doonally  Fabus CF49 69 1.15 (7) 0.09 2.77
Hara Kiri HKl 62 1.18(5) -0.20 3.10
Cavan  Chap 1C27 52 1.23 (2) -0.13 2.89
Lisnalurg  Ignot LUl 52 1.28(1) -0.43 3.21
Mogador MDO 49 1.16(6) 0.01 2.39
Belgian  Blue Tintin  De My TIY 41 1.20 (3) -0.32 3.84
Victorieux  D Au Cheme VDC 35 1.12 (11) -0.68 3.79
Simmental Ballagan  Kelly BKY 36 0.78 0.21 1.75
Suir Con SCO 30 0.83 -0.04 2.03
Limousin Luttrellstown  Gaynor LTG 25 0.77 -0.14 2.95
Enfield  Big Bang FL18 23 1.06 -0.12 3.55
Hereford Clonakenny  Fenton CKT 27 0.61 0.79 1.50
Rathcor Leo RTE 18 0.53 0.59 1.12
Aberdeen  Angus Independence  117 RHD 16 0.87 0.45 2.33
Bohey  Jasper BJP 10 0.73 0.48 1.95
() Indicates  ranking  for conformation.  Source:  Irish Cattle  Breeding  Federation  (2000).
102
Comparison  of sires
In addition  to substantial  breed differences  there are large differences 
between  bulls within each breed for growth  rate, carcass  conformation  and 
fatness and the incidence  of calving  difficulty.  The Irish Cattle Breeding 
Federation  (ICBF)  have provided  an across  breed  ranking  of beef bulls which  
are available  for widespread  use in AI and on which full information  is 
available.  A list of the top bulls for growth  is shown  in Table 2. The “growth  
EPD ” (Expected  Progeny  Difference)  column  shows the number  of kgs. of 
extra carcass gain expected  in steer progeny  from the particular  bull 
slaughtered  at 26 months of age compared  to progeny  from standard 
Holstein/Friesian  bulls slaughtered  at the same age. For example  the steer 
progeny  of the best bull for growth,  CF 49, would  be expected  to have 69 kg 
heavier  carcasses  with 1.15 higher  conformation  scores  (scale  E = 5 to P = 1), 
0.09 higher  fat scores  and 2.77 percentage  units greater  killing-out  percentage 
than the progeny  of the standard  Holstein/Friesian  sires at the same age.
Bull progeny  at 14/15 months  of age
Bull progeny  of HKI (ranked  2nd for growth  and 5th for conformation  in 
the ICBF  list) and Simmental  sires (used  to provide  replacements  from within  
the herd) on Limousin  x Friesian  cows at Grange  had carcass  weights  of 392 
at 460 days and 357 kg at 439 days respectively.  (Table  3) The spring  born 
bulls were weaned  on October  21 and received  high quality  grass silage  plus 
an average  of 4.3 kg of concentrates  per head daily (total 968 kg) from 
weaning  until slaughter  on June 6, 2000. Daily gain from birth to slaughter  for 
both groups  exceeded  1.3 kg per day but the progeny  of HKI had greater 
carcass weight for age (0.85 v 0.81 kg/day)  due to a better killing-out 
percentage  (59.5 v. 57.3%)  than the Simmental  progeny.  Dissection  of the 
pistola  showed  muscle  yields  of 78.1 and 75.2%  for the HKI and Simmental  
progeny  respectively.  Despite  high carcass  weights  particularly  for the HKI 
progeny,  carcasses  graded  very lean (average  score  2.8 for HKI progeny)  with 
mainly  R for conformation  scores.  Preliminary  results  from a study carried  in 
association  with the ICBF and the Irish Charolais  and Limousin  Societies  
show a good relationship  between  scores  for muscularity  on the live animal  
and carcass  conformation.
Table  3
Growth  and carcass  traits  of bulls from mature  Limousin  x Friesian  cows
Charolais  sire (HKI) Simmental  sires 
(to provide  replacements)
Age at slaughter  (days) 460 439
Daily  gain to slaughter  (kg) 1.32 1 .31
Carcass  weight  (kg) 392 357
Carcass  per day of age (kg) 0.85 0.81
Carcass  conformation  score 3.1 2.9
Carcass  fat score 2.8 3.2
103
Future  breeding  policy
The suckler  herd is the main source of the high quality  animals  (good  
conformation  and lean) suitable  for the higher  priced EU markets.  Suitable  
animals  for these markets  include  purebred  Charolais  and Limousin  such as 
produced  in France.  Similar  breeding  programmes  could  be achieved  here by 
upgrading  our present  suckler  herd. However,  such a programme  would  lack 
the advantages  of hybrid vigour and would result in lower cow milk 
production.  Based  on present  information  a more satisfactory  approach  would  
be to have a continental  cross cow and where  replacements  are retained  from 
within  the suckler  herd use a rotational  breeding  system  involving  breeds  such 
Limousin  (good conformation)  and Simmental  (milk production  potential)  
with a third breed  used as a terminal  sire (eg Charolais  on mature  cows).  These  
breed  types are already  widely  available  and it is suggested  that certain  herds  
should  specialise  in the production  of suitable  replacements  i.e. herds with 
Simmental  x cows  use a Limousin  bull, while  those  with Limousin  x herds  use 
a Simmental  sire. First calving  should  be at 2 years of age (up to 3 years in 
purebred  herds in France)  with a known  easy calving  sire (e.g. Limousin  AI 
sire) used for first calving.  The terminal  sire used on mature  cows should  
provide  progeny  of high growth  potential  and good conformations.  However,  
with cattle  AI figures  (excluding  DIY) having  declined  from 1.03 million  in 
1992 to 0.72 million  in 1999 and total AI to continental  breeds  only amounting  
0.32 million  (one-quarter  of cows bred to continental  sire breeds)  the vast 
majority  of continental  calves  are bred using natural  mating.  It is therefore  
important  that in addition  to improving  the quality  of sires in AI that the quality  
of continental  bulls used for natural mating  are also improved.  Thus, the 
importance  of linear  scoring  and providing  BLUP  values  for bulls cannot  be 
overemphasised.
Summary
* The highest  priced  markets  require  carcasses  of good conformation  which  
are lean and thus involves  using continental  breeds.
* The source of these animals  is the suckler  herd which presently  provide  
almost 0.9 million  continental  cross animals  or 3/4 of total continental  
crosses.
* Purebred  Charolais  (account  for half  the suckler  herd in France)  provide  high 
quality  carcasses  but lack the advantages  of hybrid  vigour  and have low milk 
production.
* Present  information  suggests  that the suckler  cow should  be a continental  
crossbred  with the terminal  sire from a third breed.
* Based  on meat  yield  50 and 100 percent  Charolais  are worth  20p and 33p/kg  
carcass  more than Hereford  x Friesian.
* The top quality  AI bulls for growth and conformation  are now being  
identified  by ICBF  but as about 3/4 of breeding  to continental  breeds  is by 
natural  mating  these bulls must also be of high quality.
* Payment  for carcasses  must be based on quality  and the system  of paying  
almost a flat price/kg  does not provide any indication  of market  
requirements.
104
Beef  from Grass-Based  System
E. G. O’RIORDAN,  D. McGILLOWAY  & P. FRENCH
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath
Grassland  is Ireland ’s greatest  renewable  feed resource  and it provides  the 
main feed for ruminant  livestock.  Grazed  grass, followed  by conserved  grass,  
are the cheapest  renewable  feeds available  and as the majority  of cattle are 
Spring-born,  grazed  and conserved  grass are logically  the basis for efficient 
beef production  systems.  Ireland  has few competitive  advantages,  but its 
ability  to grow grass does offer the chance  to provide  cattle (and sheep)  with 
a relatively  cheap  feed source.  The key to efficient  beef  production  from grass,  
now and in the future, is to operate a flexible,  adjustable  grassland 
management  programme,  using factual information  for prompt and 
appropriate  decision-making  purposes.  The system operated  must clearly  
match feed supply to animal requirements,  putting  the major emphasis  on 
increasing  the proportion  of cattle  diets that comes  from grazed  grass.
Cost of Grass  production  
a) Outside  farmer ’s control
Grass growth  is affected  by a range of factors,  some of which  are outside  
the control  of the farmer.  Factors  such as weather,  geographical  location  and 
soil type have a major  influence  on grass growth  and consequently  on the cost 
of feeding  livestock.  Geographical  location  significantly  affects  the date of the 
start and end of the grazing  season  for example  the grazing  season  in the south  
and south-west  is at least 3 weeks  earlier  than the north  and north-east.  A time 
difference  also exists  at the end of the grass-growing  season,  where  the south  
and south-west  again have up to a 3-week  advantage.  These  factors  do affect  
the costs of producing  grass. For the same soil type and level of inputs,  the 
effect  of geographical  location  means  that grass yields  can range  from almost  
16 t DM/ha  to less than 10 t DM/ha.  Translated  into feed cost terms,  the effect 
of location  results  in costs ranging  from £37 to £52/t DMD (digestible  dry 
matter).  Weather,  which can cause considerable  variation  in year to year 
annual grass production  (i.e. -i- or - 20% difference  from the long term 
average),  can alter production  costs from £42 to £63/t DMD. Excess  soil 
wetness  can result  in production  costs that range  from £47 (dry) to £56 (wet)/t  
DMD.
b) Under  farmer ’s control
The main factors  controlling  grass  growth  which  are directly  influenced  by 
farming  practices  are soil fertility,  nitrogen  usage and grazing  management.  
Now more than ever, farmers  have to be cost conscious  and each input has to 
be justified.  For grazed  grassland,  fertilisers  account  for 80%  of the input  costs  
associated  with grass production.  It is an essential  requirement  that each 
farmer  knows the soil nutrient  status of their land. The decision  to apply
105
fertilisers  to grazing  grassland,  especially  phosphorus  (P) and potassium  (K), 
has to be made against  the background  of a knowledge  of soil nutrient  status.  
Nitrogen  is the one major  input at the farmers  disposal  which  can be used to 
influence  grass growth.  An attractive  response  is achieved  with the lower  
levels of nitrogen  applied  but grass production  costs increased  with each 
increment  of nitrogen  used.
Increasing  nitrogen  usage from 300 to 350 kg N/ha (270 to 310 units/ac)  
may increase  yield by only 5% and the cost of this extra grass can be over 
£120/t  DMD.  Grass  costs of this magnitude  are very expensive  and alternative 
purchased  feeds could  be economically  more attractive.
Grange  beef  systems
(i) Suckler  calf  to beef  system
Based on early-March  calving,  the current  suckler  beef systems  finishes  
animals  at 20 (heifers)  and 24 (steers)  month  of age. The system  is stocked  at 
0.84 ha per cow unit (cow + calf + year old + replacements)  has a carcass  
output  of 500 kg per hectare  per year. This target  is achieved  by producing  a 
steer carcass  weight  of 400 kg, heifer  carcase  weight  of 300 kg and cull cow 
carcase  weight  of 400 kg. The target  output  (carcass/ha)  is achieved  from 10 
tonnes of herbage  dry matter  (DM) plus a concentrate  input of 820 kg/ha.  
Herbage  production  is based  on 230 kg N/ha, and silage  being  harvested  from 
55% of the farm in late May, and 35% of the farm area in late July. Silage  
harvested  in May is fed to the yearlings,  while the July-conserved  swards  are 
offered  to the cows. Cows and calves  graze separately  from the older cattle.  
Rotational  grazing,  with 10-12  paddocks  per animal  group,  is practised.
Two-thirds  of the lifetime  gain for the progeny  from the suckler  system  is 
produced  during the grazing  season.  The liveweight  gain during the first 
grazing  season  amounts  to 220 kg (females)  and 250 kg (males)  or almost  60%  
of the animals  lifetime  gain. The indoor  winter  period  accounts  for one-third  
of the lifetime  weight  gains. The proportion  of gain achieved  by heifers  is 
small in the second  winter  as animals  are slaughtered  early (at 20 months  of 
age). However,  almost half of the indoor liveweight  gains are achieved 
through  concentrate  feeding.  All of the liveweight  gain achieved  on the cows  
is derived  from grazed  grass.
(ii) Dairy  calf  to beef  system
The present  system  involves  purchasing  March  born calves  (7 to 14 days 
old) from dairy herds and finishing  them 24 months  later. Both Friesian  and 
Friesian/Charolais  crosses  are used. Calves  are reared  indoors  for the first 10 
to 12 weeks and go to grass in early May. Silage-ground  is grazed  in early  
Spring.  Sixty percent  of the farm area is cut for silage in late May, with a 
further  40% cut in late July. Animals  are stocked  at 0.45 ha/animal  unit 
(yearling  plus calf). Herbage  production  is about 10 tonnes DM/ha and 
together  with a concentrate  input  of 2.2 tonnes/ha,  produces  750 kg carcass  per 
hectare.  The concentrate  input  at 1 tonne  per animal  is made  up by feeding  100 
kg at the calf stage (including  some at grass in the autumn),  150 kg during  the
106
first winter  and the remainder  during  the second  winter.  A rotational  grazing  
system  is practised.  Lifetime  weight  increases  of 630 and 565 kg per head are 
achieved  for Charolais  x Friesian  and Friesian  steers, respectively.  Fifty to 
55% of the gain is achieved  at pasture  and a further  25% is achieved  from 
forage indoors.  A greater  proportion  (55%) of the weight  gain is achieved 
during  the second  year at pasture  when  compared  with the Suckler  Calf  to Beef  
System.  Weight  gains  during  the final winter  are almost  double  those  achieved 
during  the first winter.
One of the main features  of both Calf to Beef  Systems  is the high stocking 
rate achieved  in the early  part of the season.  Both systems  reach  a peak in early  
June of 3000 kg liveweight/ha  and this nevertheless  results  in high animal  
gains and provides  sufficient  areas to be conserved  for winter feed. The 
longterm  future of beef production  systems  in Ireland will depend on 
integrated  Calf-to-Beef  systems  with a major proportion  of the lifetime 
liveweight  gain being derived  from grazed  grass.
Grazing  management  strategies
(i) General  principle
The objectives  of grazing  management  are to produce  high yields  of quality  
grass over a long grazing  season  and to manage  both the cattle  and grass so as 
to utilise the sward as efficiently  as possible  while getting  high levels of 
animal  intake  and thus achieve  high levels  of animal  output.
(ii) Utilising  grass
Successful  beef production  from grazed  grassland  depends  on having  a 
planned  management  system  which  allows  for flexibility  as conditions  change.  
As grazed  grass is the main feed component,  a knowledge  of its growth  pattern 
and stock-carrying  capacity  is important.  Grass growth  is seasonal  and can 
change  widely over short periods  of time. However,  one general  trend is 
evident  and that is that once mid-April  is reached,  grass growth  increases 
rapidly,  and during  May values  of 100 kg DM/ha/day  are common.  At that 
level of growth  each hectare  is capable  of supporting  up to 5 livestock  units (2 
LU/ac)  assuming  that each LU is offered  20 kg DM/day.  Once mid-June  has 
passed  there is an inevitable  decrease  in grass growth,  so that by mid-August 
pastures  will only support  half of the May stocking  rate. There  is nevertheless 
big variation  between  years and within  years there can be a two to threefold 
differences  in growth  rates. Thus, for example,  over a 3 week period  in late- 
April to mid-May,  grass growth  can increase  10-fold  but may drop to the third 
over the next four weeks.To  fully exploit  this changing  grass  supply,  a flexible  
management  system  is required.  A system  that allows  the farmer  to see up­
coming  shortages  as well as short-term  surpluses  needs  to be practiced  if grass  
is to be utilised  efficiently  and economically.  A rotational  grazing  system  
offers  the flexibility  necessary  to make these  management  decisions.  As most  
farms  are composed  of a number  of fields,  which  vary in size, the introduction  
of a rotational  grazing  system  is not necessarily  too difficult.  Subdivisions  do 
not need to be of equal  sizes.  The greater  the number  of fields  or paddocks  that
107
are available,  the greater is the flexibility  introduced  into the grassland  
management  process.  While keeping  control on costs, a target of 10-12  
paddocks  (not necessarily  of equal size) in the Spring-Summer  period  offers  
sufficient  flexibility  to manage  grass in a variable  supply  situation.
The aim of each cattle farmer  must be to maximise  the intake of grazed  
grass by cattle in an efficient  manner  and to get maximum  animal  gains over 
as long a grazing  season as possible.  For efficient  beef production  from 
grassland,  a balance  is needed  between  the ability  of grassland  to support  stock  
during the grazing season and the provision  of adequate  Winter feed. 
Inadequate  Winter feed, especially  in terms of quality, is still a serious  
limitation  on many drystock  farms. Inadequate  stocks  of winter  feed means  
prolonged  winter  grazing,  with little liveweight  gains (indeed  weight  losses  
will occur) and damage  to pastures.  Late closing  of swards  as a result of 
uncontrolled  grazing  in AutumnAVinter  means  delayed  Spring  grass growth,  
so that when stock  are turned-out  early,  through  necessity  as a result  of Winter  
feed shortage,  performance  is poor and pasture  production  suffers  as a result 
of over grazing.  Early turnout  to an adequate  supply  of Spring  grass is highly  
desirable,  firstly, in terms of improved  animal  gains, secondly  to achieve  a 
long grazing  season and thirdly to reduce costs associated  with the more  
expensive  Winter  period.
Knowing  grass  supply
A knowledge  of grass supply  at all times  of the year is essential  if informed  
management  decisions  are to be made. While issues such as rotation  length  
and rest interval  are of great importance  to planned  grassland  management,  a 
knowledge  of pasture  supply  or pasture  cover  on a weekly  basis (if not daily)  
is essential  if the best use is to be made  of grass.
All grassland  farmers  should  have the skills to quantify  pasture  sward  
height and pasture  yields (sometimes  referred  to as pasture  cover).  Tables  
which  relate sward  height  (compressed  heights)  to yield have been produced  
at (Grange).  An assessment  of pasture  cover  may be obtained  by frequently  
(once  per week)  walking  the entire  grazing  area and measuring  sward  height.  
The measurement  can be made with a sward  stick, ruler or place meter.  Eye 
assessment  can also be used to estimate  pasture availability.  Once the 
technique  of pasture  cover measurement  is mastered,  it is surprising  how 
quickly  small  changes  in pasture  supply  will be detected.
Start  of Spring  grazing/Autumn  closing  dates
Late closing  of swards  as a result of prolonged  uncontrolled  grazing  in 
Autumn/early  Winter  has a negative  effect on Spring  grass supply.  Swards  
closed  in mid-October  compared  with mid-December,  can have yields  in mid- 
March  that are 70-80%  higher  Apart  from less grass in Spring,  there is a total 
loss to the system  because  the amount  of grass grazed  in the Autumn,  as a 
result  of the delay  in closing,  is less than the difference  between  the two Spring  
yields.  It should  be the aim of all livestock  farmers  to have some of the farm 
closed  or rested  from mid-October  onwards  to provide  early Spring  grass.  A
108
rotational  grazing  system  facilitates  an orderly  closing  of pastures  in Autumn.
When pastures  have a herbage  mass (yield) of approximately  1000 kg 
DM/ha  (in the grazing  horizon)  or a sward height of approximately  8 cm 
(compressed  sward  height),  pasture  supply  should,  in most years,  be sufficient 
to support  the full livestock  grazing  requirements  on the grazing  areas.
Grazing  of silage  swards
Any grazing  of silage  swards  in Spring  will reduce  silage  yields.  However,  
provided  that the final grazing  is done before  April 10, a reduction  in silage  
yield of not greater  than 15% can be expected.  When  the amounts  of herbage 
consumed  by the animals  is allowed  for, the net effect of Spring  grazing  of 
silage  swards  is likely to be less than 5%. Thus, grazed  grass has replaced  a 
more expensive  winter  feed (but the remaining  winter feed may be more  
expensive).  Recent  Grange  results have shown that in a planned  grazing  
system,  up to 3 weeks  grazing  can be obtained  on silage  swards  in Spring.  The 
earlier the sward is closed after grazing  the smaller  is the silage yield  
reduction.  All silage  swards  should  be closed  by April 10 at the latest. In this 
situation,  herbage  mass (yield)  on the silage swards  was only 500-750  kg 
DM/ha  in the grazing  horizon  (above  4 cm). Furthermore,  a rotational  grazing  
of silage  swards,  where  paddocks  are grazed  only once, results  in a series of 
Spring  closing  dates  and thus a smaller  yield reduction.  At a pasture  supply  of 
1000 kg DM/ha  or greater  in early April,  silage  swards  should  not need to be 
grazed  because  there is sufficient  DM on the grazing  land to carry the cattle.
Controlled  grazing  in Spring
The ability  of well-managed  grass swards  to produce  high yields  of herbage  
and liveweight  in April/June  is underestimated  by most livestock  farmers.  It is 
the stage where  the greatest  wastage  of valuable  feed takes place on farms.  In 
most  cases,  the high yield  of high quality  herbage  is not managed  correctly  and 
its true feeding  value is not well used. The failure  to adequately  convert  this 
valuable  feed resource  has a number  of consequences.  Firstly, while  
satisfactory  animal gains are achieved  in the short term (April/May),  the 
performance  for the subsequent  months  suffers as stock are grazing  poor 
quality,  stemmy,  rejected  herbage.  Animals  do not need to have huge masses  
of herbage  (greater  than 3000 kg DM/ha)  in order to give satisfactory  
performance.  Secondly,  because  of under-utilisation,  which  in some situations  
is less than 50%, pasture  output  is depressed  for the remainder  of the season.  
Thirdly,  pasture  quality  is poor and swards  which  had a DMD value of 750 
g/kg in mid-May  (capable  of producing  a liveweight  gain of 1 kg or 
greater/head/day)  drops to around  650 g/kg DMD in June and July with the 
result  that animal  weight  gains  suffer.  Fourthly,  as pasture  growth  rates fall off, 
animals  will be forced  to eat into a stubble  of very low quality  with the result 
that gains in mid to late season  will be poor, a phenomenon  seen on many  
farms.  This cycle of surplus  grass growth  early in the season  and the inability  
to subsequently  capture  it in an efficient  manner  is repeated  yearly  on many  
farms.
109
Guidelines  for grazing  swards  in Spring  should  centre  on a rest interval  of 
not greater  than 24 to 26 days.
Rest intervals  greater  than these, while growing  more grass, will lead to 
poor pasture  utilisation  and thus lead to swards  of lower  quality  later in the 
season.  Data from Grange  show that grazing  to a stubble  height  of 5 to 5.5 cm 
(compressed  sward  height)  or a residual  mass of 500 to 600 kg DM/ha  during  
April to July, resulted  in gains of over 1.1 kg liveweight/head/day.
Long  grazing  grass
With proper  grassland  management,  animals  can achieve  a steady  rate of 
gain over a long grazing  season.  Grange  data shows  that where  pasture  quality  
is maintained  and when  herbage  supply  and herd demand  are matched,  animals  
can grow at a steady  rate from April through  to November.  Similarly,  where  
overstocking  took place in Autumn,  performance  was poor. Most  pastures  will 
only support  1200 to 1400 kg liveweight/ha  from October  onwards  and for 
higher stocking  rates a carryover  of pasture from earlier in the season  
(August/September)  is necessary.  A rotational  grazing  system makes this 
approach  more practical.  Transferring  grass from times of surplus  to times of 
scarcity  has been much  discussed  in recent  years. There is surprisingly  little 
scientific  data relating  to the practice  of what has become  known  as extended  
grazing.  Grange  results  over the past 3 years have shown that the grass, if 
available,  can be carried  as a standing  crop in Autumn  for 6 weeks  or more  
with no advantage  of a longer  rotation,  even though  pasture  quality  (DMD)  is 
maintained  for periods  of 9 to 10 weeks.  However,  from September  onwards,  
on most beef farms  herd demand  matches  grass supply,  so that carrying  feed 
supply  for 6 weeks  into October  or November  is unlikely  to take place  as there  
is not sufficient  grass to do so. As provision  of sufficient  winter  feed is a key 
issue in attaining  high stocking  rates,  and conserving  35 to 40% of the farm in 
late July is an integral  part of the management  programme,  the scope for 
surplus  grass in the absence  of omitting  some  second  cut areas seems  limited.  
However,  on farms where  most or all of the Winter  feed comes  from a single  
May/June  harvest,  the chances  of carrying  feed from  August/September  should  
be an option,  but have yet to be assessed.
Overall  comment
The optimal,  rigorous  management  of Irish grassland  is the route  to a viable  
ruminant  livestock  industry  in the future,  assuming  we will have to operate  in 
a progressively  more open economic  marketplace  but where there will be 
greater  regulations  regarding  food quality,  animal  welfare  and environmental 
considerations.
Fundamental  to Ireland's  ability  to take full advantage  of the opportunities 
provided  by our grassland  is a national,  co-ordinated,  focussed,  comprehensive 
and fundamental  research  effort  to understand  grass production,  consumption  
and conversion  to quality beef - we must pursue the science  of grass  
and beef.
This technology  must be quickly  transferred  to beef farmers  in the form of
110
flexible,  adaptable  systems  and management  support  mechanisms  that will 
permit  prompt  and appropriate  decisions  based  on accurate  knowledge.
Acknowledgement
The authors  wish to thank Drs. M. G. Keane  and M. J. Drennan  for data 
relating  to Grange  systems  studies.
Labour  on Sheep  Farms
L. CONNOLLY
Teagasc,  Sheep  Research  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway
Labour  in agriculture
The agricultural  labour  force in Ireland  has been in continuous  decline  since  
the late 1950 ’s, falling  from 390,000  in 1960 to 135,000  in 1999. This is a 
feature  of developing  economies  which  results  in increased  employment  in the 
industrial  sectors with declining  employment  in the more traditional  
agricultural  forestry and fishery industries.  Agricultural  employment  in 
selected  EU countries  is shown  in Table 1.
Table 1
Employment  in Agriculture  in selected  EU countries  1997
Greece Portugal Ireland France Denmark
% total employmentUK EU
19.9 13.3 9.9 4.6 3.8 1.9 5.0
Ireland  still has the third highest  percentage  of its workforce  employed  in 
agriculture.  Only Greece  and Portugal  has higher percentages  engaged  in 
farming.  The northern  European  countries  have much lower percentages, 
Belgium  (2.7%),  Germany  (2.9%),  Denmark  (3.8%)  with the UK having  the 
lowest  at 1.9%. The predominant  feature  of the agricultural  labour  force in 
each country,  regardless  of the percentage  employed  is its continual  decline.  
The number  employed  in agriculture  within the 15 EU member  states has 
fallen from 11.9 m in 1980 to 6.9 m in 1997 i.e. a decline  of 42% in less than 
two decades.  The decline  in the Irish agricultural  labour  force since 1970 is 
shown  in Table  2.
Table  2
Ireland  - employment  in agriculture  1970 - 1997
1970 1980 1990 1999
% of total labour  force
27 18 15 8
One of the main reasons  for the exodus  from farming  has been the low 
financial  rewards  compared  to returns from the industrial  sector. Income  
survey  data consistently  show low or negative  returns  to labour  management 
and investment  in farming.  In the past many continued  in agricultural  
employment  as there were no off-farm  job opportunities  or they preferred  the
life style associated  with farming.  However  as economies  become  
industrialised  more off-farm  job opportunities  arise and this has led to the 
current  situation  where  only 8% are employed  and in agriculture  in almost  
50% of farm households  either the farmer or spouse have off-farm  
employment.
There  has always  been underemployed  labour  on Irish farms  particularly  on 
small  drystock  farms.  The 1999 National  Farm  Survey  show  0.99 actual  labour 
units “employed ” on drystock  farms,  whilst  the estimated  labour  requirement 
to operate  the farm based  on Standard  Man Days was 0.50. It is not surprising 
therefore  that output  from agriculture  has increased  over the last three decades 
despite  a falling  labour  supply.  Investment  in buildings,  farm facilities  and 
machinery  have also replaced  labour  on farms.
Labour  on sheep  farms
Sheep  number  and flocks  have been in decline  over the last 5 years.  One of 
the main issues  raised  by sheep  producers  in recent  years  has been the level of 
labour  involved  in running  a sheep enterprise.  The actual amount  of time 
required  to operate  a sheep unit has never  been quantified  and this project  is 
the first attempt  to establish  the actual  position  at farm level. Once  the scale of 
labour  required  has been established  then measures  to improve  efficiency  can 
be researched  and developed.
The objectives  of the study were:
• quantify  total labour  used on sheep  farms,
• allocate  labour  between  farm enterprises  and overhead  tasks,
• quantify  time spent on sheep  tasks and variation  in time between  farms,
• to establish  labour  requirement  of sheep  and cattle on per LU basis,
• explain  variation  in labour  requirements  between  farms,
• compare  farm labour  recording  methodologies  - detailed  weekly  v end of 
year estimates.
Thirty  lowland  sheep flocks  producing  mid-season  lamb were selected  by 
Teagasc  sheep advisors  and specialists.  Flock size ranged  from 150 to 1000 
ewes with an average  of 352 ewes. Detailed  daily time sheets  on labour  use 
were kept by each farmer  for the first week in each month  over a 12 month  
recording  period, commencing  in September  1999. The amount  of time 
devoted  to each farm task was recorded  and allocated  to sheep, cattle,  
dairying  or tillage as appropriate.  Overhead  farm tasks e.g. building/farm 
maintenance,  office work etc. which could not be allocated  to specific  
enterprises  was recorded  separately.  Details  on farm size, livestock  numbers,  
farm buildings  and technical  performance  were collected  in a once off 
questionnaire  which ranked buildings  and handling  facilities  on a scale  
of 1 to 10.
Final records  from participating  farmers  were received  in mid-October  so 
the results  presented  here are preliminary.  The average  size and stock  number 
on the 30 farms  is shown  in Table  3.
113
Table  3
Survey  farm  details
Sheep  (LU) Cattle  (LU) Farm size (hectares)
95 31 63.9
Sheep were the predominant  enterprise  on the farms with average  of 95 
livestock  units and 352 ewes. Of the 30 farms 13 had sheep  only. The monthly  
time records  showed  an average  of 2,867 hours worked  on sheep farms with 
2119 hours worked  by the farmer  whilst  649 and 99 hours were worked  by 
other farm labour  and contractors  respectively.  The farmer  owner  therefore 
accounted  for 74% of total hours worked.  The allocation  of time to the 
different  farm enterprises  is shown  in Table  4.
Table  4
Time  devoted  to sheep,  cattle & dairying
Sheep Cattle
Average  hours  per LU per annumDairying
Routine  tasks 26 25 66
Overhead  tasks 6 4 17
Total 32 29 83
Total/ewe/annum 8 — —
A total of 32 hours per livestock  unit per annum  was attributable  to the 
sheep enterprise  whilst cattle required  29 hours per livestock  unit. This 
therefore  contradicts  the theory  that sheep  are much more labour  demanding 
than cattle.  A ewe requires  8 hours of labour  input per annum,  which  is very 
similar to the Standard  Man Day co-efficient  which farm management 
practitioners  have used over the last 3 decades  i.e. 0.7 to 1 standard  man day 
(SMD)  per ewe depending  on buildings  and facilities.  Of the 32 hours  devoted  
to sheep 26 hours were spent at routine  management  tasks e.g. feeding,  
herding,  dosing  etc whilst  6 hours were spent on overhead  tasks. The time 
spent on overhead  tasks is much greater  than expected  and higher  than that 
found  in similar  studies  in the UK. There  was only one sheep  farm with a dairy  
enterprise  in the study  and the hours  worked  were much  higher  at 83 hours  per 
livestock  unit.
The variation  in labour  by size of enterprise  was also analysed  and as 
expected  flocks with under 320 ewes average  37 hours per livestock  unit 
whilst  flocks  with greater  than 320 ewes averaged  only 27 hours  per livestock  
unit.
A more  detailed  analyses  of variation  ranked  by hours  worked  per livestock  
unit of sheep  is shown  in Table  5.
114
Table 5
Hours  per LU sheep  -by labour  input
Low Medium High
Total hours - sheep/farm 2595 2738 3119
Sheep  (LU) 123 84 74
Hours/LU  Sheep 21.1 32.6 42.1
Ewes to ram 457 320 279
Weaning  % 154 149 142
Stocking  rate (LU/acre) 1.0 0.7 0,8
Farm size (acres) 133 190 151
The lowest  labour  input was associated  with largest  flock size. It is also 
interesting  that those flocks with the highest labour input had poorer 
performance  viz lower weaning  and stocking  rates. Over shepherding  
therefore  does not result  in better  technical  performance.
Detailed  time records  were kept on all tasks carried  out by farm labour.  A 
total of 79 different  farm tasks were identified  and the time devoted  to each 
recorded  in hours and minutes.  A summary  of time allocated  to task groups  is 
shown  in Table  6.
Table 6
Time on major  sheep  tasks
Lambing 19
Feed/forage 17
Herding 17
Veterinary 9
Marketing 5
Other 14
Overhead 19
Lambing,  including  checking  ewes during  lambing,  accounted  for 19% of 
total hours worked  on sheep. Herding,  which includes  checking,  counting, 
transport  within  the farm and changing  internal  paddock  fencing  accounted  for 
17% of all time input. Harvesting  hay and silage, collecting  bales, feeding  
meals  and silage  accounted  for a further  17%. Veterinary  tasks accounting  for 
9% (dosing,  paring hoofs, dipping,  scanning  etc.) Overhead  activities  as 
previously  discussed  accounted  for 19% of total time input.
The amount  of time required  to manage  a sheep flock is affected  by the 
quality of handling  facilities  and buildings.  Sheep housing  and handling  
facilities  were ranked  as poor average  and good and the number  of hours  per 
LU associated  with each group  of farms  is shown  in Table 7.
115
Table 7
Labour  input  by housing  and pens
Flours/LU  Sheep
Poor Average Good
Sheep  housing 35.1 24.8 25.7
Sheep  pens 27.6 27.3 22.5
As expected  farmers  with good sheep housing  spent on average  9.4 hours  
less per livestock  unit than those with the poorest  housing.  Similarly  those  
with good  sheep  penning  spent  5.1 hours  per livestock  unit less than those  with 
inferior  penning.  Good facilities  are therefore  important  for efficient  
management  of sheep  flocks.
Paid farm workers  contributed  only 2.5% to total hours worked  on sheep.  
Forty  three  per cent of farmers  stated  that they had difficulty  in getting  reliable 
labour  whilst  only 1% used the farm relief  service.
Farmers  were asked  for their  ideas  or plans  on how best to reduce  the labour 
input to their sheep  enterprise  and their response  is shown  in Table 8.
Table  8
Ideas/plans  to reduce  labour  input
%
Improve  housing 13
Veterinary  - preventative 13
Improve  handling  facilities 10
Reduce  feeding  time in sheds 10
Compact  lambing 7
Sheep  dog 7
No improvement  idea 37
Conclusions
Preliminary  conclusions  of this labour  study are;
• labour  requirements  for sheep are similar  to cattle and much lower than 
dairying,
• 20 per cent of farmer ’s time is spent on overhead  farm activities,  (farm  
buildings  maintenance,  fencing,  meetings  etc.)
• largest  flocks  have lowest  input per ewe,
• high labour  input  per ewe did not result  in superior  technical  performance,
• herding  and feeding  sheep  accounted  for 37% of labour,  with lambing  and
116
veterinary  tasks accounting  for a further  23%. Total amount  of time on 
office  work  i.e. tax, farm planning,  filling  forms  etc. was only 1.6% of total,
• farmers  with good housing  and handling  facilities  had lower  labour  input  
per ewe,
• farmers ’ views on improving  labour efficiency  were better  
housing/handling  pens, illness/disease  prevention,  modernisation  of indoor 
feeding  and more compact  lambing.
Acknowledgement
All the data presented  have been provided  by the 30 farmers  participating 
in the study.  I wish to acknowledge  the amount  of time, effort  and co-operation  
given by these farmers  in providing  detailed  weekly  information  on all their 
farm activities  on an hourly  basis over a 12 month  period.  Their  commitment 
is evident  in that of the 30 who started  in August  1999,  30 completed  the study  
in September  2000.
117
Financial  Implications  of Expanding  
or Reducing  the Sheep  Enterprise  on 
Drystock  Farms
P. MAHON
Teagasc,  Sheep  Research  Centre,  Athenry\  Co. Galway
Ewe numbers  in Ireland  increased  from 1.55m.  in 1980 to about  4.8m. in 
1993 while numbers  of farmers  with sheep  increased  from 30,000  to 54,000  
over the same period.  This expansion  in sheep  was driven  by the extension  of 
the CAP  for sheepmeat  in 1980 and the introduction  of various  quota  regimes.  
In June 1999 ewe numbers  had reduced  to 4.336m.  This reduction  in ewe 
numbers  since 1993 has been mainly  from the small flocks  of under  50 ewes.  
(Table  1)
Table 1
Flock  numbers  and size (1994-1999)
>50 ewes 51-100 101-500 500-1000 1000-r
1994 21251 11909 15631 613 49
1999 16803 11269 14981 607 49
In 1999, of the 15,637  flocks  of lOO-i- ewes,  about  7000  are lowland  flocks.  
It is projected  that ewe numbers  will decline  by a further  900,000  in the period  
1999 2007 (inch)  (Fabri-Ireland  March  2000).  Most  of the expected  reduction  
will occur  in the smaller  flocks,  however,  many  farmers  with large flocks  will 
also be examining  their future in sheep. The decision  to remain  in ewes,  
expand  or reduce  flock  size will depend  on many  complex  factors,  including  - 
labour  considerations,  financial,  implications,  constraints  imposed  due to off- 
farm employment,  etc. Today  I want to examine  the financial  implications  of 
some alternatives  open to the larger, more specialised  and committed 
sheep/cattle  farmer.
Table  2
Farm  Income  per hectare  (1997  -1999)
1997 1998 1999
Cattle  - Rearing £241 £229 £158
Cattle  - Other £230 £263 £169
Mainly  Sheep £220 £200 £164
Teagasc  N.F.S.
(Mainly  sheep  includes  all types  of systems  and breeds)
Financial  Implications  of Changing  Systems
In 1999 the gross value of cattle and sheep produced  in the country  was 
£1034m.  and £153. 5m. respectively.  Premiums  and headage  added a further  
£456m.  to cattle and £122m.  to sheep output.  Net income  from cattle and or 
sheep  varies  from about  £150 - £370 per hectare  (£60 - £150/acre)  with a few 
drystock  farmers  capable  of reaching  up to £200 income  per acre (income  as 
defined  on profit/loss  account).  In general,  average  income  from cattle/sheep 
farms  is in the region  of £170 - £200/ha.  (£70 £80/acre).
When  the margin  for mid season  fat Iamb is compared  with margins  from 
cattle systems  the results generally  indicate  that the gross margin  and net 
income  from mid-season  lamb is at least equivalent  or better  to returns  from 
cattle  (Table  3).
Table 3
Gross  margin  per hectare  for mid-season  Iamb and cattle  (1996  - 1998)
1996 1997 1998
£/hectare
Mid-Season  Lamb 541 519 474
Cattle  - All Systems 441 431 401
N.F.S.  Teagasc
Overhead  costs on cattle and sheep farms (excl. conacre)  average  out at 
around  £170/ha.  Indicating  a net income  of about  £320/ha.  (£129/acre)  for mid 
season  lamb as against  £260/ha.  (£105/acre)  for cattle.
So, on average  while  the income  from mid-season  lamb is equal  to or better 
than that of cattle, the investment  required  for sheep is about 50% of that 
required  for cattle (£1700  v £3300/hectare  approx.).
Results  from the more intensive  and efficient  producers  over the period  
1997 to 1999 indicate  that the margin  of advantage  remains  with the mid­
season  lamb system  (Table  4).
Table  4
Gross  margin  per hectare  for top 25% of producers
1997 1998 1999
Single  Suckling -Weanling £475
-Store £661 £649 £475
-Finish £507
Other  Cattle £771 £691 £618
Mid-season  Lamb £932 £876 £770
N.F.S.  Teagasc
119
Changing  your  system  - Financial  Implications
A frequent  question  asked by many sheep  fanners  is not “should  I expand 
ewe numbers ” but “if I get out of sheep  will I make  more money  and have an 
easier life”. Clearly,  the improvement  in cattle premiums,  slaughter  and 
extensification,  etc. available  to the cattle farmer looks very attractive 
compared  to the stagnant  ewe premium.  Excluding  headage,  a suckler  farmer  
selling  finished  animals  could collect  around  £370/ha.  (inch Extensification) 
compared  to £155 or so for ewes, at similar  stocking  rates (2001 premium  
rates).
The individual  farmer  should  not of course  change  their system  on the basis  
of average  or top 25% returns but on the basis of their own individual  
situation.  The financial  impact of changing  a sheep and or cattle system  
basically  depends  on:
- WHERE  ARE  YOU  COMING  FROM  - WHERE  YOU  WANT TO GO
- i.e., Level  of physical  efficiency  of sheep  and cattle  enterprises
- Expected  prices  and premiums  - New Investment  required  versus  capital  
released
- Labour  Requirements  and personal  preferences.
Basically,  if net income  from cattle and sheep  are more or less similar  and 
the investment  requirement  for cattle is double  that of sheep, the financial 
implications  of changing  are obvious.
Two examples  are used to illustrate  the impact  of changing  on:
- Net  Profit  - Cash Flow
- Net Worth  Change  when examined  at roughly  comparable  levels  of 
efficiency  for the cattle and sheep  enterprises.
Case I
Farm 60 ha. -
40 sucklers -
272 ewes -
Good  facilities,  etc. 
Term Loan £20,000No Headage 
progeny  to beef 
mid-season  lamb
Some  Alternative  Systems
1. Reduce  ewes to 100 - increase  sucklers  to 60.
Extra  Investment  £23,000  -i- £8,000  extra working  capital.
2. Reduce  sucklers  to 26 - increase  ewes to 395.
Reduced  Investment  £3200.
3. Reduce  sucklers  by 6 and join REPS.
Reduced  Investment  £6500.
4. Reduce  ewes by 55 and join REPS.
Reduced  Investment  £1700.
120
Summary  of Financial  Returns
1. Profitability
Present Alt.  1 Alt. 2 Alt. 3 Alt. 4
£ £ £ £ £
Gross  Receipts 63780 68522 61919 64059 65793
(of which  premiums) (16430) (19918 (15190 (16249) (17633
REPS - ) ) (4800) )
Cash Expenses 42414 - 39414 (4800)
Net Cash Income 21366 47411 39846 24645 40334
Depreciation 4000 21111 22074 4000 2459
Net Income 17366 5000 4750 20645 4000
16111 17325 21459
2. Cash Flow
Cash Balance  for
Living  Expenses 17382 15834 18408 20390 20454
3. Net Worth  Change  (Assume  £15,000  personal  drawings  etc. tax)
Net Worth  Change +556 -194 +588 +2859 +3443
Clearly  the additional  investment  required  for Alt. 1 and replacing  ewes  
with cattle,  places  a big strain on cash flow due to increased  loan repayments, 
while minor  reductions  in either  cattle or sheep would  qualify  the farm for 
REPS  and also extensification  premiums  at the low rate.
The All Sheep  Farm
Case 2 looks  at a sheep  farm at a high level of efficiency  and the financial 
impact  of changing  to 50% sheep:  50% suckling  system.
Details:-
Alternative60 ha. - No Headage 
635 ewes - mid season  lamb  
£20,000  Term Loan
350 ewes + 50 sucklers  selling  weanlings 
Extra  Investment  £58,000  - over 10 years  at 9%
121
Summary  o f Financial  Returns
1. Profitability  (£) Present  - All Sheep  Alternative  50%:
50%
Gross  Receipts 63169 70,080
(of which  Premiums) (9525) (14958)
REPS (4800) (4800)
Cash Expenses 38481 46295
Net Cash Income 24688 23785
Depreciation 4000 5800
Net Income 20688 17985
1. Cash Flow
Cash Balance  for
Living  Expenses 19685 15280
2. Net Worth  Change  (assume  £15,000  personal  drawing excl.  tax)
-1-2859 -1-1267
Summary
There  is little difference  in net income  per hectare  between  cattle  and sheep  
at comparable  levels  of efficiency.  However,  the investment  cost of most  cattle  
systems  is roughly  double  that of sheep  which  swings  the financial  advantage  
in favour  of sheep.  Generally,  changing  enterprise  mix is more or less akin to 
readjusting  the deck-chairs  with no great change  in income  and a probable 
worsening  of annual  cash flow. Qualifying  for REPS  (which  is relatively  easy 
from the stocking  rate criteria  in a cattle/sheep  system)  has a bigger  impact  on 
profit, cash flow, etc. than adjusting  enterprise  mix at comparable  levels of 
efficiency.
The individual  farmer,  however,  must examine  their own situation  and not 
base decisions  on averages,  top 25% or whatever.  Each situation  is different  - 
the level of efficiency  of each enterprise  may vary, existing  resources  are 
variable,  borrowing  requirement  and repayment  capacity  will vary and 
personal  likes and dislikes  may influence  change  over and above  the financial  
considerations.
122
Appendix  I Background  Budgets
Case 1
Stocking  Rate - 1.15 acres/LU  approx.
Steer  Weight  650kg  95p/lb
Heifer  Weight 525kg 94p/lb
Meal Input - Steers  700 kg
- Heifers  450kg
Ewes 150% weaned 
Sale price £43.70  per lamb
Overhead  costs (excl. Interest  and Depreciation)  £9550  (base)
Investment  Costs  
Suckler  Cow £750
Suckler  Quota £3(X)
Replacement  Ewes £60
Case 2
Ewes 1.6 lambs/ewe  weaned
Suckler  Weanling  Steer 320  kg
Weanling  Heifer 290  kg
Overheads  £11650  (excl. interest  and depreciation)(£512)
(£348)
123
Worm  Parasite  Control  and ‘New ’ 
Technology:  A Fresh  Approach
B. GOOD
Teagasc  Sheep  Research  Centre,  Athenry.  Co. Galway
Introduction
It is widely  recognised  that gastrointestinal  parasites  have a negative  impact  
on the health,  welfare  and productivity  of sheep.  In cases of heavy  infections  
that go untreated  the result  may be fatal (Coop,  Graham  et al 1985; Parkins  & 
Holmes  1989). Current  parasite  control  measures  have an excessive  reliance  
on anthelmintics  with insufficient  attention  to judicious  pasture  management. 
The threat  of anthelmintic  resistance  coupled  with growing  consumer  concerns 
over chemical  residues  in meat and in the environment,  which  is resulting  in 
longer  withdrawal  periods,  means  that we must re-examine  the approach  to 
parasite  control  on farms.  Pivotal  to any efforts  to control  parasites  is a sound  
understanding  of the epidemiology  of the parasite  as it interacts  with the host 
under  specific  management  and production  systems  (Barger,  1999).
Epidemiology
The life cycles  of the major  gastrointestinal  nematodes  are similar  and can 
be described  as direct  in so far as only one host (i.e. sheep)  is invaded  during  
a single  cycle of the parasite ’s life history.  The adult female  worm produces  
eggs that are passed  out on to the pasture  in the host ’s faeces.  Given  suitable  
conditions  of warmth  and moisture  the eggs will hatch, complete  two free- 
living  feeding  larval  stages  (LI to L2) to become  a non-feeding  infective  third 
stage (L3). In contrast  to LI and L2 stages, L3 (surviving  on their lipid 
reserves)  are best equipped  to survive  adverse  conditions  and are able to 
survive  for many months  at low temperatures  and can overwinter.  When  
ingested  by a suitable  host, the infective  larvae  (L3) mature  to become  adults  
and females  produce  eggs.  The length  of time between  larval  ingestion  and the 
appearance  of eggs (known  as the prepatent  period)  in faeces  is about  3 weeks.  
Peculiar  to Nematodirus,  all development  to L3 occurs  within  the egg and a 
period of cold exposure  as a stimulus  to hatching  is required.  As a result 
summer/autumn  hatching  is largely  inhibited  and a mass  hatch  of Nematodirus  
eggs will occur  in late spring  early summer  of the following  year. Among  other  
parasites  which  may be found  in the abomasum  and intestine  of sheep  (Table  
1), the most ubiquitous  parasites  found in sheep in Ireland  are Teladorsagia  
(Ostertagia  spp) and Nematodirus.
In addition  to an infective  larva ’s (L3) ability  to survive  for many months  
at low temperatures,  two factors  which  affect the normal  parasitic  life cycle  
and which ensure their continuation  to the next season are arrested  larval  
development  within  the host and the periparturient  rise in faecal  egg counts.  
Arrested  / inhibited  larval development  can be described  as the phenomenon
124
Table 1
Roundworm  parasites  found  in sheep  and their location  in the gastrointestinal
tract
Abomasum Small intestine Large intestine
Teladorsagia  (Ostertagia)  spp Nematodirus  spp Oesophagostomum  venulosum
Haemonchus  contortus Cooperi  spp Chahertia  ovina
Trichostrongylus  axci Trichostrongylus  vitrinus Trichuris  ovis
Bunostomum  trigoncephalum
Capillaria  spp
Strongyloides  papillosus*
*lnfection  occurs  through  skin as well as orally
whereby  there is temporary  cessation  in development  of the nematode.  By 
remaining  sexually  immature  in the host until more favourable  conditions  
return,  the parasite  ensures  its chances  for survival.  Not all nematodes  have the 
same  disposition  for arrested  development  (Urquart,  Armour,  Duncan,  Dunn  & 
Jennings,  1996).  Developmental  arrest of larvae  can occur  either  in response  
to the acquired  immune  status  of the host or as a result  of a seasonal  stimulus  
(such  as the increasingly  colder  temperatures  experienced  in autumn/winter).
The periparturient  rise in faecal egg counts observed  in ewes around  
parturition  and in early lactation  is a result of a temporary  relaxation  in 
immunity.  The source  of the high egg count  could  be three fold the maturation  
of arrested  larvae (arrested  because  of host immunity),  from an infection  
(overwintered  infective  larvae)  picked up on the pasture  or the increased  
fecundity  of an existing  adult worm population  (Urquart  et al 1996). The 
importance  of this rise in faecal  egg count  is that it occurs  at a time when  there  
is an increasing  number  of susceptible  hosts thus enhancing  parasite  survival.
The level of parasitism  acquired  by the grazing  animal  at any one point in 
time is determined  by a number  of factors.  These factors  may include  the 
effects of seasonal  conditions  which determine  the availability  of both 
infection  and pasture,  husbandry  system, grazing behaviour,  nutrition, 
previous  experience  of infection  (leading  to immunity),  physiological  state of 
the host (notably  in relation  to the breeding  cycle  of the ewes)  and the genetic  
make-up  of the host. To a susceptible  host the major  epidemiological  variable  
that influences  the worm burden  is the number  of infective  larvae ingested  
from the pasture  each day (Barger,  1999). There is also clear evidence  for 
genetic  variation  in the host ’s response  to parasites  (Barger,  1989; Stear and 
Wakelin,  1999; Hanrahan  and Crowley,  1999; Good, Hanrahan  and Crowley  
2000 ).
Lambs  are the most  vulnerable  in the flock  because  they have no experience 
of infection.  The ability  of a sheep  to mount  an effective  immune  response  is 
acquired  over time, in response  to parasite  exposure.  When  and how effective  
the acquired  resistance  is depends  on the species  of parasite.  For example
125
Fig.l - Pattern  of faecal  egg count  in undosed  ewe Iambs  / hoggets  
(Kearney  1966-8)
young lambs acquire  good resistance  against  Nematodirus  spp after 2 to 3 
months  of grazing  infected  pastures,  whereas  8 months  may be required  to 
develop  resistance  against  Teladorsagia  (Ostertagia)  and Trichostrongylus  
colubriformis  (Gruner,  1991).  The pattern  of faecal  output  in naturally  infected  
untreated  lambs  seen in Kearney ’s study (Figure  1) reflects  this acquisition  of 
immunity  over time. In response  to the increasing  level of pasture  
contamination  over the grazing  season  the natural  pattern  of faecal  egg counts  
in young lambs continued  to rise until resistance  began to develop  and a 
subsequent  reduction  in faecal  eggs was observed.
Pre-weaning  spring-born  lambs are confronted  with two sources of 
infection:  residual  over-wintered  larval population  and the larval population 
that is a result  of the ewe ’s increased  faecal  egg output  around  parturition  and 
early lactation.  Figure  2 highlights  the effects  of dosing  ewes (lambed  late
Fig. 2 - Number  of infective  larvae  counted  per kg/DM  observed  on 
pasture  where  ewes were dosed  or remained  undosed
126
1000 ^—0— FEC from lambs  grazing  pasture  where  ewes were dosed  
• FEC from lambs  grazing  pasture  where  ewes were not dosed
Fig. 3 - Faecal  egg counts  observed  in lambs  whose  mothers  were either  
dosed  or remained  undosed
March and dosed prior to going out and 5 weeks post lambing)  on the 
subsequent  numbers  of infective  larvae  observed  on pastures.  A lower  level of 
pasture  contamination  was observed  on pasture where ewes were dosed  
(Figure  2) and this was reflected  in the lower faecal egg count observed  in 
lambs from those pastures  (Figure 3). Post-weaning,  and as a result of 
acquiring  infection  from the above  two sources,  lambs  will be exposed  to an 
increased  source  of infection  derived  from their own contamination  of the 
pasture.
Parasite  control  measures
With the ability  of some parasites  to arrest  within  the animal  or overwinter 
on pasture,  the ideal of a completely  parasite-free  pasture  is unrealistic.  The 
essential  aim therefore,  is to minimise  the level of pasture  contamination  thus 
reducing  the intake  of larvae by the lamb during  the critical  pre- and post-  
weaning  periods.  The availability  of highly effective  broad-spectrum  anti- 
parasitic  drugs has led to a chemotherapeutically  dominated  approach  to 
parasite  control in many sheep farming  practices.  However,  anthelmintic  
resistance  threatens  this chemotherapeutic  approach  to parasitic  control  in 
sheep (Jackson,  1993; Coles 1997).  Anthelmintics  can be grouped  into three  
classes  based  on their main chemical  composition  and mode of action  (Table  
2). Resistance  has been observed  for all 3 broad-spectrum  families.  Evidence  
from studies  in Europe  indicate  a slower  rate of emergence  to that seen in the 
Southern  Hemisphere  (Waller,  1994; Jackson  & Coop, 2000).  There is little 
evidence  that reversion  to anthelmintic  susceptibility  occurs following  an 
absence  of the anthelmintic  so once resistance  is established  it remains 
(Jackson,  1993). Recommendations  to delay the onset of resistance  include  
minimal  chemoprophylaxis,  maximal  drug efficacy  (correct  dose and proper 
administration)  in conjunction  with judicious  grazing  management  (Coles  & 
Rouche,  1992).
127
Table  2
Anthelmintic  groups  and mode  of action
Group Class  of anthelmintics Mode  of action
1. Benzimadazoles  
& Probenzimadazoles1-B Disrupts  parasites  
metabolism-leads  to 
starvation
2. Imadazothiazoles  & 
Tetrahydropyrimidines2-LM Causes  muscular  paralysis  
and rapid expulsion
3. Avermectin  
& milbemycins3-AV Causes  flaccidparalysis
To take on board these recommendations  a fully integrated  approach  to 
parasite  control  is needed  based on epidemiological  knowledge  and grazing  
management  practices  so that severe  pasture  challenge  is avoided  by the most  
susceptible  part of the flock. An appraisal  of when to and why to dose is 
needed.  On-farm  DIY technology  from New Zealand  for determining  faecal  
egg counts  at farm level (FECPAK®)  offers a potentially  effective  tool to 
enable  the rational  use of anthelmintics  in conjunction  with good grazing- 
management  practices.
Faecal  egg counts  are an indirect  and the only practical  method  available  to 
measure  parasite  burden. To obtain a faecal egg count for a flock the 
FECPAK®  method  involves  collecting  samples  from a representative  number 
(about  20) of fresh faecal  deposits  to make a composite  sample.  This sample  
is subsequently  mixed  and processed  and the results  expressed  as the number 
eggs per gram of faeces.  Factors  such as weight,  nutrition,  time of year, age of 
animals,  clinical  signs and seasonal  appearance  of particular  parasite  species  
are all considerations  when  interpreting  the faecal  egg count  result.  Monitored 
over time the information  from composite  faecal counts can be used when  
making  decisions  regarding  the timing  and use of anthelmintics.  Faecal  egg 
counts will also be indicative  of how fast and to what extent a particular 
pasture  is becoming  contaminated.  In addition  to making  informed  decisions 
about anthelmintic  usage, the use of this technology  will also enable an 
assessment  of drug efficacy.  Performing  post drench  checks  after dosing  will 
achieve  this. If eggs are observed  this may reflect  incorrect  dosing  practices 
that in itself will encourage  anthelmintic  resistance  (e.g faulty dosing 
equipment,  not dosing according  to the heaviest  in the mob) or that 
anthelmintic  resistance  is already  present  to the particular  drug used.
Ultimately  the use of FECPAK®  technology  will provide  a dynamic  flow 
of information  on parasite  status  of sheep,  give producers  the choice  of making  
informed  decisions  on when to dose, provide  information  about  how optimal  
their  dosing  procedures  are or indeed  the efficacy  of the drugs  used. Moreover 
the results  obtained  from monitoring  faecal  egg counts  on a regular  basis can 
be interpreted  in terms of pasture safety and incorporated  into pasture  
management  strategies  on farms.
128
References
Barger,  I. A.(1989).  Genetic  resistance  of hosts and its influence  on epidemiology.  
Veterinary  Parasitology,  32, 21-35.
Barger,  1. A. (1999).  The role of epidemiological  knowledge  and grazing  management  
for helminth  control  in small ruminants.  International  Journal  for Parasitology  29; 
41-47.
Coles,  G. C. (1997),  Nematode  control  practices  and anthelmintic  resistance  on British  
Sheep  farms.  The Veterinary  Record  141(4):  91-3.
Coles, G, C. and Roush R. T. (1992). Slowing  the spread of anthelmintic  resistant  
nematodes  of sheep  and goats in the United  Kingdom.  Veterinary  Record  130; 505- 
510.
Coop,  R. L., Graham,  R. B., Jackson,  F., Wright,  S. E. and Angus,  K. W. (1985).  Effect  
of experimental  Ostertagia  circumcincta  infection  on the performance  of grazing  
lambs.  Research  in Veterinary  Science  38: 282-287.
Good. B., Hanrahan,  J. R and Crowley,  B. A. (2000), Susceptibility  of Texel and 
Suffolk  lambs  to nematodes  following  natural  infection:  comparative  worm  burdens  
and faecal  egg counts.  Agricultural  Research  Forum,  U.C D. 2 pages.
Gruner,  1. (1991).  Breeding  for helminth  resistance  in sheep and goats. Breeding  for 
resistance  in animals.  J. B. Owen  (ed) CAB International,  Wallingford,  pi87.
Jackson,  F. (1993). Anthelmintic  resistance  - the state of play. British Veterinary  
Journal  149: 123138.
Jackson,  F. and Coop, R. L. (2000).  The development  of anthelmintic  resistance  in 
sheep nematodes.  Parasitology  120 Suppl;  S95-107.
Kearney,  A. (1968).  The seasonality  of endo-parasitic  infection.  An Foras Taluntais  
Research  Report,  p24-25.
Kearney,  A (1967).  The seasonality  of endo-parasitic  infection.  An Foras Taluntais  
Research  Report,  p33-34.
Kearney,  A (1966).  The seasonality  of endo-parasitic  infection.  An Foras Taluntais  
Research  Report,  p99-20.
Hanrahan,  J. P. and Crowley,  B. A. (1999).  Evidence  for breed  differences  in resistance  
to nematode  infection.  EAAP  50th Annual  Meeting,  Zurich.  4 pages.
Stear, M. J. and Wakelin,  D. (1998).  Genetic  resistance  to parasite  infection.  Rev. sci. 
tech. Offint.  Epiz 17: 143-153.
Urquart,  G. M., Armour,  J., Duncan,  J. L., Dunn,  A. M. and Jennings,  F. W. (1996).  
Veterinary  Parasitology,  2nd edn. Blackwell  Science  Ltd p9-10.
Waller,  P. J. (1994),  The development  of anthelmintic  resistance  in ruminant  livestock.  
Acta Tropica  56: 233-243.
129
Quality  Lamb  Partnership  
Programme
G. MURPHY  ■
Teagasc,  Ballinrobe,  Co. Mayo
A unique  quality  lamb  production  partnership  offering  full traceability  from 
farm to fork has been established  in Mayo.  The South Mayo Quality  lamb  
producer  group  have teamed  up with Dawn  Meats,  Ballyhaunis,  Teagasc,  Bord  
Bia and the local Leader  Company  to form an alliance  aimed  at delivering  an 
independent  quality  assured  and fully traceable  product  to the consumer.
Background
South  Mayo  Quality  Lamb  Producer  Group  was set up in 1986 and from an 
initial  50 members  delivering  2500 lambs  per annum  it has steadily  expanded 
to 180 members  and 25,000  lambs  annually.
Quality  has always  been its hallmark.  From early on it forged  close links 
with Teagasc  in the form of local drystock  adviser  Gerry  Murphy.  Its ties with 
the local Leader  Company  enabled  it to venture  into areas  that might  otherwise  
have been difficult  to finance.  Leader  provided  funding  in the following  areas:
• Mobile  weighing  facilities  placed  strategically  throughout  the area.
• A computer  programme  designed  to monitor  lamb throughput  and 
performance  both of individual  farmers  and the group.
• An independent  assessment  by a trained  Teagasc  grader  of 18,000  group  
lambs  and the training  of group  co-ordinators  in assessing  lamb quality.  
Premiums  towards  the purchase  of top quality  terminal  sires by individual
farmers.  The group  has continued  this premium  ram scheme  through  industry  
sponsorship  leading  to over 500 top quality  rams  being  introduced  to the flocks  
in the past 8-10 years. Dawn  Ballyhaunis  and its predecessors  have actively  
supported  this effort.
Into the future
It is little wonder  then that the next natural  progression  for this group  would  
be in the area of quality  assurance  and traceability.  Farm  food assurance  is now 
a key component  of farm food production  and marketing.  Consumers  require  
assurance  in relation  to food safety,  animal  welfare,  environmental  protection 
and traceability.  Producers  must demonstrate  that the highest possible 
standards  have been observed  at all stages  of production.  These  objectives  can 
be best achieved  by participation  in a Farm  Food  Assurance  Programme.
However  the group felt that many of the current  attempts  at providing  
quality  assured/traceable  food  products  were window  dressing  with little  really  
tangible  to offer the consumer.  They decided  to strive towards  a fully 
independent  quality  assurance  scheme.  Discussions  and negotiations  ensued  
involving  Teagasc,  Dawn  Meats,  Bord  Bia and Leader  which  culminated  in the 
launching  of the Quality  Lamb Partnership  Programme  at Ashford  Castle  
Equestrian  Centre  by Minister  for Food  Mr. Ned O’Keefe  recently.  By offering
130
more than the minimum  demanded  by the marketplace  this pro-active 
partnership  is ahead  of its time but the hope is that they will be able to carve 
out a premium  niche for the product  and be repaid  with a premium  price. A 
steering  group  representing  group,  Teagasc  and Dawn  and chaired  by the very 
experienced  Michael  Deeley,  Bord Bia will oversee  its implementation.
Prosramme  Outline
The project will operate  at two levels - a general  programme  for all 
participating  farmers in the Dawn Meats area involving  individual  
consultations,  performance  analysis  and advice.  Secondly,  a targeted  scheme 
for the South  Mayo  producer  group will have a strong  emphasis  on the three 
key elements  of farm assurance  and traceability,  animal breeding  and 
production  systems.  All breeding  ewes and factory  lambs  will be individually 
tagged,  and this is regarded  as critical  to traceability.  A food assurance  plan 
will be drawn up for each participant  who will have to complete  a food 
assurance  programme  delivered  by Teagasc.  Participants  must comply  with a 
code of practice  covering  animal feed and medicines,  health and disease 
control,  animal  welfare,  livestock  quality,  environmental  protection  and farm 
records.
This whole package  was developed  by the group together  with Adviser 
Gerry Murphy,  Gerry Scully,  Chief  Sheep  Adviser,  Teagasc  and Tony Petit,  
Teagasc  Specialist  in quality  assurance.
The Quality  Assurance/Traceability  element
Quality  Assurance
Each farm is visited  by Teagasc  Adviser,  Gerry  Murphy  who examines  the 
farm under  the foregoing  headings  and agrees  on a quality  assurance  plan with 
the farmer.  A quality  assurance  course  will form part of the requirements.
Traceability
Each farmer  has his own individual  member  number. All  breeding  ewes  and 
factory  lambs are individually  tagged.  The tag used was sourced  in the UK 
(Ketchum  tip tag). It is a closed  plastic tip tag. The tag contains  the logo
S.M.P.G.  - the farmer  identified  number  and an individual  number  for each 
animal.  Ewes  carry a yellow  tag and factory  lambs  a white  tag on the right  ear. 
From previous  experience  with the tag by group  members  the loss rate was 
minimal.  The cost per tag was approx  15p/head.
Upgrading  of existing  systems  within the factory  will enable individual  
lambs  to be traced  through  slaughter  and into the chills.
Reaction  to the tagging  has been positive  and already  farmers  have found  
that information  on kill out % and breed  type for the lambs  is very useful  while  
individual  ewe information  regarding  mating,  lambing  time, difficulties  etc. 
are an aid to good management.
Obviously  continued  positive  reaction  to tagging  will hinge round the 
successful  outcome  to the marketing  efforts  measurable  in terms  of a premium 
price to the farmer.
131
Traceability  and Quality  Assurance
F. CROSBY
University  College  Dublin
The Sheepmeat  Forum was established  by the Minister  for Agriculture,  
Food and Rural Development  in February  1998. The objectives  set by the 
Minister  for the Forum  were:
i) to evaluate  the future  direction  of the sheepmeat  sector;  and
ii) to assess  how the industry  can address  existing  constraints  and future  
challenges
The Sheepmeat  Forum  issued  its report  in October  1999 when  it highlighted  
a range  of issues  requiring  attention  for the sustained  development  of the sheep  
industry  in this country.  Representation  on this committee  was wide ranging  
and included  Teagasc,  Bord Bia, IFA, UFA, ICMSA.  ICOS,  Macra  na Feirme,  
IMA, Kepak,  Slaney  Meats,  ICM, UCD and the Department  of Agriculture  
Food and Rural Development.  In November  1999, Minister  Joe Walsh  set up 
the Monitoring  Committee  of the Sheepmeat  Forum  with the responsibility  of 
furthering  the implementation  of these recommendations  wherever  possible.  
The report contains  some very important  recommendations  that if not 
implemented  quickly  will almost  certainly  leave us without  a place to sell our 
lambs.  I as its Chairman  will do what I can to facilitate  the recommendations 
contained  in the report.
Sheep  traceability
Amongst  the many items recommended,  sheep traceability  and quality  
assurance  were major  discussion  items and are the two for discussion  under  
this session  of your meeting  today.  It was clear  to the membership  of the forum  
that the development  of an effective  sheep  traceability  system  will become  an 
important  advantage  to Ireland  in maintaining  access  to its markets,  especially  
in France,  and could  help build market  share elsewhere.  Everybody  accepted  
the need to provide  an assurance  to the consumer  that lamb  can be traced  from 
purchase  back to its farm of origin  and in this way give a guarantee  that the 
meat is safe and wholesome.  Consequently  the membership  recognised  the 
need for a sheep  traceability  system  and gave its support  to its introduction  in 
2000 .
The urgent  need for change
Few if any of the membership  realised  then the speed  with which  the need 
for a credible  QA and traceability  system  for sheepmeat  would  become  if we 
are to have a sustained  viable industry.  In relation  to these two topics we 
cannot  afford  to ignore  what  other  countries  have done recently  and indeed  the 
discussions  that have taken place at European  level in recent weeks and 
months.  These  discussions  are ongoing  and undoubtedly  will result  in changes  
that we will have to implement  if we are to stay in business.
132
The need for tagging  should  never  be looked  on in isolation  but as part of a 
comprehensive  package,  which  will have as its core the need for a transparent 
traceability,  and quality assurance  procedure  that will give the necessary  
guarantees  that the consumer  demands  and rightly deserves.  The current  
proposals  from the Department  of Agriculture  Food and Rural  Development  
together  with the development  of a QA scheme  recently  committed  to by An 
Bord Bia, which if implemented,  will go a long way towards  achieving  the 
necessary  objectives.
Is tagging  essential?
In the EU directive  of 1992, Directive  92/102/EEC,  there is a requirement 
for sheep identification  back to a flock basis. In this there was some potential  
flexibility  given in relation  to branding,  tattoo or tag. However,  events  have 
moved faster than even the most committed  of us would ever have 
contemplated.  The EU commission  is now more interested  in ID/QA  and in 
spite of what some of us might  think, it has been documented  that our current  
system is unreliable  and unacceptable.  We urgently  need to change this 
perception  of the Irish lamb export  product.  There is now the momentum  in 
Europe  to have a harmonised  system  of ID for all member  states. In recent 
weeks,  senior  veterinary  staff from EU member  countries  met and agreed  that 
the ID system  should  be tag based.  Such a recommendation  is unlikely  to be 
ignored  by the Council  of Ministers.
Unlike  the New Zealanders,  many  of us Irish sheep  producers  appear  to lack 
long-term  commitment  to our industry.  As the second  largest  exporter  of lamb  
meat in Europe  we are extremely  vulnerable  to the vagaries  of the marketplace. 
Consequently  as producers,  we should  be proactive  rather  than reactive;  when  
it is clear that something  needs  to be changed  we should  get out there and do it 
fast. So volatile  is the situation  now that we must degrade  political  point  
winning  to second  place and all work together  so that an income  for the 43,000 
sheep  producers  in this country  can be guaranteed.
For my own part I have never  supported  the idea of doing  anything  where  
there is a cost involved  unless  it is financially  rewarding.  The most important  
reward  at the moment  is that we will continue  to have a place  to sell our lambs.  
Imagine  what would happen  in Ireland  if access to our export  markets  was 
blocked  for a month  in say July or for a lot longer!  Even at this point,  apparently  
some  potential  buyers  have gone elsewhere  for their lamb and orders  have been 
cancelled  just because  we do not have a credible  QA/ID  system  in place.
Time is not on our side and if we think that we can wait until the Minister 
Joe Walsh  delivers  a better  deal for the sheep  farmers  in Europe,  we are not at 
the races. Unlike  in 1992, the pressure  for identification  and traceability  is now 
coming  from the consumer,  in addition  to much more intense  pressure  from 
Brussels.  We have no choice  but to live within  current  and future  EU rules in 
this regard.
Vulnerability
Ireland  is not a scrapie  free country  and this together  with the fears of scrapie
133
and BSE/CJD  across  Europe  is generating  new fears. Incredibly  for a major 
exporting  country,  by Jan 2001,  Ireland  will be the only major  sheep  producing  
country  within the EU without  an acceptable  sheep ID system.  By January  
next, the UK will have a scheme  in place,  the French  and Dutch  have opted  for 
individual  number  tagging  of all animals  and the Spaniards  have an 
ID/traceability  system  in place.  Of their own free will, all countries  have opted  
for tagging.
If we want Minister  Joe Walsh  to negotiate  the best for us in Europe,  we 
will be giving  him a stronger  hand if we are seen to be abiding  by the current  
and giving  a commitment  to future  EU legislative  rules.  We must  put a system  
in place that not only identifies  the animals  on the farm but allows  for this 
information  to be carried  through  to the carcass  and even onto the cut carcass.
Members  of the Sheep  Monitoring  Committee  and others  are continuing  to 
discuss  this extremely  important  issue aimed  at putting  a system  in place that 
(i) is acceptable  within  EU rules, (ii) will take on board  the fears of producers 
and in addition,  (iii) will help to give us a marketing  advantage  for a quality  
product.
There  are many details  still to be worked  out but with the commitment  of 
all, the momentum  is there to do it. Personally  I feel we can get a marketing  
advantage  in France  by individually  numbering  all our lambs  and combining  
this with a national  QA programme.  In effect  I believe  that this is something  
which  is essential,  something  which  should  have been put in place yesterday  
rather  than tomorrow  so to speak,  although  I would  not see it as being  practical  
that individual  numbers  would  be read at the abattoir  level.
Currently  the UK and Ireland  are the only major  sheep  producing  countries 
within  the EU without  an individual  number  on the breeding  ewes. Having  
lambs individually  numbered  would confer management  advantages  for 
improved  efficiencies,  including  better  record  keeping  of the occasional  drug 
treatment  etc. We need to give this level of guarantee  to the consumer  that we 
are committed  to producing  a quality  product  and have a scheme  in place  that 
stands  up to any scrutiny.
Any scrapie monitoring/testing  programme  will necessitate  individual  
numbering  and we are likely  to see much  more of this even in the short term.  
We should  set ourselves  up for this now and not be forced  to change  later. I ask 
you - is individual  numbering  too high a fence to jump now? I believe  that 
Ireland  should  lead the way and let the other countries  take a leaf from our 
book rather  than the opposite  way around.
134
NOTES
135
NOTES
136
v-. ;■■ . ;‘ ^ ■■* - :V:
5:^-- ^-I ■-■_
■■7 - 7
•=^-■7  ^ V'.:  - • ^ ^ '
■ r . ' ' ■• ■ ..v- ' ' •■ ? ■ * .. ■ . .•^:..c'j.  ., • -rt 17 7.. ^ . ._ _ _ ■ - 7 - . -
^ ' ,7- 7-
I '- <
