Irish Grassland  
Association  Journal
2003  VOLUME  37
IRISH  GRASSLAND  ASSOCIATION
CORPORATE  MEMBERS  2003
ACC Bank  
AIB Bank  
Alltech
Bank  of Ireland  
Bord Bia 
Connacht  Gold 
Dairygold
Dairymaster  Limited  
Dawn Meats  
Drinagh  Co-op  
Drummond  Seeds  Limited  
FBD Insurances  
Glanbia
Goldcrop  Limited  
Grassland  Fertilizers  Limited  
I.A.W.S  Group  pic 
I FAC Accountants 
Irish Farmers ’ Journal 
Irish Farm Managers  Association  
Kerry  Agribusiness 
Lakeland  Dairies  
LELY Ireland  Limited  
McQuinn  Consulting  
Monsanto  Ireland  Ltd 
Mullinahone  Co-op 
New Zealand  Cattle  Limited  
Pharmacia  Animal  Health  
Premier  Molasses  Company  Limited  
Timac  Limited
TEAGASC  EDUCATION  and ADVISORY  SERVICES
Ballyhaise  Agricultural  College  
Cork East 
Cork West  
Laois  
Limerick
Regional  Office,  South,  Kildalton  
Regional  Office,  North,  Grange  
Tipperary  North  
Tipperary  South
Irish Grassland  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 37 2003
Edited  by 
David  McGilloway
ISSN 0332-0588
Printed  by Walsh,  Printer,  Roscrea
CONTENTS
PAGE
P. Clarke  &
G. Scully New Zealand  Sheep  Farming 1
T. Nolan Grassland  & Grazing  Management  for
Mid-Season  Lamb Production6
A.A. Avery Meeting  the World ’s Food Challenges,
People,  Pets and potables17
H. Bayliss Fonterra  - a blueprint  for Ireland? 28
D P. Berry,
F. Buckley  P. Dillon  
R.D. Evans,  M Rath  
R.F. VeerkampGenetic  Selection  to maximise
Dairy Herd Survivability35
A.F. Carson
L. E.R Dawson
M. A. McCoyManagement  of Young  Stock  for maximum  
retention  in the Dairy Herd43
D. French Profitable  Milk Production  - 
Getting  the Basics  right55
P. Kenny A Strategic  Vision  for the Irish Dairy Industry 60
L. Lamberg Encouraging  change  in the Dairy Industry  - 
The Danish/Swedish  Perspective,
Co-Ops  - the Future65
G. Ramsbottom Technologies  for Profit 69
J. Tyrrell I.C.O.S.  Vision  for the Irish Dairy  Sector 76
P. Bolger
J. McNamaraLabour  Efficiency  on Drystock  Farms:  A core 
issue  for the Future82
M.G. Keane Factors  Affecting  finishing  Cattle  Performance 89
J. Shirley Brazil  - The World's  Food Producing  Giant 97
B. Smyth Cattle  Farming  after Fischler 102
Irish Grassland  Association  Participant ’s Report  
on Study  Trip to New Zealand  - October  2003107
COUNCIL  2003 - 2004
President  
Vice-President  
Past-President  
Generai  SecretaryTony Pettit  
Brendan  Barnes  
John O'Brien  
Grainne  Dwyer
John Claffey,  Kevin Commins,  Noel Culleton,  Jim Dwyer,  John Dunworth,  Donal  
Fitzgerald,  Sean Flanagan,  Jan Frederiks,  Padraig  French,  Mark McGee,  James  
Humphreys,  Anne Kehoe,  Pearse  Kelly, Jack Kennedy,  William  Kingston,  Pat 
McFeely,  David McGilloway,  Michael  O’Donovan,  Robin  Talbot,  Padraig  Walshe,
Peter  Young
Irish Grassland  Association,  Moneymore,  Borris  in Ossory,  Co. Laois  
Phone/Fax  0505 41025 Email: arassland@eircom.net
New Zealand  sheep  farming
P. Clarke^  & G. Scully^
^Teagasc,  Kildalton,  Co. Kilkenny  
^Teagasc,  Athenry,  Co. Galway
Introduction
New  Zealand  (NZ) is four  times  the size of Ireland  (Ire), and has a total population  of close 
on 4 million  people  (the same as Ire). The main natural  resources  are the people,  the 
land and the sea. Farming  is the mainstay  of the economy,  with agricultural  exports  
accounting  for over 90 percent  of revenue  earned.
New Zealand  agriculture  is based  on 4.6 million  dairy cows  and 30 million  breeding  ewes.  
There are virtually  no suckler  herds or cereal cropping.  Having  come through  a very 
tough period  in the mid 1980's  when all subsidies  were removed,  farming  has bounced 
back to be a strong  industry  today. Product  prices  are well below those  in Ire, but the NZ 
cost base is much lower. There  are no milk quotas. To begin milk production  in NZ, a 
farmer  must make an initial payment  to the co-op of about €1.30 per gallon of milk 
produced.  The co-op  uses this fee to provide  the facilities  to process  the milk.
There are virtually  no in wintering  farm buildings  in NZ other than milking parlours,  
shearing  sheds  and covered  sheep  handling  units. Animal ’s stay out all year round so 
feeding  is grass based. All farms are well fenced  and organised.  The most common 
machine  is the quad bike, with over 70,000  in NZ.
Root crop acreage  is again increasing;  turnips to  overwinter  cows,  ewes  and store lambs,  
and stubble  turnips  and other  green  crops  for finishing  lambs. Some  round  bale silage  is 
also made.
Pollution  is an issue of increasing  concern.  To set up a new milking  unit, a farmer  must  
first go to the neighbours  and get them to sign off that they are happy  that there will be 
no interference  with their water  supply. This is a form of planning  permission  and there 
are Environment  Courts  that adjudicate  in the case of a dispute.
New Zealand  has long been associated  with new technology  and this is evident on farms.  
Farmers  highlight  the Internet  and quad bike as bringing  major  changes  to their lives. A 
low cost base, rationalisation  at farm and processor  level, plus strong marketing 
worldwide  has all contributed  to the present  good fortune  of NZ farming.  Obviously,  given  
that so much  has to be exported  the value  of the NZ dollar  is important.  A weak  NZ dollar  
greatly  helps exports.
Sheep
Numbers
In the early 1980 ’s, the NZ ewe flock stood at 50 million  breeding  ewes. Today  the figure 
is 27 million  head. In 1980, lamb carcass  weight was  13 kg; today  it is almost  17 kg (see 
Table 1). In addition,  the average  weaning  rate has gone  from below one  lamb/ewe to the 
present  1.16 lambs/ewe.  Even though  ewe numbers  have dropped  by 32 percent,  overall 
weight  of lamb carcase  produced  has increased  by about  3 percent.  This is a massive 
turnaround  by any standards  and shows  how sheep  farmers  have become  more efficient  
and adapted  to survive  without  subsidies.
Table  1. Breeding  ewe number,  lamb carcass  weight,  weaning  rate and total lamb  
output  for 1983 and 2001
1983 2001
Breeding  ewes (million) 51.0 30.3
Lamb  carcase  weight  (kg) <13 16.8
Weaning  rate 0.98 1.19
Total lamb output  (OOOt) 600 600
Source:  Meat  New Zealand
Wool
Of the 30 million  breeding  ewes  in NZ, some  3 million  are Merinos  and the rest are based  
on the Romney.  The Merino  sheep  is a hill breed  and producer  of good quality  wool. The 
fleece from a Merino  can weigh up to 6 kg, twice that of a Suffolk  in Ireland. Merino  
fleeces  have a fibre diameter  as low as 16 microns  whereas  fleeces  in Ireland  would  have 
a diameter  of 28 - 30 microns.
Falling  wool prices  have hit NZ as well as everywhere  else. Just a few years  ago, wool 
accounted  for 34 percent  of total sheep  output;  today it is just 16 percent.  This is forcing  
a change  in emphasis  from wool to increased  lamb output.
Grass
Grass is the cornerstone  around  which NZ sheep  farming  survives.  There is no meal 
feeding. Grass is saved up for their shorter  winters  and rationed  out to ewes during  
pregnancy.  Ewes are set stocked  three weeks before lambing  and allocated  grass  
depending  on whether they have singles,  twins or triplets. Farmers  talk about  kg of grass  
DM per hectare  in the same  way as farmers  in Ireland  are familiar with cereal  yields. In 
NZ grass  growth  is planned  and budgeted,  it is their main source  of feed.
Breeding
The Romney  sheep,  which is the most popular  sheep  in NZ, comes  form the Romney  
Marsh  breed  in Kent, Southern  England.  A white-faced  sheep,  the mature  body weight  is 
about 65  kg. Like the Merino,  it can produce  a fleece  of up to 6 kg but the fibre diameter 
is usually  over 30 microns.  The Perndale  breed  (Romney  x Cheviot)  and the Coopworth  
breed  (Romney  x Border  Leicester)  have developed  from the Romney.
Weaning  rate is going up with many farmers  hitting 140 %. This is being achieved  by 
using composite  breeds. About  20 years ago some Texel, Finnish  Landrace  and East 
Friesian  ewes were  brought  in to NZ. These  bloodlines  are now being used to produce  a 
prolific  crossing  ram (composites),  very similar  to the Belclare  in Ireland. Farmers  that 
have reached  a weaning  rate of 140 - 150 % do not want  to increase  this any further,  as 
this results  in increased  triplets  numbers  which  does not suit an easy care set up.
Terminal  rams are selected  to produce  lambs with good hindquarters  and narrow  
shoulders.  NZ farmers  argue  that the back end is the most valuable  part of the carcase  
and no matter how good the shoulder  is, it is still worth  very little so why select  for it. You 
are just selecting  for difficult  lambings.
Work  organisation
In NZ you don’t attempt  to operate  without  proper  facilities.  Every  farm is superbly fenced 
with sheep  wire or electric  fencing,  and is equipped  with its own post driver  and fencing 
equipment.  There  is also a big fencing  contract  business  in the country.  Gates  and grass 
roadways  are strategically  designed  and located  to make  movement  of animals  easier.  
All sheep  have to be crutched  (clipped)  before  sale. This is potentially  a huge job but 
again the facilities  make it easy. The handling  units are well designed.  Additional  
features,  such as electronic  chutes  and automatic  weighing  scales are increasing  on 
units. Labour  saving  products  are widely  used e g. concentrated  pour-ons,  which  can be 
mixed  with water  and pumped  to a jetter  system  in a race using a tractor  sprayer.  Every  
farm has a special  chute for loading  animals.  All the livestock  trucks  and trailers  have  
sliding  doors. There  are no trailer  ramps  as we have here - they were banned  about  10 
years  ago on safety  grounds.
Teams  of dogs are a vital element  - stamina  dogs are used for long distance  work, the 
'eye' dog for lambing  and ’gentle ’ dogs are used in the handling  units. Quad  bikes  are on 
every  farm.
Lambing  is largely  unsupervised.  At best, farmers  try to get around  all the flock every 1 
- 2 days. There  are no foxes  in NZ. Likewise  there are no grey crows  to be seen, which 
are big advantages  when lambing  outside.
Processing
Two major  meat groups  - Alliance  and PPCS  - account  for 80 % of the beef and lamb  
slaughtered  In NZ. Farmers  own both. The Alliance  Group has reduced  their lamb  
slaughtering  factories  from eleven  down to seven  plants  - Mataura  is the biggest. This 
plant operates  20 hours  a day with four hours  down time for cleaning.  Daily throughput  
of lambs  is 10,000  head. It employs  close on 1,400 people  and Is a fully integrated  unit. 
Sheep  go in at one end and meat comes  out vac-packed  and labelled  at the other  end. 
This product  has a shelf life of 65 days - 40 days for shipping  and 15 days on display  in 
the supermarkets  across  Europe.
In NZ, carcasses  are being weighed  and graded  as in Ire, but that is soon to change.  
Scanner  equipment  is in its final testing  phase  and by 2004, farmers  should  be paid on 
’yield of meat ’ rather  than grade. Factories  have gone from cutting  up about 15 % of 
carcasses  a few years  ago to cutting  up 85 % of carcasses  now (Table  2 ). Yield of meat  
is very important.
Table 2. Percentage  changes  in further  lamb processing  for selected  years 1981,  
1991 and 2001
Exports  in carcass  form Exports  as bone in/ 
boneless  cuts
1981 84% 16%
1991 43% 57%
2001 10% 90%
Source:  Meat New Zealand
With rationalisation  at factory level, moving to cutting of carcasses  and improved  
technology,  $NZ 18 has been added  to the value  of each lamb ($NZ 2 = 1). All this has
been passed  back to the farmer. When lambs  are sold, farmers  get paid 90 % of the 
quoted  price. The remaining  10% is held by the company  as an interest  free loan. This 
is then paid at the end of the season  plus a dividend.
Traceability
Traceability  exists  from the farm of origin  to the factory,  and a declaration  required  by law 
has to be signed  by the farmer. This relates  to disease  status  and withdrawal  periods.  
There is no traceability  from the farm of birth as there is no official  tagging  of sheep.  
However  NZ export  400,000  tonnes  of sheepmeat,  230,000  tonnes  of which comes  to 
Europe.  Europe  is a high price market  and so NZ will do whatever  Europe  wants  in order 
to stay in the market.
Research
Major progress  is being made  using Biotechnology.  DNA  testing  is being used to identify  
genes that influence  productive  traits e g., number  of lambs produced,  resistance  to 
disease,  fertility  in ewes and yield of meat in lamb carcasses  or any other  quality  that is 
desirable.  Instead  of trying  to select  populations  of animals  as in the past and hope the 
next generation  will have a particular  trait or quality - these  new methods  allow  genes  be 
incorporated  into breeding  programmes  and breeds.  This gives instant  results.
Monitor  Farms
A monitor  farm is an individual  farm chosen  by the local community,  which  a community  
group advises  and monitors  over  a three-year  period.  The Monitor  Farm  programme  aims 
to increase  farmer ’s awareness  of key management  issues  affecting  their business,  to 
motivate  the farmers to  modify  their systems  to increase  productivity  and profitability,  and 
to be market  driven. In all, there were 31 such farms  in 2000, spread  across  the whole 
country  covering  both sheep  and beef. Meat New Zealand  and Woolpro  provide  funding  
for these farms. Meat New Zealand  is the company  charged  with selling/promoting  NZ 
meat around  the world while Woolpro  is a wool exporting  company.  Each farm has a 
community  group that meets regularly  and discusses  how the farm is doing. This 
community  group  is made up of farmers,  local agribusiness  people,  advisers,  vets, meat  
factory  people  and researchers.  Discussion  groups  are built around  these  farms  and the 
funding  provided  goes in part to the Monitor  Farmers  and in part to pay an adviser  to run 
the discussion groups.  Looking  in at this Monitor  Farm  model,  it is very impressive.  There  
is a huge element  of self-help  with the farmers  themselves  as the drivers.
Conclusions
New Zealand  farm produce  will continue  to be a competitor  in Europe,  
very strong  links with Europe  and particularly  the UK.
There  are three key messages  for the Irish sheep  industry;
• Work  organisation,
• Biotechnology,
• Value  added.They still have
Improved  handling  facilities  are needed  on Irish farms. Basic handling  facilities  should 
include  a collecting  area, a dosing  race and footbath,  plus a place  to put a weighing  scale  
are necessary  if you have sheep. In Ire the same  fencing  equipment  is available  as there 
is in NZ. A lot of fencing  has been done under  REPS  in the last few years, but alot more  
needs  to be done.
Ireland  will need to move fast in the whole biotechnology  area. Teagasc  are in the 
process  of building  new biotechnology  laboratories  at the main centres.  Today  in NZ, you 
can take a tiny pin prick of blood from a rams ear - send it to Lincoln  University  and got 
back information  on how resistant  the ram is to footrot.  The new biotech  laboratories  must  
be given both the equipment  and the scientists  to make the advances  we need to 
compete. This applies  across  the board through  dairying,  sheep and cattle. Major 
advances  will be made  in the next few years  using the best genetics - Ire must be part of 
these advances.
The ‘value added'  area has to be tackled  in Ire. Why can’t we be more innovative  in 
developing  convenience  packs for export? How good are the carcasses  we are 
producing  for cutting  up? The industry  needs  feedback.  As farmers,  that feedback should 
be demanded.  Are the Breed Societies  doing the right type of selection?  What do we 
mean by a good ram anymore?  The NZ farmers  are very tuned in to the exact 
requirements  of the export  markets.  We are not nearly  as close to that information  and 
we don’t see it as important  as the New Zealanders  do.
New  Zealand  farm size is massive  by Ire standards  - 2,500 ewes  or 400 dairy cows  being  
the basic unit to live on. Scale in Ire will change  over time, and there is nothing  wrong 
with part-time  farming.  Also, Ire is only 20 - 30 hours by truck away from main export 
markets,  whilst  the New Zealanders  are 40 days by boat away from the same markets.  
So, while scale is different  it is not a reason  not be able to compete. Europe  is an 
expensive  place  to live in and farmers  can't be expected  to take low prices  and live in an 
expensive  economy.  In Ire there is a real danger  of allowing  direct  payments  to become 
a total distraction  at the expense  of good  technical  farming.  This distraction does  not exist 
in NZ. There is a need to find a balance  between  the two, and to avoid the trap of 
regarding  the animals  as just heads  to be kept to collect direct payments.  While  it is easy 
to understand  why this is happening,  unless  these  issues  are addressed  now, there  could  
be a huge price to be paid for this in years  to come.
To conclude,  there is a 'Freedom  to Farm ’ in NZ that does  not exist in Europe  at present.  
We need to be careful  here that farmers  are not legislated  out of existence.
References  
AgResearch  (2001).
2001.http:/AAAvwagresearch.cri.nz/agr/media/press/38_press.htm  
Connolly,  L. (1997). Sheep  production  in New Zealand and Ireland. Teagasc 
Dairy Exporter  (Nov. 2001). Boost  to dairy  and meat  exports  pp 86-87.
Meat New Zealand  (2001).
httpV/ www.meQtnz.com/wdbctx/corporate/corporate.home
Meat New Zealand  (2001). Global  sheepmeat  - the outlook  to 2006
Ministry  of Agriculture  and Forestry  (2001). Situation  and outlook  for New Zealand  
agriculture  and forestry
Grassland  and grazing  management  for 
mid-season  lamb production
T. Nolan
Teagasc  Research  Centre,  Athenry,  Co. Galway
Introduction
In Ireland,  grassland  occupies  about 80% of agricultural  land, over 80% of which is 
permanent  pasture. The estimated  percentages  of grazed herbage,  silage and 
concentrates  dry matter (DM) in the annual  diet are about  87, 10 and 3 for sheep,  80, 15 
and 5 for mixed sheep and cattle, and 61, 31 and 8 for cattle respectively.  Efficient  
grassland  use by sheep  capable  of high productivity  at low input cost remains  the basis  
for competitiveness.  As this involves  the planning  and integration  of a wide range  of soil, 
plant and animal relationships  into a smooth-running  predictable  whole system,  the 
particular  system  used tends  to be farm specific.
In this paper  it is intended  to avoid such specificity  and to focus on the more important  
factors  of grassland  and grazing  management  for lowland  mid-season  lamb production,  
which  underpins  the achievement  of high return  on land, labour  and capital. It is pitched  
at a level for efficient  grassland  use, where  high stocking  and lambing  rate combinations  
are required,  i.e. situations  where  planning  and management  are under  a more severe  
test. The system  is defined  as one in which lambing  commences  in late February  /early  
March  and all lambs  are taken  to about  42 kg liveweight  (18kg carcass)  by September
Grassland  type, system  selection  and potential  output  levels
Irish land area has been classified  according  to soil use range  as 42% mainly  dry mineral  
lowland,  30% mainly  wet mineral  lowland,  30% mountain  and hill and 7% organic. The 
mix of these  types on a given farm ultimately  decides  the most appropriate  system.  The 
main limitations  are wetness,  slope and rock outcrop,  which limit the proportion  of the 
farm suitable  for winter  forage  conservation.  An efficient  cattle system  requires  about  55 
and 20% for early  and late cut silage  respectively,  whereas 38% as one late cut will suffice  
for sheep. This is reflected  in about 80% of lowland  sheep flocks being farmed in 
association  with a cattle enterprise,  about 10% with tillage  and 10% as sheep  only. The 
target  annual  output  levels  (kg carcass  meat ha‘i) set by research  for sheep  and mixed  
sheep and suckler  beef systems  are 500 and 366 (206 beef + 160 lamb) (Nolan  and 
McNamara,  1999; 2002).
General  planning  and management
Grassland  management  is essentially  concerned  with achieving  a suitable  fit between  
food supply  and demand  over the whole  year, including  the correct  integration  of winter 
forage  conservation.  The basis for success  is planning  and recording.  The ewe flock 
places  little demand  on roughage  quality,  except  for Ifi months  before  and 2fi months  
after lambing. Food budgeting  is recommended  but it ignores the day-to-day  
management  decisions,  as how to deal with wet weather  conditions  when pastures  may 
be poached.  Planning  is mainly  about  the integration  of a) total and seasonal pasture  
growth, b) food requirement  relative to ewe and lamb physiological  state and c) 
differences  in the food requirement  of ewes and lambs throughout  the year. In the
development  of the above  mentioned  sheep  and mixed systems  over 8 years (1994  to 
1997 for mixed and 1998 to 2001 for sheep),  no date-related  management  decisions  
were made between  years for; autumn  resting of pasture,  first nitrogen  application, 
lambing  and calving,  putting  animals  into winter quarters,  start of spring  grazing  or silage 
closing.  This contradicts  the oft-stated  difficulties  surrounding  early or late growing  spring 
conditions  where the overall stocking  rate is much lower than those used in the 
experiments.  While  the research  systems  were run on developed  relatively  free-draining 
permanent  grassland  the rainfall  was about 1250 mm per annum.
Recording  should  be an integral  part of planning.  Early experience  in a collaborative  
Technology  Evaluation  and Transfer  (TET) programme  between  Teagasc  and sheep 
farmers  emphasised  how recording  by farmers  of lamb growth  rate and pasture  supply 
raised issues for discussion  as to why differences  between  fanris occurred. This 
approach  should  identify  interventions  required  for improvement.
Farm layout  and grazing  system
Some  area sub-division  is required  when ewes, lambs  and rams are separately  grazed.  
Where  two different  output  flocks  are used,  e g. meat  lamb and breeding  of replacements, 
they should  be allocated  separate  grassland  areas. Complete  flexibility  requires  that the 
number  of paddocks  is decided  by the smallest  paddock  required,  but research  has 
shown  that a 4-paddock  rotation  is adequate  for a recommended  flock size of about  150 
ewes,  even at high stocking  rate and high lambing  rate. For large flocks,  subdivision  into 
groups  of 150 ewes  according  to mating  date will facilitate  subsequent management  tasks 
such as dosing  and drafting  with consequent  improved  accuracy  and much saving  on 
labour. In the Athenry  high output  system  (consisting  of 260 ewes  on 16 ha), 8 paddocks 
were adequate,  whereas  post-lambing,  the flock  was divided  into two groups of 120 ewes  
and their 220 lambs and each group  was rotationally  grazed  on 4 paddocks.  For the 
mixed  grazing  system  of 272 ewes  and 30 cows,  46 ha was divided  into 4 sections so that 
ewes + lambs  could be grazed  with cows + calves,  steers  and heifers  and replacement  
hoggets  and heifers  grazed  together.  Thus each system  requires  a specific  plan and 
management.  Paddocks  need not be of equal  size.
Very often  there  are a greater number  of fields  in the farm than that required.  Sheep  proof  
fencing  should  be supplied  by grouping  fields. Temporary  fences  to make subdivisions, 
particularly  where  it is not desirable  to erect  permanent  fences  are available and relatively 
cheap and easy to erect. Continued  use of a small paddock,  generally  close to the 
farmstead,  for sick animals  and for holding  animals  is considered  risky due to possible 
disease  build up, e g. footrot or parasites. Too much sub-division  can also create 
problems  of too high a livestock  density  on a paddock  during  grazing.  In the Athenry  high 
output  sheep  system  a density  of 60 ewes and their 110 lambs/ha  worked  well. Where, 
in wet weather  a paddock  became  poached,  the sheep were moved on to the next 
paddock  and the rotation  speed  either  adjusted  over the following  3 paddocks  to maintain 
overall  rotation  speed  or grazing  resumed  on the paddock  after rainfall  had cleaned  the 
soiled pasture. Such periods  are interpreted  as temporary  borrowing  from the general  
pasture  supply  bank, which  can be re-instated  soon after. The rotation  of the area used  
for conservation  Is discussed  below.
Grassland  management  over the year
Autumn  / spring  management
This is concerned  with provision  of grazing  to flush ewes, resting  of half of the area for 
the following  early grazing  season  and applying  fertilisers  at the correct  times. Gunn et 
at., (1988)  reported  higher  ovulation  rate and therefore  higher  potential  lambing  rate in 
ewes flushed  on pasture  of 5-6 cm height  (2200 kg DM ha'i), compared  with 2-3 cm 
height  (650 kg DM ha"''). For the systems  under  consideration,  it is essential  that all 
lambs  are drafted  by September  and that beef heifers  are slaughtered  by mid-October,  
when cows,  weaned  calves  and f'z -year-old  steers  are housed.  This allows  ewes  to be 
flushed  and prevents  loss of condition  in cattle and grassland  poaching.  Ewes  can then 
be grazed  on half of the area to about 8 December  and 20 December  respectively  for 
sheep  and mixed  systems.  Late October  resting  resulted  in 55% more pasture  (1426  vs. 
918 kg DM ha"') being available  in early spring compared  with 8 December  resting.  
Figure 1 shows  that these requirements  are not achieved  on many of the TET farms.  
Delaying  closure  from late October  to mid-December  reduced  pasture  height in late 
February  by 2 cm and pasture  quantity  (1 cm height  = 200 kg DM ha"'') by about  400 kg 
DM ha""', which is close to that recorded  in the experiments.  These  results  concur  with 
those by Carton  et at., (1988a;  1988b)  for re-seeded  perennial  ryegrass  pasture. In the 
experiments  P and K were applied  in early November  and nitrogen  in mid January.
Figure  1. Effect  of resting  date on spring  grass  height
Eu
O)
0)
■2
CD
$
CO
Lambing  to weaning
This is a critical  time and largely  decides  whether  the system  is successful.  The target  is 
an average  lamb daily liveweight  gain of at least 300 g from birth, to be at least 34 kg at 
weaning  (14 weeks),  when 35 % (sheep)  to 50 % (mixed,  where  about 15% is drafted  
before  weaning)  of lambs  will be drafted  at 18 kg carcass  weight. Ewe milk yield is the 
main determinant  of lamb growth  rate to 7 weeks  age, when they increasingly  rely on 
grazed  herbage,  up to a daily intake  of 1 kg of organic  matter  day"'' at weaning.  In the 
normal  healthy  animal  the level of grazed  nutrient  intake  governs  ewe milk yield and lamb 
growth  rate. This is mainly  influenced  by the amount  and density  of herbage  on offer, the 
proportion  of green leaf to stem + dead matter  present  and grazing  severity.
The lactating  ewe will increase  daily DM intake  to about  21^4 kg at 3 weeks  and to 31/4 kg 
at 6 weeks  followed  by a gradual  reduction  to about 1 kg at weaning  with ewes rearing  
twin lambs  having  11% higher intake  (Vulich  et at., 1991). At high levels  of nutrition,  ewe 
milk supply  (kg day'i) increases  from about  2.5 at lambing  to 3.5 at 3 weeks  and then 
decreases  to 2.5 at 6 weeks  and to about 1 at 14 weeks. At the same level of nutrition 
ewes suckling  twin lambs  generally  produce  about 40% more milk than those suckling 
single lambs  and this difference  is likely to be closer  to 60% during  the first 3 weeks  of 
lactation. Ewes rearing  twins are therefore  more efficient. It is well established  that 
suckling  ewes loose body weight  but within the normal  limits encountered,  this has no 
serious  consequences  where  they lamb in good condition  as they can mobilise  body fat 
reserves,  which they use (with 85% efficiency)  to counteract  short periods  of reduced 
pasture  supply.
Poor ewe nutrition  in late pregnancy,  results  in reduced  lamb birth weight  and ewe milk 
supply, which can be identified  by little milk in the udder at lambing  and protracted 
production  of beistings. Grazed herbage  before lambing is best but requires  
interpretation  in a whole  system  context  (Nolan,  1971). Most research  evidence  indicates 
that only severe under-nutrition  in late pregnancy,  even to the extent  that lamb birth 
weight is reduced  by 25%, cannot  be rectified  by good post-lambing  nutrition. Such  
under-nutrition  is not recommended.  On the other hand, reduced  ewe nutrition  for even 
a short period post-lambing  reduces  twin lamb growth  rate, whereas  a 70% increased 
energy  intake  in the first month  of lactation  increases  lamb  growth  rate by 24% during  that 
month  and by 34% during  the following  month,  with much  of the latter  being  attributed  the 
heavier  weight  at the start of the second  month. Our experience  is that there is little 
difficulty  in ensuring  adequacy  of pasture  in late February/early  March  and it is the pasture 
re-growth  from the first and second  grazings,  which result in the tightest  food supply:  
demand  ratio in mid-March  to early April. Thus in the development  of the high output  
sheep  system  it was essential  that the second  nitrogen  application  was brought  forward 
from April to early March.  The average  pasture  heights  of all paddocks  for the sheep  
system,  where none and 14kg creep / lamb were used, are in Figure  2. In the mixed  
system,  where  no creep  was used, they were about  12/3 cm higher throughout.
Figure  2. Average  pasture  heights  (cm) in group  1 (iamb  creep)  and group  2 (no 
creep)  areas  - 2001
E
SO)
0)sz
00
TO
CL
Mixed  grazing  benefits  can be obtained  through  about  10% higher  lamb and beef animal  
growth  rate at constant  stocking  rate, or by increasing  the stocking  rate by about 13% 
(Nolan  and Connolly,  1977, 1989). O’Riordan  (1990)  found  that the addition  of one ewe 
and her twin lambs  per cow did not affect  milk yield or its fat and protein  contents,  where 
cows  were  stocked  at 2.5 ha"'' and cow milk yield was about  4,500  litres. A 5 kg increase  
(17 to 22 kg) in lamb carcass  weight  was obtained  at a stocking  rate of 10 ha"'' over 6 
weeks from November  4, on dairy pastures  when supplemented  with 250 g creep  per day 
(Larue, 1992). Animal  movement  restrictions  may preclude  exploitation  of the latter  
despite a lack of evidence  of any problems. The benefits  are mainly due to 
complementary  grazing,  which  improve  the cattle/dairy  pastures,  and to lower  roundworm  
burdens  in lambs. The lower  the proportion  of either  species  in the mix the greater  the 
growth  rate benefit  to it. The greatest  motivation  to select  a mixed  system  is that it fits 
most grassland  types in relation  to area required  for winter  forage  compared  with cattle  
only as indicated  above. Nolan  and McNamara  (1999)  compared  the total daily food DM 
requirement  at selected  dates for sheep, suckler  beef and their mixture  at equal LU 
stocking  rates (1.3 sheep  + 1.3 cattle ha"''). They showed  the effect of mixed grazing  
complementarily  with food requirement,  as generally  intermediate  between  sheep and 
sucklers,  and lower  at critical  early and late season  periods  (Table 1). The influence  of 
sheep in the mix to reduce  food requirement  in mid- to late-season,  compared  with 
suckler beef is particularly  important  to ensure adequate  pasture supply to meet  
increasing  cattle  demand.  Since half of the area will be closed  for silage  from April 9 to 
early June, food requirement  for mixed systems  on the grazed  half, would be twice the 
levels  stated  i.e. closer to 100 kg of DM ha"'' day"',  at this time.
Table 1. Pasture  dry matter  (DM) requirements  (kg day"'')  at selected  dates for 
sheep,  mixed and suckler  beef systems  at the same annual  livestock  unit (LU) 
stocking  rate equivalent  of  1.3 sheep  + 1.3 cattle  ha"'
Week  ending Athenry  mixed  system 
Sheep Suckler TotalSeparate  orazino  
Sheep Suckler
March  9 3 0 3 6 0
April 7 23 16 39 46 32
May 31 24 18 42 48 36
June 14 16 18 34 32 38
August  9 9 22 31 18 44
Sept 7 6 24 30 12 48
It is clear from the above  discussion  that the quantity  and quality  of herbage  available  
post-lambing  is the main determinant  of lamb and beef animal  growth  rate. The key 
aspects  are previous  autumn management,  fertiliser  application,  rotational  grazing  
pattern  and correct  integration  of nitrogen  use and winter forage conservation.  In 
particular,  the prevention  of the elongation  of reproductive  stems, through  grazing  
paddocks  sufficiently  bare to maintain  a good balance  between  new growth and 
senescence  of older material,  is a critical requirement  to sustain  an organic  matter
10
digestibility  of at least 76%. Measurement  or eye-assessment  of pasture  height is a 
practical  management  yardstick.  It is convenient  to select  one paddock  and to measure 
pasture  height on all paddocks  when it is about to be grazed  so that each estimate 
represents  one rotation.
Supplementary  concentrate  creep
Post-lambing,  creep is not oonsidered  necessary  for ewes which lamb in good body  
condition.  Most  documented  evidence  shows  no lamb  growth  rate response  to ewe creep 
until pasture  height  falls below  3 cm (Treacher,  1990). Young  et al., (1977)  recorded  no 
lamb gro\Mh  rate response  to ewe creep during  the first 8 weeks  of lactation  until the 
stocking  rate was over 20 ewes + 40 lambs  ha"i. However,  when ewe creep  contained 
a higher proportion  of protected  protein (fish meal) was fed. Penning  et al., (1988)  
obtained  a lamb growth rate response,  possibly  due to the direct effect of higher 
methionine  increasing  milk yield (as it does in high yielding  cows) (O’Mara et al., 1991).  
Robinson  (1978)  found  that, in order  to obtain  improved  milk yield through  feeding  extra  
protein,  increased  energy  intake  is necessary  for bacterial  activity,  only where  the ewe is 
producing  below  potential.  It is concluded  that there is no lamb growth  rate or economic  
response  to supplementation  of lactating  ewes, even when rearing  twin lambs, except  
where  they lamb in poor condition  and subsequent  nutrition  is poor.
Twin lamb growth  rate is decided  by genetic  ability  to grow, ewe milk supply  and amount 
and quality  of pasture  and / or creep. The aim of offering  creep  to lambs  pre-weaning  is 
to increase  income  through  improved  lamb growth  rate and / or higher  lamb value, and 
so knowledge  of lamb growth  rate response  and price structure  is required.  Favourable 
lamb meat, creep  price ratio per se does not justify  the use of creep  where  the same  lamb  
growth rate can be obtained  without  it. Neither  can drafting  rate be advanced.  A 
response  to creep  supplementation  at grazing  is only obtained  where  the pasture  is not 
supplying  an adequate  volume  and balance  of nutrients  (Prache  et a!., 1990). Where  
some nutrient  deficiency,  disease  and / or parasite  problem  exists it is best treated 
directly. Research  and commercial  farm results  have shown  that grazed  herbage  can 
support  the required  daily growth  rate of 300 g or more in twin lambs  from birth to 14 
weeks. Response  to creep  during  the period  5 to 14 weeks  old varied  from zero to 1 kg 
of liveweight  per 5 kg of creep (Treacher,  1990; Grennan,  1999; Nolan and McNamara, 
2002). Recent  results  from farms involved  in the TET programme,  showed  that in 2000 
the average  annual  quantity  of creep  used was 33 kg ewe-i (range  0-90  kg) and 13 kg 
lamb 1 (range  0-63  kg). For 30 farms  in 2001, it was over 20 kg ewe"!  on 23 farms  (over 
40 kg on 9 of these) and over 40 kg lamb-i on 3 farms. There was no relationship 
between  the level of creep used and mating  date, pasture  supply,  number  of lambs  born 
/ ewe joined,  or lamb drafting  rate. At a stocking  rate of 16 ewes ha'i, lamb performance  
targets  of 4.5, 15, 25 and 35 kg liveweight  at birth and at 5, 10 and 14 weeks  (weaning) 
were achieved  without  supplementary  concentrates  for ewes or lambs pre-weaning 
(Nolan  and McNamara,  2002). Lambs  had access  to forward  creep  grazing,  male lambs  
were not castrated  and pasture  height was sustained  at the target 5 - 7 cm height 
Despite  the use of creep on the TET farms, only about 25 % had all lambs  drafted  by 
September  (Figure  3).
11
Figure  3. Pattern  of lamb drafting  - TET farms
10 11 12 13 14
These results provide strong evidence  that income may be seriously  eroded by 
unnecessary  use of creep  feed, and that there is a great need to improve  grassland  and 
grazing  management  to improve  income. Figure  4 reflects  the main biological  issues  
involved  regarding  pasture  height  and use of creep.
Figure  4. Relationship  between  pasture  height  and creep supplementation  for 
example  line (R = response;  NR = no response)
The 'horizontal  line’ {•) is the average  height  of all paddocks  for the Athenry  sheep  system  
from birth to weaning  at 14 weeks  old. The inclined  line (□) represents  a frequently
12
occurring  pasture  height  profile  on farms  over  the same  period. The latter is too low (less 
than 3 cm) at lambing  and a lamb growth  rate response  (R) to ewe creep is indicated.  It 
is then adequate  until about  5 weeks  into lactation  when no response  (NR) to ewe creep 
occurs. Subsequently  it is far too high resulting  in the development  of elongated  seed  
heads  and a high proportion  of dead matter. In this situation,  a response  to lamb creep 
occurs. Thus one may experience  a response  to creep at both too little and too much  
pasture  availability.  Grennan  (ongoing)  found  that the proportion  of stem + dead matter  
in the sward  may increase  from 20 to 65% as pasture  height  increases  from 5 to over 8 
cm. It is concluded  that where  pasture  state is correct,  supplementary  creep  substitutes, 
rather  than supplements  pasture  in both the ewe and lamb diet.
Protected  vegetable  protein  (By-pass  protein)
From normal  vegetation,  microorganisms  synthesise  protein  from fermentable  energy  
sources  in the rumen,  and this together  with other nitrogen  components  accounts  for 
about  75 % of all protein  in the food. It passes  into the intestine  where  about  85% of it 
undergoes  enzymatic  degradation  and is absorbed  as amino  acids. Overall  35 % passes 
through  the animal  (ARC, 1995; Hervas  et al., 2000). There  is evidence  since  the 1980s  
that a significant  lamb growth  rate response  could be obtained  from creep  containing  2 to 
5 % of protected  protein. In the latter, most of the protein  passes  unaltered  into the 
intestine  where up to 90% of it is absorbed  to improve  growth  rate, mainly  due to the 
amino  acids  lysine  and methionine  (Webster  and Povey,  1990). Therefore  the main issue  
is the quantity  and profile  of amino  acids  entering,  or degraded  in, the small  intestine.  For 
example,  the addition  of about 50 kg of protected  protein to an energy  source,  as 
sugar  beet pulp or barley,  may greatly  improve  lamb  growth  rate. Due to the unavailability 
of fish meal the source  of these  proteins  is restricted  to formaldyhyde  (‘Sopralin ’) or heat 
(‘Soyapass ’) treated  soya bean meal. Maize distillers  grains is a natural  source  but 
requires  amino  acid augmentation,  especially  with lysine and methionine.  Treatment  of 
natural  protein  sources  increases  their cost, at present  to over €400  f’’. There  is still a 
serious  deficit  in information,  mainly  regarding  the availability  (height  x density),  quality 
(supply,  balance  and availability  of nutrients)  and intake  characteristics  of the pastures  to 
which  these  supplements  were added,  including  the specific  influence  of clover  (Nolan  et 
al., 2001). This is much more  difficult  to accomplish  under grazing  compared  with indoor  
more controlled  conditions  where  most of the studies  were conducted.
Integration  of silage  conservation
This is an important  component  to provide  adequate  winter  forage  and also to maintain 
pasture  height  at the target  level. For the Athenry  sheep  system  the whole  farm area was 
allocated  to grazing  from lambing  to weaning  to obtain  the maximum  lamb growth  rate. 
For the mixed system,  ewes and lambs grazed  the half of the farm rested from the 
previous  late October,  from lambing  to 9 April when they were moved  to the other  half of 
the area to commence  mixed grazing  with cattle. The grazed  half was then closed  to 
produce  adequate  winter  silage  in one early  June  cut. This suited  the higher  food demand 
by the cattle component  in late season. The integration  of grazing  and conservation  
varied  in the planning  of the two systems  essentially  to ensure  that the targeted  animal 
perfonnance  and winter forage  conservation  would  be achieved.  Rotating  these  areas  in 
alternate  years can also help to reduce  lamb roundworm  burdens.
13
Post weaning  management
In the research  systems,  weaned  ewes  were stocked  at up to 50 ha"'' from late June to 
mid-September.  The loss of about  3 kg liveweight  was attributed  to reduced  gut fill rather  
than loss of condition. However,  periodic  identification  of some thin ewes and their 
removal  to graze  with the lambs  for short periods  is advisable  Also on some soil types  
ingestion  of soil (silica)  may lead to excessive  incisor  tooth wear (Nolan,  1970). In the 
research  sheep system,  lambs less than 36 kg at weaning  were offered  250 g creep  
head'' day"'' to ensure  that they would be finished  by September.  In mixed grazing  this 
was not necessary  as most lambs were over 36 kg at this time and lambs tended  to 
sustain higher growth rate probably  because  their proportion  in the mix was low. 
Generally  in sheep systems  it will be necessary  to top some paddocks  due to lamb 
preferential  grazing  pattern.
Conclusions
Efficient  grassland  use by sheep  capable  of high productivity  at low input  cost remains  the 
basis for competitiveness.  Planning  and recording  are essential.  Choice  of system  is 
mainly  determined  by grassland  type and in particular  the proportion  of the farm, which  is 
mowable. The quantity  and quality of herbage  available  post-lambing  is the main 
determinant  of lamb and beef animal  growth  rate. A response  to pre-weaning  creep  
supplementation  at grazing is only obtained  where the pasture  is not supplying  an 
adequate  volume  and balance  of nutrients.  Farm results  provide  strong  evidence  that 
income  may be seriously  eroded  by unnecessary  use of creep and that there is a great  
need to improve  grazing  management.  Further  and more in-depth  research  in this area 
is indicated  to gain greater understanding  of the relationships  involved  under  grazing.  For 
a given lamb meat price structure,  adjustments  to stocking  rate, lambing  date and 
grassland  management  may be required  but clearly  this Is a between  rather  than within  
year decision.
Energy  and protein  requirements  of ruminants.  ISBN  085198References
CAB International  (1995).
851 2
Carton,  O.T, Brereton,  A.J., O’Keefe,  W.F. and Keane,  G.P. (1988a). Effects  of autumn  
closing  date and grazing  severity  in a rotationally  grazed  sward  during  winter  and spring.  
1. Dry matter  production.  Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research,  27: 141-150
Carton,  O.T, Brereton,  A.J., O'Keefe,  W.F. and Keane,  G.P. (1988b). Effects  of autumn  
closing  date and grazing  severity  in a rotationally  grazed  sward  during  winter  and spring.  
Irish Journal  of Agricultural  Research,  27; 151-165
Grennan,  E.J. (1999). Lamb growth  rate on pasture:  effect of grazing  management,  
sward type and supplementation.  End of project  report:  Sheep  Series  No. 3, Teagasc,  
Athenry,  Co. Galway,  ISBN 184170  017 5
Gunn,  R.G., Rhind,  F.M., Maxwell,  TJ. and Sim, D A. (1988). The effect  of sward  height  
and active immunisation  against  androstenedione  on reproductive  performance  of ewes  
of two welsh breeds  in different  body conditions.  Animal  Production,  46:417-426.
14
Larue, D. (1992). Animal  production  and pasture  responses  to using dairy pastures  to 
finish store lambs. Diplome  d'agronomie  approfondie,  University  of Montpellier,  France
Nolan,  T. (1970). Effect  of stocking  rate on incisor  tooth wear in ewes. Irish Journal  of 
Agricultural  Research,  9: 187-196.
Nolan, T. (1971). New systems  of fat lamb production  are being developed  at Creagh.  
Farm and Food  Research,  2 pi 28.
Nolan, T. and Connolly,  J. (1977). Mixed stocking  by sheep and steers - a review.  
Herbage  Abstracts,  47: 367-374.
Nolan, T. and Connolly,  J. (1989). Mixed versus  mono grazing  of steers and sheep.  
Animal  Production,  48:519-533.
Nolan,  T. and Grennan,  E.J. (1996). Strategies  for the extensification  of sheep  production 
systems.  47^^ Meeting  of the European  Association  for Animal  Production.  Lillehammer,  
Norway,  August,  1996
Nolan,  T and McNamara,  N. (1999). Sheep  and suckler  beef production  system.  End of 
project  report:  Sheep  Senes  No. 5 (Project  4039), Teagasc,  Athenry,  Co Galway  ISBN  
184170  029 8, pp35.
Nolan, T, Connolly,  J. and Wachendorf,  M. (2001). Mixed Grazing  and climatic  
determinants  of white  clover  {Trifolium  repens  L.) content  in a permanent  pasture Annals  
of Botany, 88:713-724.
Nolan,  T. and McNamara,  N. (2002). High output  mid-season  lamb meat  system.  End of 
project  report:  Sheep  Series  No. 20 (Project  4455),  Teagasc,  Athenry,  Co Galway  ISBN  
1 84170  309 5
O'Mara,  R, Murphy,  J.J. and Rath, M. (1991). The effect of level of feeding  and type of 
concentrate  on milk production  and nutrient  flows of dairy cows. IGAPA 17^^ Annual  
Flesearch  Meeting.  p69.
O'Riordan,  E.G. (1990). Mixed stocking  of dairy cows and sheep. Research  Report,  
Teagasc
Prache,  S., Bechet,  G. and Theriez,  M. (1990). Effects  of concentrate  supplementation  
and herbage  allowance  on the performance  of grazing  suckling  lambs. Grass  and Forage  
Science,  45: 423-429.
Treacher,  TT (1990). Grazing  management  and supplementation  for the lowland  sheep  
flock. In: New Developments  In Sheep Production,  (Eds. C.F.R. Slade and T.L.J.  
Lawrence).  Occasional  Publication  No. 14. British  Society  of Animal  Production  p45-54.
Vulich,  S.A , O Riordan,  E G. and Hanrahan,  J.P. (1991). Effect  of litter size on herbage 
intake  at pasture  by ewes  and their progeny.  Animal  Production,  53: 191-197.
Webster,  G.M. and Povey, G.M. (1990). Nutrition  of the finishing  lamb. In. New 
Developments  in Sheep Production,  (Eds. C.F.R. Slade and T.L.J. Lawrence).  
Occasional  Publication  No. 14, British  Society  of Animal  Production  p71-82.
Hervas,  G., Frutos,  E., Mantecon,  A.R. and Giraldez,  F.J. (2000). Effect  of tannic  acid on 
rumen  degradation  and intestinal  digestion  of treated  soya bean meals  in sheep. Journal  
of Agricultural  Science.  Cambridge,  135: 305-310.
Robinson,  J.J. (1978). In: European  Association  for Animal  Production  Publication  No 
23, p53-65. ISBN  0906562-00-7.
15
Penning,  P.D., Orr, R.J. and Treacher,  T.T. (1988). Responses  of lactating  ewes, offered  
fresh herbage  indoors  and when grazing,  to supplements  containing  different  protein  
concentrations.  Animal  Production,  46:403-415.
Young,  N.E., Newton,  J.E. and Orr, R.J. (1980). The effect  of a cereal  supplement  during  
early lactation  on the performance  and intake  of ewes  grazing  perennial  ryegrass  at three  
stocking  rates. Grass  and Forage  Science,  35: 197-202.
16
Meeting  the world ’s food challenges:  people,  pets and
potables
Alex A. Avery
Hudson  Institute,  Center  for Global  Food  Issues,  PO Box 202, Churchville,
VA 24421-0202,  USA
Introduction
The short and the sweet  of it is that the world is in the midst of the largest  increase  in 
global food demand  in human  history. A likely three-fold  increase  in food demand  will 
unfold in the next 30-40 years, primarily  as a result of economic  growth  in Asia. That 
economic  growth  is driving  a greater  demand  for protein  and improved  diets throughout  
the developing  world,  a demand  that is outpacing  their agricultural  capacity.
In the next 30-40  years,  Asia will have half of the world ’s food and fiber consumers,  but 
less than one third of the world ’s arable land and less than one fourth of the world ’s 
pasture. In short,  Asia will be unable  to feed and clothe  itself This means  export  market 
opportunities  will continue  to grow substantially  for several  decades  to come.
World  food challenges  - population
The two factors  affecting  world food needs and farm product  demand  are population 
growth  and individual  income  growth. As the World Bank ’s website  puts it: “No social  
phenomenon  has attracted  more attention  in the past half century  than the 'population  
explosion ’ - that surge  from about  2.5 billion  people  in 1950  to more  than 6 billion  in 1999,  
making  the 20th century  one of unprecedented  population  growth. As the number  of 
people  grew, the interval  for adding  another  billion people  became  shorter  and shorter,  
with the increase  from 5 billion  to 6 billion  occurring  in only 12 years. ”
The world passed  the six billion  mark in 1999. The world ’s overall  population  growth  rate 
is currently  about 1.5 percent  per year - adding  an additional  80-85 million  consumers  
each year to the global  population.  That's  another Mexico  added  to the world ’s consumer  
pool every  year. An additional  New York City added  every  month. While  an additional  85 
million  people  per year may seem daunting,  we are far from heading  toward  a population 
disaster
In fact, recent  analysis  suggest  that the world ’s peak population  will likely be less than 
nine billion, perhaps  as low as eight billion or less. The United Nations  Population 
Division  just released  a report predicting  that three quarters  of all nations  will have a 
below  replacement  fertility  by 2050. We’re looking  at roughly  a 50 percent  increase  over 
today ’s global population  added  over the next 45 years  or so.
The slowing  population  train
The current  period  marks  the first time since  the gbbal  population  reached  one billion  that 
adding  the next billion people  took longer  than the previous  billion. What  this means  is 
that the global  population  train has its brakes  on hard, but it has taken  a while  for the train 
to loose momentum.
17
Fertility  rates are always  low in affluent  countries.  This is because  in a developed  
economy  children are very expensive. Disposable  diapers, Nikea sneakers,  car 
insurance,  college  tuition. Women  in the workplace  mean that childcare,  once a "free ” 
commodity,  is a major  household  expense.  As a result,  women  in high-income  countries  
now average  only 1.7 children  apiece  - well below  the direct replacement  level of 2.1 
children  per couple  (one to replace  mum, one to replace  dad, and 0.1 to make up for 
those  that die young). In some high-income  countries  the numbers  are frighteningly  low. 
Consider  Italy and Germany;  with a current  average  of only 1.2 and 1.33 children  per 
couple  respectively,  they stand to lose virtually  half their population  over the next 40 
years, not including  immigration.
In contrast,  larger families  make economic  sense in poor and relatively  undeveloped  
countries.  If you are a poor, subsistence  farmer,  more  children  mean  more helping  hands  
to harvest  the crop, gather  firewood,  haul wafer,  and do the myriad  other chores. In the 
developing  world,  children  also support their parents  in their old age. Thus  the incentives  
are toward  large families.  The average  Third World  fertility  rate in 1960 was 6.5 children  
per couple. Today,  because  of rapid economic  growth  and rising affluence,  the average  
fertility  rate globally  is now only 2.7 and falling,  meaning  that humanity  has moved  more  
than 75 percent  of the way to a stabilizing  fertility  rate in only one generation.  Moreover,  
fertility  rates are still falling  rapidly  in virtually  all developing  countries.
World  food needs  - affluence
The GATT, now the World  Trade  Organization  (WTO),  has clearly  shown  itself to be the 
most successful  international  institution  in human  experience.  It replaced  tariff wars with 
economic  growth. World non-farm  trade has increased  more than sixteen-fold  since  
1950, and is still rising. As a result  of the explosion  in world  trade, nearly  3 billion  people  
in Asia are now living in market-oriented  economies  that have been increasing  their 
national  economic  output  by nearly  10 percent  per year, compounded,  since 1980. This 
economic growth  is headlined  by Japan,  but also includes  Taiwan,  South  Korea,  Thailand,  
Malaysia,  Pakistan,  Mauritius,  and southern  China. India and Indonesia  have come a 
long way as well.
Nearly  half of the world's  population  lives in Asia. And as Asia continues  to grow, both 
economically  and in population,  we can look to Japan  as a model  of what to expect  from 
the region  as a whole.
Surging  demand  for better  diets
The first thing that poor people  do when they get more income  is to bid for better  diets.  
First, they want more rice and wheat. Then, they buy more cooking  oil. Then, they buy 
more  eggs,  milk and, finally,  more meat,  fruits, and vegetables.  These  farm products  take 
three to five times as many farming  resources  to produce  as a calorie  of cereals  - but 
there is an innate human hunger  for them. In Asia the demand  for meat has been  
skyrocketing  alongside  the rise in personal  incomes.
The first Asian  tiger was Japan,  which  was also the first of the Asian meat consumers  as 
well. A country  that once consumed  less than 15 grams  per day of animal  protein  (and 
felt an urgent  need to have fish in the diet) is now nearing  60 grams  per day of meat and 
dairy products.  If Japan  did not still have such high tariffs on beef imports,  the average
18
Japanese  might already eat more than 70 grams of animal protein. This meat 
consumption  pattern  is also being emulated  in Taiwan.
China is the huge Asian food challenge,  with 1.25 billion people  raising  their incomes  at 
a speed  never  before  seen in a large, low-income  country  (Figure  1). Meat consumption 
has risen 10 percent  annually  in the past decade,  more than doubling  national  meat 
consumption  in the 1990s. Most of the expansion  to date has been pork, but the demand 
for both beef and poultry  have more than doubled  and are still growing.
Figure  1. Chinese  Meat Consumption
Thousand  
Metric  Tons
□ Pork M Poultry Beef
Moslem  countries  are also joining  in the demand  for meat,  though  they forego  pork, which 
is a favorite  meat in many  world cultures.
Indonesia,  which is both Moslem  and Asian, has increased  its poultry consumption  
dramatically.  In 1995 the broiler  flock rose 25 percent  lo 600 million  birds. The demand 
for corn in poultry  feeds has been rising by 4 million  tons per year as the feed industry 
expanded  by 13 percent  annually.  Indonesia  even deregulated  soybean  imports  so that 
a lack of protein  meal wouldn ’t constrain  meat and egg production.
Moslems  in Pakistan  have also been increasing  their meat  and egg consumption,  paid for 
by cotton  and textile  exports,  which  generated  economic  growth  of 5-6 percent  annually 
during the 1990s. Milk consumption  has also been rising strongly. To the east,  
Bangladesh  is setting  its sights  on economic  growth  through  export  manufacturing.  The 
Bangladeshis  already  eat many of India's  worn-out  cows, and will raise the quality  and 
quantity  of meat and dairy products  in their diets as and when they can afford it.
The question  mark over India
A major  question  over world animal  protein  consumption  has been Flindu  India. India has 
long been called  a “vegetarian ” country,  but it is far from that. In recent  years, India has
19
doubled  its milk consumption  to more than 65 million  tons per year - and there is little 
environmental  difference  between  a beef cow and a dairy cow. With a succession  of 
governments  dismantling  the economic  constraints  of its creaking  socialism,  India ’s 
consumers  are bidding  for even more milk. Thanks  in part to satellite-fed  community  
TV’s, India is no longer content with the “Hindu  rate of growth."  Economic  growth,  which  
had been averaging  4-5 percent  annually,  has more recently  been gaining  at 5-7 percent  
per year. Since 1965, India ’s birth rate has also dropped  dramatically,  from 6.2 to 3 births  
per woman for the 2000-2005  period, contributing  significantly  to higher personal  
incomes.
In terms  of high-quality  protein,  India is focused  first on dairy products.  Consumers  seem  
to be bidding  for another  2 million  tons of milk per year, and the farmers  have only been  
able to deliver  an additional  1 million  tons. Prices  are high, but feed resources  are short.  
Gaunt  cows still graze  the roadsides  and rummage  the city streets  in India. One-third  of 
the fodder  for 400  million  ruminant  animals  comes  from leaves  and branches  stolen  from 
India ’s forests!
New clothes,  beer and dogs
The other  reason  why the world  must  triple farm output  is that once  we have fed 8.5 billion  
people the  way they prefer,  other  growing  farm product  appetites  will have to be satisfied.  
Not only will consumers  in developing  countries  eat better, but they will also drink and 
dress better, too. China ’s beer consumption  has more than tripled in the last decade.  
How much additional  grain will be required,  if each of the 730 million  Chinese  men drink  
just one extra beer per month?  That ’s 8 billion  bottles  of beer  in a year!
Huge populations  of people  are moving  from societies  where  everyone  owned  only two 
cotton  outfits  apiece,  to a dozen  and more - just like any other  modern  society.
A major  challenge  exists in relation  to pet food. The U.S. has 113 million  pet cats and 
dogs for 270 million  people.  All over the world,  ownership  of companion  animals  and pet 
food sales rise with incomes. Already,  China ’s one-child  policy is stimulating  pet 
ownership.  It is reasonable  to project  that China  in 2050 will have more than 500 million  
cats and dogs, translating  into significantly  increased  demand  for pet food, including  more  
meat, fishmeal  and protein.
Combining the  expected  50% increase  in global population  with the fact that most  of these  
additional  people  will live in countries  that are increasing  individual  consumption  of high-  
protein  foods - foods that take 3-5 times more farm resources  per calorie  than cereal  
calories,  it is easy to see how overall  farm resource  demand  will at least double,  and will 
more likely triple over the next 45 years  (Figure  2).
20
Figure 2^ Projected  food demand  of the growing  world population,  fuelled by rising  
demand  for high-quality  foods  (meat,  dairy products  etc.,)
Land ----the scarcest  natural  resource
The increase  in food demand  will result  in even greater  competition  between  farming  and 
wildlife  for land;
• Agriculture  already  uses 37 percent  of the earth ’s land surface,  and any land not 
already  in a city or a farm is wildlife  habitat.  (UN FAO estimate)
If the world has 30 million  wildlife  species  (a reasonable  biologist's  “guesstimate ”) 
then 25-27 million  of them are probably  in the tropical  rain forests,  with most of the 
remainder  in such critical habitats  as wetlands,  coral reefs and mountain  
microclimates.  These  are places  we have not farmed,  and should  not farm.
Through  pesticide  use, fertilizers,  confinement  meat and dairy production  and modern  
high-yield  farming  has already  saved  millions  of square  miles  of 
wildlife habitat  from conversion  to agricultural  use. It is estimated  that modern  food 
production  systems  currently  save approximately  15-20 million square miles of 
wilderness  from being  ploughed  for low-yield  food production.  That makes  it the greatest  
conservation  triumph  in modern  history!
Thus one key to conserving  the natural  world in the 21st century  will be what  the Hudson  
nstitute  calls “high-yield  conservation. ” Meeting  both the food and forestry  challenges  of 
the 21 century,  while leaving room for nature, will depend  on mankind's  ability to 
continue  increasing  food and fiber  yields  per acre of land and per unit of input  from plants  
animals  and trees  on our best land, and transporting  the products  to where  the people are 
demanding  it. Success  will also depend  heavily  on how high-tech  methodologies such as 
biotechnology  in food, fiber, and forestry  are embraced.
a9'''cultural  products  in the global market  place my? Dairy cows don't perform  well in hot, humid  tropical  climates.  Similarly  oranges 
don t grow  well in the cool, damp  conditions  of the British  Isles. Why should  India attempt  
to produce  all of its own dairy products  inefficiently  and at high relative  costs  when  it can
21
import  the dairy products  it requires  and produce  more high-value  fruit and/or  vegetable  
crops for trade. With free trade we can take advantages  in lower production  costs and 
greater  resource  use efficiencies  - benefiting  society  and the environment.
Hamstringing  high-yield  conservation
Today the world ’s most advanced  societies  are attempting  to legislate  for low-yield  
agriculture  and block freer trade. All over the developed  world, government  funding  for 
agricultural  research  is being cut back, or shifted to low-yield  "sustainable"  farming.  
Governments  in affluent  countries  subsidize  low-yield  organic  farming,  while regulators  
respond  to public opinion  by depriving  the world ’s high-yield  farmers  of time-tested  
pesticides  and raising  the safety hurdles  to unjustifiably  high levels. In Europe,  several  
governments  now have official  goals  for organic  to make  up 10-20  percent  of farmland  by 
2010, despite  the fact that the demand  has leveled  off, and something  like 60 percent  of 
UK organic  milk is sold at a loss as non-organic  for lack of demand.
Organic  farming  is the prescription  offered  by almost  every  major  so-called  environmental  
group  in the world. Greenpeace,  Friends  of the Earth,  the World  Wildlife  Fund,  The Sierra  
Club, Environmental  Defense;  all of these groups  and scores  of others  tell the urban  
public  that organic  farming  is the solution  to the worlds  food safety  and environmental  
problems.  This is a myth.
Organic  farming  cannot  possibly  meet humanity ’s-food  needs  without  massive  increases  
in the amount  of land devoted  to manure  and green  manure  production.  This land would  
have to be taken  from areas  currently  devoted  to wildlife  habitats.
In terms of today ’s food needs (never  mind the needs  of the larger  and more affluent  
societies  of tomorrow),  the requirement  for nitrogen  fertilizer  alone,  would necessitate  an 
organic mandate  for the massive  conversion  of land into animal  pasture  or green  manure  
crop area. The world ’s farmers  currently  use roughly  80 million  metric  tons of synthetic  N 
fertilizer  per year, much  of this on cropland,  but some  on pasture  land as well. To replace  
this “synthetic"  N fertilizer  with animal  manure  would require  another  7-8 billion cattle,  
according  to Dr. Vaclav  Smil of the University  of Manitoba.  Yet the entire world cattle  
population  is estimated  today  at only 1.2 billion,  so this would  be a 600%  increase  in the 
world ’s cattle population.  Where  would  we "park ” that many additional  bovines?  At the 
relatively  dense  stocking  rate of only 2 acres per animal  - an inadequate  area, in most  
regions  - that works  out to 22 million  SQUARE  MILES  of additional  pasture  needed,  or 
44% of the planet ’s entire land area!
Of course,  manure  isn’t the only organic  nitrogen  source. We could use green-manure 
crops, that is, legumes  plants that fix nitrogen  via the bacteria  in their roots, but the 
additional  land requirements  would  still be huge. Work  conducted  in 1999 by a high-level  
technical  committee  appointed  by the Danish  government  to study the consequences  of 
a total conversion  of Denmark  to organic  farming  (the Bichel committee),  found that if 
Denmark  went totally  organic,  with no feed imports  and no synthetic  nitrogen  fertilizers,  
human  food production  would  fall by 47 percent  - essentially  half! (Figure  3). This drastic  
cut in food production  occurred  not because  the yields of organic  crops  were so much  
lower  than those attained  from conventional  agriculture,  but rather  from the drastic  land 
use changes  necessary  to supply  an adequate  amount  of animal  manure  fertilizer.  The 
committee  calculated  that Denmark  would  need a 160 percent  increase  in grass  area in 
rotation,  i.e. cattle pasture  and fodder  beet crop area would need to increase  by 35
22
percent. This would reduce  grain crop area by 30 percent  and potato  crop area by 70 
percent.
Crop yields  would  also be lower. Organic  farming  activists  claim that organic  yields  are 
nearly  equal to those  of conventional  non-organic  farmers. However,  direct  field-to-field 
yield comparisons  show  that organic  methods  produce  between  10-40 percent  less than 
non-organic  methods  when using identical  varieties  grown  side-by-side.  Across  several 
studies,  organic  methods  averaged  about 15 percent  lower  in corn yield, 11 percent  lower 
in soybean  yield and 30 percent  lower in potato yields. [Alternatively  an 11 percent 
reduction  in organic  soybean  yield translates  into a 13 percent  higher conventional  yield 
The 30 percent  lower  organic  potato  yield translates  into a 42 percent  higher  conventional  
potato  yield!]
Figure 3. Production  comparison  between  conventional  agriculture  and 100% organic  
production  in Denmark
20000
S 15000a.a
u
2 10000
•o
c
40
E
B 5000
c
(0oI■ Eggs
3 Beef
a Fruits  and 
berries  
□ Vegetables
0 Sugar
nRape
B Potatoes
HPork and 
Poultry  
□ Milk
■ Gram
1996  100%  Organic
Production
A recent  Swiss  study  found  that over 21-years,  organic  yields  averaged  between  10 and 
40 percent  less (depending  on the crop).
Giving  the vegetarian  soiution  a chance
Is there a 'vegetarian  solution ’? Frances  Moore  Lappe's  famous  book ‘Diet for a Small  
Planet ’was written  40 years ago. We have run out of time. The world has no larger  a 
proportion  of vegetarians  today than it had then. A recent reputable  survey (by 
Yankelovich  for the ‘Vegetarian  Times)  found that 4 percent  of Americans  consider  
themselves  vegetarian  - but two-thirds  of the vegetarians  considered  chicken  and fish as 
honorary  vegetables.  Almost  all of them consume  dairy products.  Less than half of one 
percent of Americans  foregoes  any animal calories,  i.e. so-called  vegans The 
percentages  are similar  in other  affluent  countries.
23
It is apparently  true that humans  could satisfy  virtually  all of their nutritional  needs  by 
eating  nuts and tofu instead  of meat and dairy products.  It is also clear that virtually  no 
society  is currently  willing  to do so, if it can afford meat, milk and eggs. Nor does the 
environmental  movement  have plans to spend any of its annual  billions  in revenue  to 
attempt  creating  billions  of vegans  to protect  the environment.  The environmentalists  are 
content  to hope that food shortage  will create vegans  for them. What we’re seeing,  
instead,  is the ‘Indonesian  solution ’ - people  clearing  millions  of hectares  of tropical  forest  
to grow low-yielding  corn and soybeans  for chicken  feed and poor-quality  cattle pasture  
Moreover,  another  strong  worldwide  trend in food consumption  is towards  higher  quality  
Consumers  are moving  toward  real milk instead  of powdered  milk, real eggs instead  of 
powdered  eggs, and rich ice cream  instead  of ice milk. They are buying  more  fresh fruits 
and vegetables  at the expense  of canned  ones. They are demanding  more fresh chilled  
meat instead  of frozen  meat. There  is little reason  to expect  that soy burgers  or tofu will 
replace  real meat  in affluent  societies.  Thus,  the world  must prepare  itself  to supply  more  
meat, milk, eggs and dairy products,  more cost-effectively,  and with the least possible  
impact on the environment.  This must be done quickly, before undisturbed  natural  
habitats  are destroyed.  We must move  to get more high quality  protein  from higher  yields  
on the existing  farmlands  through  research  and free trade.
Agricultural  gas mileage
It is reasonable  to ask, ‘when  environmental  activists  are demanding  that we increase  the 
fuel economy  of our automobiles  to 20 or 30 kilometers  per liter, ’ why are they advocating  
that we reduce  the resource  mileage  of our agricultural  systems?  Worse,  there is an 
attempt  to block the very technologies  that will make more of our farms  ‘organic-like ’, via 
biotechnology.  Biotechnology  offers a pathway  OUT of the external,  chemical  pesticide  
route to protecting  our crops  and livestock.  It offers  a very cost-effective  and biologically  
based approach  to pest protection  and yield increases,  yet the organic  activists  and 
organic  farming  community  is doing everything  in its power  to stop it. Why - because  
they’re afraid of the loss of a lucrative,  high-return  niche market  for their products?
Consider  the opposition  to Bt crops. Bt stands  for Bacillus  thurinaiensis  a natural  soil 
bacteria  that produces  a protein  toxic to plant eating  caterpillars.  It's harmless  to birds,  
fish, mammals,  and all non-caterpillar  insects. When eaten by humans,  Bt proteins  are 
digested.  Organic  farmers  have been protecting  their crops  with aqueous  solutions  of live 
Bt bacteria  for 40+ years.
The biotech  version  eliminates  the aerosol  Bt sprays  - and consequently  eliminates  the 
costs of fuel, machinery,  and labor of spraying.  Instead,  the gene for the Bt protein  is 
incorporated  into the crop plants  genome.  This not only reduces  spraying  costs, but also 
reduces  the likelihood  of pests  developing  resistance  to Bt proteins  because  the levels  of 
toxin are consistently  high. Yet because  many more farmers  are likely to use Bt crop 
protections,  the likelihood  of pest resistance  may go up and this is the basis for the 
organic  farmer  opposition.  Organic  farmers  would like the benefits  of Bt technology  
reserved  only for themselves.  Who gave the organic  sector  the exclusive  rights to Bt 
benefits?
A recent  article  in the journal  Science,  reports  that in 2001, Bt cotton  in India yielded  80 
percent  more than non-Sf  cotton. The benefits  are in lower  overall  costs, less pesticide
24
use, less pesticide  risk, higher  yields  and, thus, resource  use efficiency  less land taken  
from India's  wildlife  to grow cotton  - and all of this in the hands  of relatively  uneducated 
poor farmers  in a still-backward  country.
Biotechnology  benefits
The benefits  of biotechnology  are now beginning  to be realized.  Research  from Brooms  
Barn in the UK, and Denmark,  is finding  significant  wildlife  benefits  in the fields  from using  
biotech  herbicide-tolerant  crops. More weeds  without  loss of crop yield, and thus more  
wildlife  that live off of the weeds.  The reduction  in chemical  pesticide  sprays  from Bt crops  
have been enormous  - millions  and millions  of gallons  of pesticides  not sprayed  and this 
is just the beginning:
Raising  yieids with wild-relative  genes:  Two researchers  from Cornell University 
reasoned  that after a century  or more of inbreeding,  the genetic  base of our crops had 
significantly  narrowed.  They also reasoned  that the world's gene banks  contained  a large  
number  of genes  from wild relatives  of our crop plants. By crossing  with selected  genes 
from wild relatives  of the tomato  family  (a crop where  yields  have been rising by about 1 
percent  per year), the wild-relative  genes  produced  a 50 percent  gain in yields  and a 23 
percent  gain in solids. The same researchers  selected  two promising  genes  from wild 
relatives  of the rice plant — a crop where no yield gains had been achieved  since the 
Chinese  pioneered  hybrids  some 15 years ago. Each of the two genes  produced  a 17 
percent  gain in the highest-yielding  Chinese  hybrids;  the genes are thought  to be 
complementary,  and capable  of raising  rice yield potential  by 20 to 40 percent.
Salt tolerant  biotech  crops:  This has been a long-term  agricultural  science  goal upon  
which hundreds  of scientists  have labored  via conventional  plant breeding  methods  for 
decades,  with virtually  no success Today,  biotechnology  has delivered  truly salt-tolerant  
crops, with tomatoes  now growing  in nearly  40 percent  seawater Uptake  however  is 
limited  because  of politics.
Improved  animals  with biotech:  Heretofore,  methods  for introducing  new genes into 
livestock  had a low efficiency  - less than 10 percent.  However,  in the 24 November  1999  
issue of The Proceeding  of the National Academy  of Sciences,  researchers  reported  a 
new method  for producing  transgenic  animals  that approaches  100 percent  efficiency.  A 
foreign  gene was inserted  into the animal's  egg pre as opposed  to post fertilization.  This 
offers huge potential  in producing  animals  with greater  tolerance  for pests and diseases, 
better  feed conversion  ratios and other  practical  advantages  - the end effect  being more  
efficient  farm resource  utilization. Think of it as increasing  the metaphorical  petrol  
mileage  of humanity's  agricultural  car.
Fighting  human malnutrition  with genetically  modified  rice: The Rockefeller  
Foundation  funded  research  that has overcome  two of the world's  largest  sources  of 
malnutrition  with genetically  modified  rice. Around  the world, some 400 million  people 
currently  suffer  a chronic  severe  shortage  of Vitamin  A About  14 million  of these people 
go blind every year, including  about 8 million  children. Rockefeller's  new 'golden  rice' 
contains  beta-carotene,  which the human  body readily  turns into Vitamin  A. (The beta-  
carotene  literally  turns the rice golden.)  The new rice also has three new genes which 
overcome  the chronic  iron deficiency  among  people  in rice cultures;  4 billion  people  suffer 
this iron deficiency,  women  being at an increased  risk of birth complications.  (The
25
phytate  in rice, tied up the iron in their bodies  no matter  how much iron they consumed;  
the new rice has phytase  to free the iron.) ‘Golden  rice ’ will offer improved  health to 
billions  of women  and children  in rice-eating  countries  who could not have been helped  
through  factory-food  additives  - at a tiny cost to society  and no cost to them.
Saving  forests  with biotech  trees:  The world could increase  its forest  harvest  ten-fold  
if we planted  just 5 percent  of today ’s wild forests  with high-yield  tree plantations.  Such  
plantations  are good-but-not-great wildlife  habitat  because  they are not “fully natural,"  but 
they could apparently  take all of the logging  pressures  off 95 percent  of the natural  
forests.
Trees have always  been difficult  to improve  through  crossbreeding  because  the time 
frames  are so long. Biotechnology  is already  helping  to provide  higher-yielding  trees  
through  cloning  and tissue  culture  - which permit  us to rapidly  copy the fastest-growing,  
most pest-resistant  trees in a species.  When  we master the tools of biotechnology  more  
fully, we should  be able to increase  forest  growth  rates, drought  tolerance,  pest resistance  
and other  important  traits more directly,  and even more effectively.
High-yield  conservation
There  is a need to educate the  urban  public  about  the environmental  benefits  of high-yield  
modern  farming,  and why these technologies  should be embraced,  albeit with care. 
Increasingly  affluent  consumers  will NOT be satisfied  with a vegetarian  future.  
Agriculture  and agricultural  researchers  must talk about  saving  natural  habitats  and wild 
species  with better  seeds. We must talk about  conquering  soil erosion  with high yields  
(so there ’s less farmland  to erode) and conservation  tillage (which radically  reduces  
erosion  per acre of farmland).  We must talk about  preventing  forest  losses  to slash-and-  
burn farming  (the cause  of destruction  for two-thirds  of the tropical  forests  lost). We must  
point out that where  high-yield  farming  is practiced,  the amount  of forest is expanding.  
We must point out that the losses in wildlife  habitat  overwhelmingly  occur where the 
farmers  get low yields.
We must analyze  every  eco-activist  proposal  in terms  of its land requirements;
• Organic farming  for the world  would  mean  clearing  at least 5 million  square  miles of 
wildlife  for clover  and other  green  manure  crops.
• Reducing  fertilizer  usage  in the U.S. Corn Belt would  mean  clearing  many  additional  
acres  of poorer-quality  land in some  distant  country  to make up for the lost yield.
• Blocking  free trade in farm products  and farm inputs  will probably  mean clearing  
tropical  forest  for food self-sufficiency  in Asia.
It should  not be solely  up to agriculture  to prevent  such a needless  disaster.  Agriculture 
has no history  of public affairs  campaigns  or any real experience  in conducting  them.  
However,  there is no other  entity with the knowledge,  the financial  requirements  and the 
direct  interest  to do it.
How can we present the  environmental  case for high-yield  and high-efficiency  agriculture  
if the journalists  will not write it and politicians  fail to support  it? Modern  agriculture  must  
take its case directly  to the people,  through  advertising  and activism
Recently  the Center  for Global  Food Issues  launched  an internet  eco-campaign  with an 
online petition - 'The Declaration  in Support  of Protecting  Nature  With High-Yield  Farming
26
and Forestry ’. The inaugural  signers  of the declaration were a co-founder  of Greenpeace, 
two Nobel Peace Prize laureates,  the President  of the World Conservation  Trust, the 
founder  of the Gaia Hypothesis,  and two prominent  US Senators. More than 800 
scientists,  agriculturalists,  foresters,  and conservationists  from more than 60 countries 
have now signed it. The declaration  can be read in English,  French, Spanish  or 
Portuguese,  and is the perfect  vehicle  for starting  careers  as an agri-eco  warrior.
The declaration  can be viewed  at www.hiahvieldconservation.orQ .
To date, agriculture  has failed to rise to the challenge,  and the momentum  for high-yield 
conservation  is waning.  Public  investment  in high-yield  research  is low and we are failing 
to support  the farming  community.  Regulators  are continuing  to strangle farm  productivity  
at an increasing  rate all over the world.
In the long run, of course,  farmers  and farm researchers  will be vindicated  even without  
a public  affairs  campaign,  but that vindication  could  come  too late for the wild habitats  and 
species,  and way too late for most of today ’s high-tech,  high-efficiency  farmers  and 
agribusinesses.
27
Fonterra  - a blueprint  for Ireland?
Harry Bayliss
Director,  Fonterra  Co-Operative  Group
Introduction
This is an important  time for the Irish dairy industry  with the development  of a strategic  
plan. Discussions  centred  around  creating  a new super co-operative ’ accounting  for 
some  70% of local milk processing,  presents  some  arguments  similar  to those  advanced  
in New Zealand  (NZ). Arguments  for consolidation  in processing  sites, potential  cost 
savings  and increased  investment  in research  and development  are all points  debated  
widely  in recent  times  in NZ.
The New Zealand  industry
To explain  the dairy industry  today in NZ requires  a brief history  lesson.
In 1998, the NZ dairy industry  was in turmoil. The government  had given notice of 
deregulation,  and the industry  had been told to develop  a timetable  and a process  to 
manage  this change. Deregulation  was not unexpected,  but there were mixed and 
passionate  feelings  on the topic. At that point the industry  comprised  11 co-operatives 
exporting  90% of production,  and accounting  for 20% of NZ exports. In the NZ Dairy  
Board, there was an effective  international  marketing  organisation  with €3.5 billion in 
sales and an acknowledged  competitive  advantage  in low production  costs, extensive  
dairy trade experience  and value-added  products.
The industry  strategy,  developed  at that time and endorsed  by farmers,  set the goal of 
driving  the levels of efficiency  within the industry  while returning  15% return on Total 
Gross  Assets  with a stretch  target  of 15% year on year revenue  growth. A key element  
of the strategic  planning  process  considered  what structures  were necessary  to take this 
strategy  forward.  An industry  team evaluated  32 structural  options  before  settling  on the 
preferred  mega  co-op'  structure  that is now Fonterra.
Creating  the mega co-op was no simple task. It required  the largest re-structuring  
exercise  even undertaken  in NZ as well as legislative  and regulatory  consents.  While  the 
NZ industry  rapidly  consolidated  (with more  than 95% of the industry  grouped  around  two 
major  manufacturing  co-ops  in 2000),  clearing  the final hurdle  was far from easy In fact 
it took a further year before the NZ Dairy Board, the NZ Dairy Group, and Kiwi 
Cooperative  Dairies  merged,  and Fonterra  was created.
Fontarra  the company
• A snapshot  of Fonterra;
• NZ ’s largest  company;
• Fourth  largest  dairy company  in the world by turnover,  accounting  for almost  40% of 
net dairy trade;
• Annual  turnover for the year-ended  May ‘02’, was almost  €6 9 billion;
• Assets  of almost €5 9 billion,  and ‘shareholders ’ equity  of €2.2 billion;
28
• 13,000  shareholders  spread  right around  NZ, supplying  more than 13 billion litres of 
milk each year;
• 1.8 million  tonnes  of product  manufactured  annually,  including  some of the world ’s 
best-known  dairy brands;
• 95% of production  exported  to customers  in 140 countries  around  the world;
• The lowest-cost,  dairy producer  in the world.
Making  the transition  from a pair of co-operatives  and a marketing  arm to a single mega  
co-op'  was an extraordinary  challenge.  Resources  included  the assets  of the contributing 
co-operatives  (including  plant and people). The Dairy Board assets included  the 
ingredients  marketing  network  NZMP  and the consumer  goods  company  New Zealand  
Milk. The former is a globally  significant  dairy ingredients  company,  with a cow-to- 
customer  chain stretching  from NZ to a network  of offices  covering  every  continent  except  
Antarctica.  New Zealand  Milk is a consumer  and food branded  products  business,  
marketing  around  the world  with 96 brands  including  Anchor,  Aniene,  Anmum,  Chesdale,  
Soprole  and Mainland.  New Zealand  Milk owns  and operates  plants  globally,  which  pack 
bulk dairy and non-dairy  products  into branded  consumer  presentations.
Other industry  assets included  R&D facilities,  a biotechnology  company  (ViaLactia  
Biosciences),  a technology  development  business,  rural retail chains  and, an agricultural 
website  called Fencepost.com.
In the first year, the new company  had to overcome  the extraordinary  challenge  of 
creating  one company  from these businesses,  staffed  by the right people,  with the right 
resources,  systems,  processes  and culture  - all without  dropping  the ball in terms of 
collection,  production  and marketing.  While  there were instances  in that first year when 
the service  was not what it might have been, the overall  service  delivery  was quite an 
achievement  given record  peak milk production,  record  product  volumes  and record  sales  
in that first year.
Benefits  are now starting  to emerge  from the merger. In the product  mix area, for 
example,  €7.0 million  was extracted  in benefits  from increased  flexibility.  In NZMP  an 
entire link was taken out of the supply chain by moving customer  liaison into the 
manufacturing  plants. Work  on our supply  chain,  promises  to deliver over €40 million  in 
savings  each year. An independent  report  by Deloitte  Touche  Tohmatsu  confirms that  the 
new company  has so far achieved  more than €60 million  of annualised  merger  benefits 
in areas  specifically  identified  as part of the pre-merger  analysis,  and that Fonterra  is well 
on-track  to meet a three-year  target  of capturing  €160  million  of total merger  benefits
The Fonterra  strategy
One of the great achievements  of the first year was the development  of The Fonterra  
Strategy ’. With 13,000  farmer  shareholders  there  are many  opinions  as to what  direction 
the company  should  take. Despite  this The Fonterra  Strategy  has been widely  accepted 
as appropriate  and achievable.  It maps  out a path forward  for the next five to 10 years 
A key element  of this strategy  is the defining  of cornerstones  as the heart  of the business 
These  include  activities  that sell shareholder ’s milk and activities  that leverage  Fonterra's  
distinctive  capabilities.  They are also the activities  where  the predominant  source  of milk 
is from supplier  shareholders.  This is a commitment  as a co-operative to process  all milk 
from suppliers.
29
The cornerstones  are what the company  is good at-, 
strategy  show where  effort is being  focused.The seven  strategic  themes  of the
The strategic  themes
1. To be the lowest  cost supplier  of commodity  dairy products.  The NZ dairy industry ’s 
low-cost  position  has always  been a core competitive  advantage.  Fonterra  is looking  
at each step of the value  chain  to see where  improvements  can be made. On the farm 
this means  assisting  farmers  to achieve  productivity  gains of at least 3%. In the 
business  it means  increasing  productivity  through  research,  streamlining  the supply  
chain, and constantly  looking  for ways to reduce  manufacturing  costs and to serve  
customers  better,  for less.
2. The  aim is to be the leading  price, and inventory  manager  in the global  dairy market.  
Fonterra  has an increasing  presence  on the global  traded  market.  It stands  at around  
40% today  and is forecast  to increase  over the next five years With the increase  of 
supply  out of NZ and Australia,  coinciding  with the reduction  in supply  from Europe,  
Fonterra  is in a good position  to have greater  influence  over the development  and 
stability  of the world market. In effect  this means  more opportunities  to be smarter  in 
the way pricing,  inventory,  and product  mixes  are handled,  and further  opportunities  
to develop  the world market  and to secure  best product  value.
3. Theme  three is to become  an effective  developer  of dairy ingredients  partnerships  in 
selected  markets.  An international  network  and ability  to produce  dairy products  at 
low cost put Fonterra  in an ideal position  to take the lead here. The company  has 
developed  close relationships  with major customers  around the world, who are 
increasingly  demanding  partnerships  with their dairy ingredients  suppliers.  This is 
achieved  by building  broader  and deeper  relationships  with them, providing  tailored  
products  and services,  e g. technical  know-how  and innovative  product  development.
4. Theme  four is to become  the leading  specialty  milk components  innovator,  and 
solutions  provider.  The fast-growing  specialty  ingredients  market  has the potential  to 
deliver  new value-added  earnings for Fonterra.  Milk is a truly remarkable  product  with 
components  that can improve  overall  health and even fight specific  diseases.  The 
opportunities  are virtually  limitless  and can be tapped  into by investing  more in R&D 
to create  an “innovation  engine ” within Fonterra  that will play a key role in building  
shareholder  value.
5. The  intention  here is to become  the leading  consumer nutritional  milks marketer.  This 
takes  advantage  of the growing  desire  from consumers  for products  that deliver  health  
and nutrition  benefits  at different  stages  in life.
6. Theme six envisages  the company  pushing  further  and harder  into the rapidly  growing  
global foodservice  sector. Consumers  today want more convenience.  There is a 
rapidly  growing  demand  from restaurants,  hotels,  caterers  and fast-food  outlets  for 
processed  dairy ingredients.  The brands  seen on TV screens  etc. are increasingly  in 
demand  from restaurants,  fast food outlets,  hotels,  bakeries  and so on because  these  
are the businesses  consumers  are going to more and more for their food. These  
businesses  demand  convenience  too - shredded  cheese  rather  than blocks,  single  
serve  butter  pats, butter  sheets  for bakeries  - anything  that makes  the job faster  and 
easier.
30
7. Theme  seven focuses  on developing  integrated  strategies  for the major emerging 
markets  of China,  Eastern  Europe,  India,  and the South  American economic  grouping, 
of Chile, Brazil and Argentina.  These  four markets,  and what happens  in them with 
regard  to supply  and demand,  will have a major  influence  on the shape  of the overall 
global  dairy market. Therefore  it's vital to know about  their production  capabilities, 
what is happening  with land use, what consumer  trends are emerging,  and what 
opportunities  exist for ingredients.
While  the elements  of this strategy  may be interesting,  the important  point  to make  is that 
the formation  of Fonterra  was an integral  part of the development  of the strategy.  Without  
Fonterra  there would not be a united  view, or a critical  mass to implement  the strategy 
successfully.  It has generated  tremendous  interest  and a good deal of excitement  
because  for the first time, there is a shared  vision  of global  industry  leadership  - there is 
an agreed  strategy  that all are behind,  from the farm gate to the board  and out into the 
marketplace.
The lessons  for Ireland?
What  lessons  can Ireland  (Irl) learn? Does  the experience  in NZ have any relevance  for 
Ireland?
Be wary of blueprints.  The model  adopted  in NZ was right for the industry,  its position  in 
the globally  traded  market  and progress  in terms of industry  reform. NZ farmers  were  
ready  for it, and have worked  without  subsidies  for the past 18 years. In 1984 just one 
year's  advance  warning  was received  that 30 separate  production  payments  and export  
incentives  would  be removed.  These  accounted  for 30% of the value  of production.
This forced  a rapid adjustment  to new economic realities  - cutting  costs,  diversifying  land 
use and altering  production  to fall in line with market  signals. It was an abrupt  change,  
accompanied  by dire predictions  of forced sales of farms, mass bankruptcies  and 
plummeting  land prices. In fact, only 1% of farms  went out of business  and while land 
prices did drop initially,  they rebounded.  The overwhelming  upside  was a significant  
improvement  in efficiency.  Since  the removal  of subsidies,  farming  productivity  in NZ has 
averaged  3.9% growth  year on year. This enforced  change  was a major factor  in the NZ 
dairy industry  achieving  its lowest-cost  producer status.
At the time of the earliest industry  discussions  on strategy  and consolidation,  the NZ dairy 
industry  had already  adjusted  to life without  subsidisation.  The changes  to market access 
that arose with the creation  of the EU had already  been worked  through,  with major  
efficiency  gains  and a very competitive  cost structure.
The ‘final merger'  was a logical  conclusion  to a lengthy  round  of industry  consolidation. 
The industry  was already  globally  competitive  pre-merger,  with a strong  focus  on moving 
out of commodity  products  and into the value-added  segment.  The merger  was based  
on moving  even further  fonward  from this position  of competitive  and operational  strength 
- especially  since NZ commercial  interests  lay in the opening  up of world  trade access 
and the dismantling  of market  subsidies.  It is estimated  that NZ dairy exports  of €2.4  
billion  in 2000 attracted  duties  of €314 million  at overseas  borders,  an average  duty rate 
of 13 1%.
31
In contrast,  Irl continues to enjoy  pricing  support  in terms  of EU subsidies,  quota  systems  
and subsidies  such as headage,  premia  schemes,  fodder  schemes  and aid for young  
farmers.  In 2001, around  56% of Irish farm incomes  came  from direct  EU payments  (Joe 
Walsh,  Minister  for Agriculture  and Food). This is akin to the NZ dairy industry  in 1984,  
but poles apart from the self-supporting  industry  that drove through  the mega merger  
some 17 years  later.
Had the industry  in NZ not undergone  significant  change  already,  it is entirely  possible  
that farmers  would  have rejected  the final step to create  Fonterra.  That final step came  
after nearly 10 years without  subsidies  and a great deal of discussion  about structural  
change,  starting  as far back as 1995. The talk also had to be backed  up by some  industry  
leadership.  It took the two main co-operatives  to undertake  a series  of strategic  mergers  
to get to a point  where  the ‘mega  co-op ’ concept  could be seriously  discussed.  It’s fair to 
say not all sections  of the industry  saw the need for change  and there were many  
occasions  when the industry's  future  was debated  more with the heart, that the head.  
The decisive  factor  in the end, however,  was that the industry  came in behind  a shared  
vision. Similar  to Irl, NZ saw a changing  global market  and recognised  that major  
competition  was not from the co-ops  down the road, but from the shift in retail power 
occurring  globally,  and the emergence  of non-dairy  food products. It took time for 
everyone  in the industry  - and that included  those negotiating  the merger  - to recognise  
that this was a merger  focused  on international  markets. It was not about what was 
happening  at home, or individual  companies,  but getting  the critical mass needed  to 
compete  effectively  internationally.
To sum up the process  in one word, it would be communication.  The industry  had to 
invest  an extraordinary  amount  of time, effort and intelligence  into educating  politicians  
and regulatory  bodies  as well as farmers  about  why consolidation  was the best path and 
what benefits  it would deliver  for the NZ economy  and farmers. So the lesson  here is 
that, change  of the magnitude  being contemplated  in Irl will not be achieved  easily, and 
not only farmers  but also all stakeholders  must be convinced  it is the right step.
The second  lesson relates  to transparency.  One of the major concerns  around  the 
merger was  farmers'  ability  to track whether  the new ‘mega  co-op ’ was creating  value  for 
them, or destroying  it. Prior to the merger,  the NZ Dairy Board  did not specifically  report  
long-term  performance  measures  to the industry;  its only visible  performance  measure  
was payout. The performance  of individual  co-ops  was measured  on the margins  they 
added to the Board ’s payout. The payout  and the margins  were used as de facto  
performance  measures.
The merger  required  the development  of a set of very robust  performance  measures  - the 
commodity  milk price (CMP),  and the actual milk return (as discussed  earlier). These  
enabled  farmers  to compare  what Fonterra  is paying  them against  a theoretical  CMP  
independently  set. The CMP is the highest  theoretical  price that an efficient  competitor 
could afford  to pay for NZ’s milk while making  an adequate  return  on capital.
A further  mechanism  for assessing  performance  came with the introduction  of a Fair 
Value Share Price ’ (FVSP). Prior to the merger,  shareholders  in Fonterra ’s legacy  
companies  could not assess  the value of the investment  they had in their cooperative  
because  there was no open market  for the shares  they held. Transactions  between  the 
companies  and shareholders  were based  on nominal  share  value. Today  prior  to the start 
of each season,  an independent  valuer estimates  the FVSP. This takes into account  the
32
likely future  earnings  of Fonterra ’s separate  businesses,  corporate  overheads,  R&D and 
other  operations,  as well as the forecasted  volume  of milk supplied  to Fonterra,  expected 
exchange  rates, and the number  of shares. For 2002, Fonterra's  directors  set the FVSP  
at €1.98,  which was within the range determined  by Standard  & Poor ’s, of €1.88  to 
€2.19. Clearly,  such a mechanism  enables  farmers  to track whether  the company  is 
increasing  or destroying  their wealth.
Governance  is another  area where  Irl could learn lessons.  The co-operative  model,  well 
established  in both countries,  has many traditional  strengths.  Among  them is the close  
contact  between  directors  and shareholder/suppliers  and the resultant  flow of information 
between  them. As co-operatives  have grown  beyond  geographic  groupings,  maintaining 
these links and these  information  flows becomes  increasingly  difficult. However,  farmers 
today need more information,  not less.
To help solve this problem,  Fonterra  established  a model  designed  to deliver  on these 
expectations.  The ’Shareholders ’ Council ’ comprises  45 councillors,  spread  across  the 
country  and in close contact  with shareholders.  The Council  serves  as a performance 
watchdog  and as the bridge between  the company  and shareholders.  The Council 
appoints  the valuer  who determines  the Fair Value Range  for Fonterra ’s shares.  It also 
appoints  the Milk Commissioner,  whose  role is to resolve  any shareholders ’ complaints  or 
disputes  with Fonterra.  The Council  develops  and trains shareholders  to have a wider  
understanding  of the industry  and facilitates  targeted  training  programs for potential  future 
directors.  It also has the authority  to call a special  shareholders ’ meeting  if it has serious 
concerns  with Fonterra ’s compliance  with its cooperative  principles  or its performance. 
The council  is proving  very valuable  in ensuring  that Fonterra  has maintained  true co­
operative  principles.
A further  lesson  - is the importance  of the cow-to-customer chain. In Fonterra,  significant  
benefits  have been gained in bringing  the NZ Dairy Board into the company.  It has 
enabled  Fonterra  to overcome  the disconnection  between  supply and manufacturing 
functions  at home,  and marketing  functions  around  the world,  and allowed  for a reduction  
in supply chain costs by some €41 million a year. Most importantly,  it has enabled 
Fonterra  to bring marketing  and R&D people  together  allowing  the company  to be more  
responsive  to customers  and more innovative  in meeting  their needs.
A final lesson is one still being embraced.  The creation  of Fonterra,  as NZ’s largest 
company,  brought  with it some external  pressures  in addition  to the pressures  of 
integrating  the legacy  companies.  Where  before  the industry  tended  to be reported  on in 
agricultural  pages, it now find itself in the financial  pages. Consequently,  much of the 
commentary  is delivered  by people  who understand  the corporate  world, but not the co­
operative  world,  and certainly  not the world dairy market.  They have yet to come  to grips 
with the new economic  principles  developed  as a discipline  for the industry. This is 
particularly  trying given that Fonterra  adopted  a policy of complete  transparency  on 
payout  forecasts In the past, forecasts  were made  three times a year. Fonterra  tracks 
payout  forecasts  daily. The policy  is to let farmers  know  if the company  believes  there is 
a shift of (€) 5 cents or more, up or down. Rather  than applaud  such transparency  
however,  the media reports  payout  forecasts  on an emotional  ’good news, bad news ’ 
basis rather  than examining  the underlying  economic  drivers  of these forecasts.  At the 
same time, the company ’s leadership  position  has evolved  an expectation  to show 
leadership,  not just in dairying,  but also across  in a raft of other  areas  from good corporate
33
citizenship,  to research  and development  and talent  development.  This intense  scrutiny  
and the higher leadership  expectations  of Fonterra  are not unwelcome,  but they do 
represent  an additional  burden  that had to be carried  while bedding  the merger  in. It is a 
burden  that has been shouldered,  and one likely to be encountered  in Irl if this route is 
followed.
Conclusion
Is Fonterra  the blueprint  for Ireland?  Only the industry  in Ireland  can decide  this. The 
model  certainly  works  in NZ. It has delivered  more  than €60 million  in annualised  merger  
benefits,  and potential  total merger  benefits  of €160 million. The industry  is unified  
around  a strategy  with clear goals to grow shareholder  returns. The first year indicated  
the company's  potential.  Year  two has seen some  excellent  gains  to date in a very difficult  
market,  with commodity  prices  at 10 year lows and the NZ dollar heading  to historical  
highs. The vision  is to 'Lead in Dairy'. The journey  began  with the merger,  but there is a 
long way to go. However  the achievements  to date make Fonterra  confident  that 
Leadership  is an attainable  goal. Much has been learnt on the journey  and these  lessons  
may well prove  useful  to the dairy industry  in Ireland  as it strives  to go forward  in the years  
to come.
34
Genetic  selection  to maximise  dairy herd survivability
D P. Berryi,  F. Buckleyi,  P. Dilloni,  R.D. Evans^,  M. Rath2  & R.R Veerkamp3  
Moorepark Production  Research  Centre,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork  
^University  College  Dublin,  Belfield,  Dublin  4 
^ID-Lelystad,  PC. Box 65. 8200  AB Lelystad,  The Netherlands
Introduction
Survivability  may be defined  as the ability of an animal  to remain  within a herd over a 
given time period. Recent  trends  show  a gradual  decrease  of over 1.0% per year in first 
lactation  animals  reappearing  as second  lactation  animals  over the years 1993 to 1999  
(Irish Cattle Breeding  Statistics,  2002). This trend has occurred  as a result of 
management  changes  and changes  in the genetic  make-up  of the dairy population  over 
this time period. Nevertheless,  genetic  progress  towards  improved  survivability  must be 
prioritized  in order  to counteract  this phenomenon.  Genetic  progress  is cumulative  and 
permanent,  unlike management  practices  that need to be repeated  annually,  usually  at 
some repeated  expense.
Optimal  financial  benefits  are achieved  by maintaining  herd calving  intervals  in the region  
of 365-370  days and an empty  rate of less than 7% (Esslemont  et al.. 2001). There  are 
losses  associated  with levels  of performance  below  these  standards  (Britt, 1985). Annual  
total culling  rate should  be kept close  to 18% to maximise  the benefits  of age and genetic  
improvement  (for review  see Esslemont  et al., 2001).
The ability  to breed animals  that survive  longer  in our herds is of economic,  welfare  and 
environmental  importance.  With improved  survival,  the age structure  of the herd is 
altered towards  more mature animals  that are expected  to have higher yields. 
Replacement  rate/cost  is reduced  and the overall  cost of replacements  is spread  over a 
longer  time/production  horizon.  Superior  health  and fertility  reduces  veterinary  costs  and 
reduces  the incidence  of involuntary  culling  thereby  increasing  the scope for voluntary  
culling  (i.e., more scope  to cull lower  producing  cows). From an environmental  point of 
view, stocking  rates may be reduced  due to the requirement  for a smaller  number  of 
replacements  and the ability to fill quota with fewer, more mature  cows. This has 
implications  for reduced  methane  emissions.  Problems  associated  with the disposal  of 
specific  risk material  (SRM)  from animals  >30 months  of age may also be reduced.
The objective  of this paper is to illustrate  the past, present  and future of international 
breeding  programs  in improving  cow survivability  within  the herd.
Past international  breeding  programs
Genetic  change is readily achievable  through  the selection  of individuals  with 
performances  that differ from the average  of the population.  Genetic  improvement  
however  is more  difficult  to achieve  and requires  a favorable  genetic change  in important 
traits without  deleterious  effects  on other related  traits of importance.
For a long time breeding  programs  worldwide  (with the possible  exclusion  of the 
Scandinavian  countries)  were based  solely  on milk production  without  any consideration  
for other ancillary  traits. In Ireland,  up until November  2000, each animal  received  a
35
relative  breeding  index (RBI) figure,  which  was a weighted  sum of its progeny ’s capacity  
to produce  milk solids alone. It has now been recognised  that selection  in dairy cattle  
solely  for high milk production  is generally  accompanied  by reduced  fertility  (Berry  et al., 
2003b;  Evans  et al.. 2002) and reduced  health (Emanuelson  et al., 1988)  that may lead 
to poorer  overall  survival,  especially  in seasonal  calving  herds. It is for this reason  that 
most countries  have begun to include  traits, other than those associated  with milk 
production,  in their selection  indexes. Although  progress  towards  increased  milk 
production  may be reduced,  these  selection  indexes  suggest  that better  overall  economic 
efficiency  will be obtained  when  functional  non-production  traits are included  in selection  
objectives
Current  breeding  strategies
Economic breeding  index
The economic  breeding  index (EBI) was introduced  in Ireland  in November  2000. The 
objective  of the EBI Is to increase  the profitability  of the dairy herd. A sire with an EBI of 
€50 indicates  that, on average,  offspring  from that sire will leave €50 more profit per 
lactation  than offspring  from a sire with an EBI of €0. Over  the past 10 years  the average  
genetic  merit of milk-recorded  cows in EBI has increased  by €2.5/yr.  Herd profitability  is 
governed  by a large number  of different traits, however,  their inclusion  within  the selection  
index is limited  by the lack of sufficient  data. Currently  the EBI includes  five goal traits:
EBI(€)  = -0.076PDm||k+0.86*PDfat+5.7*PDp|.otein"*'^1  2.07 PD^aiving  interval
The EBI is based on predicted  differences  (PDs) which are defined  as the genetic 
superiority  that an animal  is likely to pass onto its offspring  compared  to the average  
animal  within the population  (e g., if a sire with a PDmnk  of +400 is used across  a herd,  
his progeny  are expected  to yield on average  400 kg milk more per lactation  than progeny  
of the average  sire with a PDmiik  of 0 kg). All PDs are expressed  as deviations  from a fixed 
genetic  base, which  is currently  the average  of all cows born in 1995 and milking  in 2000  
for the three  production  traits, and test-sires born between  1988 and 1992 for survival  and 
calving  interval.
The numerical  coefficients  of the  EBI are called  economic values  and are defined  as the 
marginal  profit per lactation  resulting  from a genetic  change  of one unit in that trait (e g 
a 1% improvement  in survival will  increase  profit  per lactation  by €11.40).  The sign of the 
coefficients  indicate  the direction  that is most  favorable  (I.e., profitability  will be maximized  
with reduced  milk carrier,  higher  fat and protein  yields, positive  survival  and a negative  
calving interval). The economic  weightings  are not directly  comparable,  due to the 
different  units in which  they are expressed.  In terms  of relative  importance,  protein  yield 
receives  the highest  weighting  with survival  receiving  23% of the relative  weighting  of 
protein  yield
Based on the economic  value of survival  in the EBI, a 0 5% increase  in the average  
genetic  merit of heifers  entering  the national  dairy herd (1,250,000  cows),  given a 25% 
replacement  rate and an average  number  of lactations/cow  of 3.2, would  be worth over 
€5.5 million  annually  to the industry Alternatively,  in a 100 cow herd a 0.5% increase  in 
the average  genetic  merit of incoming  heifers  for survival  would  be worth  €456/year.
36
The low heritability  for survival  (Olori et al., 2002)  coupled  with the long time required  to 
obtain  large amounts  of survival  data for a sire has led to an increased  interest  in indicator 
traits which; 1) can be more easily recorded;  2) can be measured  earlier  in life; and, 3) 
possess  a co-heritability  that is larger than the heritability  of the survival  trait (i.e. indirect 
selection  for improved  survival  is more efficient  than direct  selection  for survival).  Within 
the EBI, four linear type traits (angularity,  foot angle, udder  depth and body condition 
score) are included  within a sub-index  to obtain an early, yet reasonably  accurate 
indicator  of the potential  survival  of an animal. These  four traits were chosen  since  they 
have been found  to be strongly  related  to survival  (Table  1). The weighting  placed  on the 
indicator  trait is reduced  as more  actual  survival  data becomes  available  from the progeny 
of the sire (Pool et al., 2002).
Table  1. Heritabilities  (h^) and genetic  correlations  estimated  between  BCS and the 
other type traits with calving  interval  (CIV1, CIV2, CIV3), survival  (SUR1,  SUR2,  
SUR3),  and milk yield (MILK1,  MILK2,  MILK3)  for the first three  iactations.
Trait OVl CTV2 Sav3 sum SUR2 SUR3 MUJG MILK2 MIUG
i Angularity 0.30 0.38 0.46 ;035 -0.37 -0.19 -0.08 0.59 0.50 0.53
! Foot Angle 0.14 0.14 -0.08  ’0.01 0.28 0.21 0.20 -0.01 0.05 0.04
i Udder  Depth 0.33 -0.01 -0.11 1-0.38 0.13 0.26 0.15 -0.27 -0.22 -0.32
:bcs 0.22 -0.18 ^18 '-0.19 0.33 -0.04 -0.21 -0.36 -0.26 -0.32
Source: ICBF; Methodology  for the genetic  evaluation  of calving  interval  and survival  in 
Ireland
The reliability  of each animal's  EBI is always  presented  alongside  its EBI figure. The 
reliability  figure  describes  how certain  an animal ’s estimated  PD reflects  its true PD. It is 
a useful  guide  to the risk of an individual  animal's  PD changing  in the future. The reliability 
of a trait/breeding  goal depends  on both the heritability  estimates  of the trait(s)  but also 
the amount  of performance  information  for either  the animal  itself and/or  the animal ’s 
relatives  for the trait(s)  in question  or other  correlated  traits. Although  the models  used to 
predict  PDs for animals,  scale  the individual  PDs towards the  mean PD to account for  the 
amount  of performance  infomiation  on which  they were based,  it is not unusual  for a sire 
with low reliability  to be highly  ranked  in EBI only to be subsequently  deflated  when  more  
information  on that animals  is accumulated.  Similarly,  it may also be possible  for an 
animal's  EBI to increase  with the accumulation  of more data.
The golden rule when considering  using bulls with low reliabilities  (test bulls) is to 
minimize  risks by selecting  several  bulls. The reliability  of the EBI is determined  by the 
average  contribution  of the production  traits (69%) and the average  of the fertility  traits 
(31%). Thus the weighted  average  reliability  of each EBI figure  is calculated  as:
ReliabilityEBi  = [(ReliabilityppjODUCTlON*^  69) + (ReliabilityFpRTiLiTY ’O-^’')]
37
Body  condition  score
In November  2002,  body condition  score  (BCS)  was included  in the list of linear  type traits  
in Irish sire catalogues.  Body condition  score  is measured  at the same  time as the other  
linear  type traits and ranges  from 1 (extremely  thin) to 9 (extremely  fat). Results  from 
Moorepark  (Berry et al., 2002b) indicated  that the genetic  correlation  between  BCS 
measured  by the IHFA  (Scale  1-9) and BCS measured  by Teagasc  staff  (Scale  of 1-5) was 
0.86 This suggests  that despite  the difference  in scale, both BCS measures  are 
genetically  the same  trait.
Body condition  score sire proofs  are presented  in the same  way as all other linear  type 
traits in that they are scaled by their respective  standard  deviation.  Around  68% of 
animals  lie within ±1 on the BCS scale,  while 95% of animals  lie within ±2. Therefore  a 
PDbqs "I implies  that the animal  will produce  progeny  that will on average  have a BCS 
which is one standard  deviation  greater  than the average  of the population;  the current  
standard  deviation  of BCS is 0.54 (Brotherstone,  per comm.),  thus the animal's  progeny  
will be 0.54 BCS units (Scale1-9)  greater than the average  of the population.
Genetic  analysis  from the Moorepark  “Farm Fertility  study" showed  moderately  large  
heritability  estimates  for BCS ranging  from 0.29 to 0.36 (Berry et al., 2002a).  These  
heritability  estimates were  larger  than those  reported  for milk yield (0.19  to 0.29) from the 
same study (Berry et al., 2002a; Evans et al., 2002) and suggest  that rapid genetic 
improvement  in BCS is possible  with direct  selection  for BCS.
Many studies  (Berry et al., 2003b;  Pryce et al., 2001) have reported  negative  genetic  
correlations  between  milk yield and BCS indicating  that genetic  selection  towards  
increased  milk yield alone  will result  in lower  BCS levels. However,  because  the genetic  
correlation  between  BCS and milk production  is less than an absolute  value of one it is 
possible,  using appropriate  economic  weightings,  to select for higher  milk production  
without  any deleterious  effects  on BCS (Berry  et al., 2003b).
There  is evidence that an increase  in genetic merit  for BCS will result  in improved  genetic  
merit for fertility  (Berry  et al., 2003b;  Pryce et al., 2001). Berry et al., (2003b)  reported  
favorable  genetic  correlations  between  average  BCS with calving  to first service  interval  
(-0.37),  number  of services  (-0.42),  pregnancy  rate to first service  (0.34)  and pregnancy  
rate 63 days after the start of breeding  (0.35).
Alternative  breeds/crossbreeding
Currently  alternative  breeds  are unable  to be ranked  on EBI due to a lack of data and this 
is likely  to remain  the situation  for the immediate  future. Therefore,  Irish dairy farmers  are 
unable  to rank Holstein-Friesian  sires against  sires of the many  alternative  breeds  that are 
available.  However,  recent  experiments  from Moorepark  (Dillon  et al., 2003; Evans  et al., 
2003) indicate  that on average  cows from the Montbeliarde  breed were economically 
superior  to either the Holstein-Friesian  or Normande  breeds. Evans et al., (2003)  
reported  superior  economic  returns  from the Montbeliarde  breed under  three different  
quota environments.  The higher  profitability  of the Montbeliarde  breed was associated  
with lower  replacement costs,  higher  beef  value  and higher  milk price. Dillon  et al., (2003)  
showed  that the proportion  of animals  that survived  to 7 years  of age was 20.6%,  49.2%  
and 55.8%  for the Holstein-Friesian,  Montbeliarde  and Normande,  respectively.  This 
difference  in survival  was due substantially  to differences  in fertility. Nevertheless,  these
38
results  reflect  an average  breed effect and the genetic  variation  within breed is likely to 
be just as large as the genetic  variation  between  breeds. Therefore,  without  being able 
to rank sires of all breeds  on the same scale, using alternative  breeds  is analogous  to 
“shooting  in the dark”.
International  comparison
International  dairy cattle  breeding  has become  an ever-increasing  business  over the past 
few decades,  fueled mainly by the development  of techniques  such as artificial 
insemination  and embryo  transfer,  allowing  cross-country  transfer  of genetics. Much  
effort has therefore  gone into developing  procedures  to allow breeders  in one country  to 
make use of genetic  evaluations  of animals  in another  country. This has led to the 
development  of INTERBULL.  As well as looking  at international  converted  proofs  it is also 
important  to look at the individual  countries'  breeding  programs Table 2 shows  the 
number  of milk-recorded  cows in different  countries  and the proportion  of the national 
population  this represents.  Ireland is one of the lowest  countries  with regard to the 
proportion  of the national  herd in milk recording.  Nevertheless,  despite the low proportion 
of cows  milk-recorded,  in absolute  terms  Ireland  milk records  more cows  than most  of the 
Scandinavian  countries.  Therefore,  more emphasis  should  be placed  on maximising  the 
exploitation  of available  data.
Table 2. Number  of milk recorded  cows and their proportion  of the national  dairy  
herd for several  international  countries  for the year 2000
Country Number  of Recorded  cows  i Percentage  of national  population
Denmark 578,000 90 0
Norway 276,028'' ................. '■j""' .......... g^g
Sweden 368,350  : 82 1
The Netherlands 1,235,501 821
Germany 3,669,222 80 4
Estonia 105,958 76i6
Finland 270,575 74.3
Canada 724,456 627
France 2,750,700 62 6
Austria 384.320 61.9
Australia 1,028,233 49.0
Japan 522,947 46.5
Greece 74,095 44.1
Spain 499,176 42 2
Belgium 237,662 40 0
Rep. Of Ireland 391,796 31.7
Northern  Ireland 71,336 25.0
South  Africa 125,485 22 0
Agrentina 411,555  ;• 17 5
Source:  www.lCAR  nrg
The fundamental  phenomenon  behind  genetic  gain is that on average  individuals  in one 
generation  should  be genetically  superior  to their predecessors  (i.e. current  young  test
39
sires should  on average  be genetically  superior to last years  test sires). The subsequent  
dissemination  of superior  genes within a population  can only be achieved  through  
widespread  use of young  test sires within the national  dairy herd. Forty percent  of the 
Norwegian  national  dairy herd is inseminated  with young  test sires. This facilitates  large  
progeny  groups  providing  more accurate  estimated  breeding  values  (EBVs)  for young  
sires. However,  less than 3% of the milk-recorded  cows in Ireland are currently  
inseminated  with semen  from young  test sires. This low usage  of test sires is due to the 
lack of confidence  in the current  sire-testing  program  in Ireland. Presently  in Ireland  we 
rely heavily  on imported  semen,  thus genetic trends  in Ireland  tend to follow  international  
trends. These  trends  are not always  compatible  with our systems  of production.  Thus,  
genetic  gain in EBI will only be achievable  through  selection  of sires within our own 
population  (national  breeding  program)  or selection  of sires from countries  with similar  
breeding  objectives  and production  systems  as Ireland. Continuing  to rely on genetics  
from breeding  programs  with different  objectives  to Ireland  will seriously  hinder  genetic  
gain through  the EBI. Farmers  must have confidence  in the EBI. If confidence  in the EBI 
is increased  then the increased  use of test sires will follow.
Veerkamp  et al., (2000)  showed  large  probabilities  of a sire from an Irish national  breeding  
program  ranking  in the top 10 of foreign  sires, ranked  on EBI, when  the genetic  correlation  
between  the average  foreign  breeding  goal and the Irish breeding  goal is less than 0.90, 
and the number  of sires tested and the effective  number  of daughters  per sire both 
exceed  25. This may be achievable  at a cost of just over €2.5 million/year,  which implies  
a cost of €5/insemination  (assuming  500,000  inseminations).  Hence,  the cost of an Irish 
breeding  program  appears  to be considerably  less than buying  foreign  semen.
The opportunity  also presents  itself for a joint testing  program  with other countries  that 
adopt similar  breeding  goals to Ireland. This would involve  the selection  of top sires 
ranked  on EBI (or an index including  traits very similar to those  currently  in the EBI) and 
the mating  of these  sires with genetically  superior  dams  within  the host country. Semen  
from the progeny  of these  matings  may subsequently  be imported  and tested  under  Irish 
conditions  with the resulting  data made  available  for joint evaluations  in the host country.  
This could be viewed  as a method  of achieving  higher  genetic  gains at a relatively  small  
increase  in cost to the industry.
Increasing  the proportion  of cows milk recorded  will only result in modest  increases  in 
national  genetic  gain, attributed  mainly  to more accurate  sire EBVs  as a consequence  of 
larger progeny  group sizes. However,  milk recording  provides  an opportunity  for the 
farmer  to identify  genetically  superior  cows that should  be used to breed replacements.  
Berry  et al., (2003a)  has shown  that A8 (every  8 weeks)  milk recording  estimates  305-day  
yields  predicted  from A4 (every  4 weeks)  milk recording  schemes  with a small bias (1.9 
kg) and with a relatively  small standard  deviation  of the bias (216 kg). Alternate  A4 AM- 
PM recording  schemes which  are currently  operational  in Germany,  France,  Austria,  Italy, 
and Croatia  have also shown  small bias (2.9 kg to 13.0 kg) and small standard  deviation  
of the bias (214 kg to 227 kg) in estimating  305 day milk yield when compared  with 305- 
day yield predicted  from current  A4 recording  schemes.
Once animals  are milk recorded  they will enter  the IRIS database  and will automatically  
acquire  calving  interval  and survival  data. An increase  in the number  of recorded  herds  
will reduce  the number  of cows censored  for survival  (i.e. where cows were sold and 
entered  herds  that were not milk recorded).
40
Figure  1 illustrates  the breakdown  of individual  breeding  indexes  adopted  by several  other  
countries.  Over 70% of the indexes  shown in Figure 1 have some element  of 
longevity/survival,  which indicates  its increasing  popularity  as an economically  important 
trait in breeding  programs  worldwide.  Figure 1 clearly illustrates  the substantial  
opportunity  for a joint testing  program  with another  country
Figure  1. International  selection  indexes  with relative  ratios between  the different  
traits
(MET)
Japan  (NTP)
IrManP  (EBI)
Spatn  (ICO)
UK(Pll)
AvaMta  (APR)
Namartand*  (DPS)
Naw2ialaiid(nW)
Kaly (PFT)
Canada  (LPI)
US(TPI)
StUttadandflSEl)
Oarmany  (R2dl  
US(NM)
Sauin  Ainea(BVl)
Franca  (ISU)
UK (TOP)
Svadan  (TMI)
Danmarli  (S^OEX)
00% 100%
I - ■ ■ - I Protein  
FertilityFat
Udder  HealthType Longevity
Other
Source;  Holstein-Friesian,  2002
Future  of breeding
Efficient  genetic  improvement  is dependent  on the use of artificial  insemination  (Al). 
However,  most farmers  find the cost of Al prohibitive.  An average  service  charge  of 
€20/sen/ice  across  a 50 cow herd at 1.8 services  per cow accumulates  to an annual  Al 
bill of €1,800. When added  to a labour  cost for heat detection  and a monetary  cost for 
the inconvenience  of the service,  the overall  cost of Al spirals. This has lead to increased 
usage  of stock bulls.
The use of stock bulls is counter-productive.  Reliable  breeding  values  are not available 
for stock bulls, so it is not possible  to determine  how good or how bad a stock bull is, 
especially  for traits with low heritabilities  (e g., survival).  Similarly,  the same  stock bull is 
usually  run with the herd as a whole  so an individual  sire cannot  be matched  with each  
individual  dam. Change  in genetic  merit of animals  is cumulative  and permanent,  thus 
unfavorable  trends not only affect the subsequent  generation  but may also persist  for 
many generations.  Most of the traits that animal  breeders  are interested  in are complex 
quantitative  traits, which means  that they are controlled  by several  genes  which along  
with the influence  of environmental  factors  such as nutrition  make up the observed
41
phenotype  or performance  of the animal. So far, most selection  has been on the basis  of 
this observable  phenotype.  As referred  to previously,  the traditional  quantitative  approach  
to selection  is based on knowledge  of population  genetic  parameters  for the traits of 
interest,  such as heritabilities,  genetic  variances  and genetic  correlations.  These  
parameters  can be estimated  using statistical  analyses  of phenotypic  and pedigree  data. 
Tremendous  rates of genetic  improvement  have been achieved  through  quantitative  
approaches,  but nevertheless  it has limitations.  The phenotype  can often be an imperfect  
predictor  of an individual  animal ’s breeding  value; it may be unobservable  in both sexes  
(e g , milk production  traits) or, may only be observed  late in the production  cycle (e g., 
survival)  making  efficient  genetic  progress  difficult.
Biotechnology  provides  an option  by selecting  for genes  directly;  DNA  can be obtained  at 
any age and from both sexes. The use of molecular  information  will undoubtedly  form an 
integral  part of breeding  programs  in the future. The two main areas  where  biotechnology  
will prove  beneficial  in breeding  programs are in the area of marker-assisted  introgression  
(MAI) and marker  assisted  selection  (MAS). Marker  assisted  introgression  involves  the 
introduction  of a favorable  allele to a population,  while MAS is the use of molecular  
markers  to accelerate  selection  for a particular  trait within a population.  Several  genes  
with important  effects  have been located  for important  diseases  such as BU\D, DUMPS  
and CVM. However,  the identification  of individual  genes  responsible  for survival  per se 
may prove difficult  due to the complex  nature  of the trait and its low heritability,  which  
would  suggest  a large number  of genes  controlling  the trait. Nevertheless,  opportunities  
may arise for candidate  gene selection,  which is essentially  genes  that have a known  
function,  linked  to survival  (e g. a gene coding  for improved  fertility  may be investigated  
as a marker  for survival).
Conclusions
The choice  of sires used this year will influence  the genetic  makeup  (survival  as well as 
production  potential)  of future cows in your herd. Selection  may be within or between  
breeds. However,  when selecting  within the Holstein-Friesian  sires available,  farmers  
must have confidence  in the EBI. The EBI ranks Holstein-Friesian  sires on overall  
profitability  using  economic  criteria  pertinent to Irish production  circumstances.  However,  
attention  should  be paid to the reliability  of the EBI of individual  sires. Where  possible  
choose  sires with reliabilities  greater  than 60%. At all times it is advisable  to select a 
number  of sires. If fertility  and survival  are an issue in the herd, then more cognisance  
can be placed  on survival  and calving  interval  traits in the index. Other  considerations  
may include  conformation  traits, risk of genetic  defects  (CVM, BLAD)  and avoidance  of 
high levels  of inbreeding.
References
Berry, D P., Buckley,  F, Dillon, P, Evans, R.D., Rath, M. and Veerkamp,  R.F, (2002a).  
Genetic parameters  for level and change  of body  condition  score  and body weight  in dairy 
cows. J Dairy Science  85: 2030-2039.
Berry, D P, Buckley,  F, Dillon, P, Evans, R D., Rath, M. and Veerkamp,  R F (2002b).  
Genetic parameter  estimates for body  condition  score  measured  by two different  sources.  
Meeting  with Al industry  & Dairy Herdbooks,  Silver  Springs  Hotel, Cork. 31®* July 2002.
42
Berry, D P., Buckley,  F., Dillon, P., Evans,  R.D., Raxh, M. and Veerkamp,  R.F. (2003b). 
Genetic  relationships  among  body condition  score,  body \weight,  milk yield and fertility  in 
dairy cows. J. Dairy. Sci. (In Press).
Berry, D P, Olori, V.E., Cromie,  A.R., Veerkamp,  R.F, Rath, M. and Dillon P (2003a) 
Accuracy  of predicting  yields from alternative  milk recording  schemes  ’ Anim Sci 
{Submitted).
Britt, J.H. (1985). Enhanced  reproduction  and its economical  implications.  J. Dairy Sci 
68: 1585-1592.
Cromie,  A. (2002). Irish cattle breeding  statistics.  Print Run Limited,  Unit 72 Western 
Parkway  Business  Park, Ballymount,  Dublin  12.
Dillon, P, Snijders,  S., Buckley,  F, Harris, B., O'Connor,  P. and Mee, J.F. (2003). A 
comparison  of different  dairy cow breeds  on a seasonal  grass-based  system  of milk 
production.  2. Reproduction  and survival.  Livest.  Prod. Sci. (Submitted)
Esslemont,  R.J., Kossaibati,  M.A. and Allcock,  J. (2001). Economics  of fertility  in dairy  
cows. Fertility  in the high producing  dairy cow. Occasional  publication  No. 26 BSAS  
p19.
Emanuelson,  U., Danell, B. and Philipsson,  J. (1988). Genetic  parameters  for clinical 
mastitis,  somatic  cell counts,  and milk production  estimated  by multiple-trait  restricted 
maximum  likelyhood.  J. Dairy  Sci. 71: 467-476.
Evans, R.D., Buckley,  R, Dillon, P. and Veerkamp,  R.F. (2002). Genetic  parameters  for 
production  and fertility  in spring-calving  Irish dairy cattle. Irish J. of Ag. and Food  Res 
41: 43-54.
Evans, R.D., Dillon, P, Shalloo,  L., Wallace,  M. and Garrick,  D.J. (2003). An economic  
comparison  of dual-purpose  and Holstein-Friesian  breeds  in a seasonal  grass-based  
system  under  different  milk production  scenarios.  Livest  Prod. Sci. (Submitted)
Olori, VE., Meuwissen,  TH E. and Veerkamp,  R.F. (2002). Calving  interval  and survival 
breeding  values  as measure  of cow fertility  in a pasture-based  production  system  with 
seasonal  calving. J. Dairy  Sci. 85: 689-696.
Pool, M.H., Meuwissen,  TH E., Olori, V.E., Cromie,  A.R., Calus, M.P.L. and Veerkamp, 
R.F. (2002). Breeding  for survival  and calving  interval  in Ireland. P*' World Congress  on 
Genetics  Applied  to Livestock Production.  August  19-23.  Montpellier,  France, pi 35-138
Pryce, J.E., Coffey, M P, Brotherstone,  S.H. and Woolliams,  J.A. (2002). Genetic  
relationships  between  calving  interval  and body condition  score  conditional  on milk yield 
J. Da/ry  Sc/. 85: 1590-1595.
Veerkamp,  R.F, Meuwissen,  TH E., Groen, A.F., van Arendonk,  J.A.M., Dillon, P, 
Cromie,  A.R and Olori, V. (2000). Dairy breeding  objective  and programs  for Ireland.  
Discussion  report  following  phase  1. Consultancy  of the industry.  ID-Lelystad  reoort ID- 
Lelystad.
43
Management  of young  stock  for maximum  retention  
in the dairy herd
A.F. Carson'',  L.E.R. Dawson''  & M.A. McCoy^
^Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland,  Hillsborough,  Co. Down  
^Veterinary  Sciences  Division,  Sormont,  Belfast
Introduction
Heifer  rearing  has a major effect  on the milk production  of herds  in the UK and Ireland. It 
is also becoming  increasingly  clear, through  research,  that there are important  long-term  
effects  of heifer rearing  on reproductive  performance  and the incidence  of lameness  in the 
milking  herd. Recent  survey  data from Northern  Ireland indicates  that infertility  and 
lameness  are two of the major reasons  for the removal  of dairy cows from the herd, 
accounting  for over 30% of the total removals  (Mayne et al.. 2002). Thus an 
understanding  of the effects  of feeding  and management  of young  stock  on these  factors,  
which  have major effects  on the longevity  of dairy herd replacements,  is important  for the 
dairy industry. Consequently,  the objective  of this paper is to review  the findings  of 
research  on the effects of heifer feeding and management  on milk production,  
reproductive  performance  and lameness.  This information  is essential  to point the way 
forward for the most appropriate  systems  for rearing dairy herd replacements  for 
maximum  retention  and profitability  in the dairy herd.
Effect  of feeding  during  the rearing  period  on miik production  and fertility  
Prepubertal  nutrition
Target  growth  rates during  the various  phases  of the rearing  period  should  be aimed  at 
maximising  mammary  development.  Udder development  is particularly  sensitive  to 
nutrition  in the period  from 3 to 10 months  of age. With Friesian-type  heifers,  high planes  
of nutrition  leading  to growth  rates above  0.75 kg/d, during  the pre-pubertal  period  have 
been found  to inhibit  mammary  growth,  leading  to reductions  in milk yield (e g. Little and 
Kay, 1979). However research  at Hillsborough  (Carson  et al., 2000)  has established  that 
high genetic  merit Holstein-Friesian  heifers  are less sensitive  to high planes  of nutrition  
and can be grown  at rates of up to 0.95 kg/d during  the pre-pubertal  period on grass  
silage and straw-based  diets without  detrimental  effects  on milk yield (Table 1). High 
genetic  merit Holstein-Friesian  heifers  have a larger  mature  body weight  and hence  may 
tolerate  higher levels of feeding  before the development  of milk secretory  tissue is 
permanently  inhibited. It is important  to note that there are clear differences  in the 
propensity  to lay down fat in the udder between  strains  of Holstein-Friesians.  When  
reared  on the same  diet, the proportion  of milk secretory  tissue  in the udder  was found  to 
be considerably  more  and the proportion  of fat less, in high genetic  merit  Holstein-Friesian  
heifers  compared  with medium  genetic  merit Holstein-Friesian  heifers  and New Zealand  
heifers  (Table  2). Thus there remains  a need to ensure  that growth  rates of lower  mature  
weight  dairy herd replacements  are controlled  during  the pre-pubertal  period.
44
Table 1. The effects  of rearing  regime  from 3 to 10 months  of age on subsequent  
milk production  in high genetic  merit  Holstein-Friesians  (Carson  et al., 2000)
Low plane  
SilageTreatment
High plane  
SilageHighplane
Straw
3-10  months  of age
Concentrate  feed level (kg/d) 1.0 2.5 3.7
Liveweight  gain (kg/d) 0.70 0.95 0.93
Live weight  at 10 months  (kg) 244 291 288
At calving
Live weight  (kg) 549 588 596
Withers  height  (cm) 137 139 141
First lactation  (305-days)
Milk yield (kg) 6242 6594 6767
Milk fat (%) 4.14 4.22 3.99
Milk protein  (%) 3.28 3.36 3.24
Table 2. Udder  composition  at 15-months  of age in high genetic  merit (HGM) 
Holstein-Friesian,  medium  genetic  merit  (MGM)  Holstein-Friesian  and New Zealand  
(NZ) heifers  (Carson  et al., 2002a)
HGM MGM NZ
Weight  of udder  (g)
Udder  composition  (%)2021 2398 1827
Parenchyma 45.7 34.1 26.8
Fat 38.5 45.4 56.1
Protein  nutrition  has been raised  as a potential  key factor  influencing  pre-pubertal  udder  
development.  However,  whilst some studies  have found that increasing  the protein  
content  of the diet has reduced  pre-pubertal  mammary  fat deposition,  no studies  have  
observed  any subsequent  significant  increase  in milk production  (Dobos  et al., 2000).  
Diets should  be designed  to ensure  protein  supply  is adequate  during  the various  phases 
of rearing  to ensure  optimal  growth. It is important  to note that oversupplying  protein  as 
vi/ell as being  detrimental  to the environment,  through  increasing  nitrogen  excretion  in the 
faeces  and urine, has been  found  to increase  fat deposition  in growing  beef  heifers (Steen 
and Robson,  1995). Overall  protein  contents  of the diets fed to heifers  at Hillsborough 
are given in Table  3.
Table 3. Dietary  protein  contents  of diets fed during  the rearing  period
Live weight  range  (kg) Protein  content (% of totai ration  DM)
Birth - 100 18
100 - 300 17
300 - 400 16
400 - first calving 14
45
Effects  of weight  at first  caiving  and diet type
With Friesian  animals  a target  pre-calving  live weight  of 520 kg at 24 months  of age was 
established  for heifer  rearing  systems  based  on research  carried  out during  the 1960 to 
1970 ’s. At this weight, milk production  in Friesian  heifers  was not curtailed  due to 
inadequate  body size (e g. Little and Harrison,  1981). However,  high genetic  merit  
Holstein-Friesian  animals,  which are widespread  in the UK and Ireland, have an 
increased  live weight and frame size at maturity  compared  to their medium  merit  
contemporaries  (Mayne  and Gordon,  1995). An impetus  for heavier  weights  at calving  
has been initiated,  based on survey  data from the United  States  which indicated  that 
optimal  first lactation  milk yields were obtained  when Holstein  replacement  heifers  
weighed  590 to 635 kg at calving  (Keown  and Everett,  1986). To develop  appropriate  
targets,  the impact of adopting  heavier  weights  at calving in Northern  Ireland dairy 
systems  has been investigated  at Hillsborough.
Increasing  the plane of nutrition  during  the second  year of life, to adopt  heavier  weights  
at calving,  (620 compared  with 565 kg) was found to have no significant  effect on milk 
production  (Carson  et a!., 2000) (Table 4). Dry matter  intake in early lactation  in the 
heifers  calving  at 565 kg was higher  compared  with animals  calving  down at 620 kg and 
this appeared  to offset the milk production  associated  with the increased  body 
mobilisation  in the heavier animals.
Table  4. The effect of adopting  heavier  weights  at calving  through  increased  plane  
of nutrition  from 14 to 24 months  of age (Carson  etai.,  2000)
LowPlane  of nutrition
High
Pre-calving
Live weight  (kg) 568 620
Condition  score 3.1 3.5
Withers  height  (cm) 137 138
First iactation  (30S-days)
Milk production  (1) 6767 6931
Fat % 4.01 4.01
Protein  % 3.39 3.30
Fat plus protein  (kg) 500 507
This balance  may change  in commercial  production  systems  where  dry matter  intake  may 
be limited  due to factors  such as competition  from larger  herd mates  and variable  forage  
quality. In addition,  increases  in body  condition  associated  with heavier  weights  at calving  
may be less if increases  in growth  rate are phased  in strategically  over  the whole  two-year  
rearing  period  A large-scale  study was undertaken  to investigate  the effect of weight  at 
first calving  and diet type on body size, reproductive  performance  and milk output in 
commercial  milk production  systems. In this programme  11 milk producers  supplied  
heifers for  rearing  under  4 rearing  systems  (Carson  et al., 2002b)  (Table  5). Heifers  were  
returned  to the farms  of origin  one-month  before  calving  where  subsequent  performance  
was recorded.
46
Table 5. Effects  of rearing  treatment  on body size milk yield and composition  
during  the first and second  iactation
Rearing  regime
Live weight  at 24 months
Forage  during  winter
Forage  during  summer540 kg 
Silage  
Grass620 kg 
Silage  
Grass620 kg
Straw
Grass620 kg
Straw
Straw/Grass
Body  size pre-calving
Condition  score 2.8 3.6 3.4 3.4
Withers  height  (cm) 134 137 139 139
First  lactation
Milk yield (kg) 7222 8020 7956 7901
Fat (%) 3.81 3.70 3.70 3.77
Protein  (%) 3.27 3.13 3.17 3.26
Fat + protein  yield (kg) 511 544 544 554
Milk value (£) 1296 1387 1387 1410
Second  lactation
Milk yield (kg) 8909 9319 8831 8777
Fat (%) 3.91 3.63 3.76 3.86
Protein  (%) 3.35 3.26 3.26 3.24
Fat + protein  yield (kg) 645 638 610 623
Milk value (£) T638 1639 1574 1575
Economics  of rearing  system
Value  of milk over 2 2934 3026 2961 2985
Lactations  (£)
Fertility  cost (£) -160 -302 -400 -395
Feed cost of rearing  (£) -345 -474 -477 -502
Milk value less feed & 2429 2250 2084 2088
Fertility  costs (£)
Averaged  across  11 farms,  first lactation  milk yield was 11% greater  in animals  reared  to 
calve down at 620 kg compared  with those  reared  to calve  at 540 kg (Carson  et al., 2002  
b) (Table  5). Fat plus protein  yield was increased  by 0.41 kg per kg additional  live weight  
above  540 kg (approximately  80% of mature  weight).  Milk production  during  the second 
and third lactations  was not affected  by rearing  regime. By the end of the first lactation,  
although  there remained  slight differences  in skeletal  size as indicated  by body length,  
heifers  reared  to 540 or 620 kg at first calving  were of similar  live weight.
Weight  changes  during  the first lactation  indicate  that the higher  milk yield produced  in the 
animals  reared  to calve  at 620 kg was due to increased  mobilisation  of body reserves and 
not supported  by increased  intake. In fact, dry matter intakes  in early lactation  have been  
found  to be lower  in animals  reared  to heavier  weights  at first calving  (Woods  et al., 2003).  
Data from large-scale  dairy cow studies  suggest  that condition  score at calving/and  or
47
greater  rate of body condition  score loss during  eqrly lactation  are correlated  with poorer 
fertility  (Mayne  et al., 2002). Likewise,  in the present  study heifers  reared  to calve at 620 
kg, which  lost more  weight  in early lactation  had a longer  interval  to first recorded  oestrus  
than those reared  to calve at 540 kg (Table  6). Heifers  reared  to calve at 620 kg also 
tended to have a longer calving interval,  which as well as having an effect on 
management  for those herds striving  to maintain  a seasonal  calving  pattern,  has a 
detrimental  effect on milk production  over the lifetime  of the animal  (Esslemont  et al., 
2001). Interestingly,  the trend for heifers  reared  to calve at 540 kg to have a shorter  
calving  interval  was repeated  in the second  and third lactation.  This cannot  be explained  
in terms of differences  in live weight  or condition  score at the second  calving  and may 
indicate  that nutrition  during  the rearing  period  has permanent  effects  on the hormonal  
pathways  affecting  reproductive  performance.
Table  6. The effect  of rearing  regime  on reproductive  performance  during  the first 
lactation  (Carson  et al., 2002b)
Live weight  at 24 months
Forage  during  winter
Forage  during  summerRearing  regime
540 kg 
Silage  
Grass620 kg 
Silage  
Grass620 kg
Straw
Grass620 kg
Straw
Straw/Grass
Calving  tol®* recorded  heat (d) 70 102 108 87
Calving  to 1®' service  (d) 86 109 120 115
Proportion  pregnant 0.94 0.98 0.91 0.88
Services/conception 1.7 1.8 1.8 2.4
Calving  interval  (d) 394 426 435 458
Diet type during  the rearing  period  had no significant  effect  on subsequent  milk production  
even though  significant  differences  in mammary  development  were detected  in animals  
at 18-months  of age (Carson  et al., 2003). This may indicate  that animals  reared  on 
silage-based  diets during the winter, which had reduced  milk secretory  tissue at 18 
months  of age compared  with animals  on straw-based  diets, exhibit  compensatory  milk 
secretory  tissue  development  during  the subsequent  summer  grazing  period. Likewise,  
improvements  in udder development,  which  were gained  through  pasture  grazing  during  
the first summer  compared  with feeding  indoors  on straw-based  diets, were not correlated  
with any increase  in performance.
Over the 34-month  period  post-calving,  the cumulative  milk yield produced  by the heifers  
reared  to calve at 540 kg has been similar  to the animals  reared  to calve at 620 kg (20 
195 versus  19 856 litres). Thus  the higher  first lactation  milk yield of the heifers  reared  to 
620 kg has been negated  by the shorter calving  interval  in the animals  reared  to calve at 
540 kg, combined  with the fact that rearing  effects  have not extended  into subsequent  
lactations.  In conjunction  with the higher  rearing  costs associated  with the larger heifers,  
these results  indicate  that rearing  heifers  to calve at 620 kg is uneconomic  (Table 5). 
Furthermore,  from a management  point of view it is easier  to rear heifers  to a moderate  
live weight  (540 kg) for calving  at 24 months  of age which, as well as being the most  
economic,  is fundamental  to maintaining  a seasonal  calving  pattern.
48
Effect  of feeding  during  the rearing  period  on lameness
Lameness  is a major welfare  and ecx)nomic  issue for the dairy industry  in Northern 
Ireland Sub-clinical  laminitis,  characterised  by haemorrhages  in the sole of the claw, is 
believed  to be a major  pre-disposing  cause  of lesions  such as sole ulcers  and white line 
lesions  which are an important  cause  of lameness  (Offer  et al., 2001). Nutrition  during 
the rearing  period has an important  effect on claw development  and can predispose 
heifers  to these  types  of foot problems.
Forage  type fed during  the rearing  period  has been highlighted  as an important  potential 
factor  in claw  development.  Workers  in Scotland  (Offer et al., 2001)  reported  that feeding 
low dry matter  grass  silage  (19% DM) for 3-months  after service,  as compared  with grass 
hay, was associated  with a greater  prevalence  of poor locomotion  and haemorrhages  in 
the sole in first lactation  heifers. Both claw horn lesions  and lameness  are recurrent. 
Heifers  lame in their first lactation  are 2 to 3 times  more likely to be lame in their second 
lactation  (Ward  & French,  1997). In addition,  heifers  fed on low, compared with  a high dry 
matter  silage  during  lactation  have been found to have a higher  incidence  of claw horn 
lesions  (Webster,  2002). It has been suggested  that wet faeces  on the floor contributes  
to the chemical  erosion  of both the sole and heel therefore  increasing  the force of the 
impact  between  the sole and the pedal bone giving rise to claw horn lesions. In studies 
at Hillsborough,  forage  type during  the rearing  period  had no significant  effect  on lesions 
in the sole area, however  heel erosion  scores  during  the rearing  period  were significantly  
lower in heifers  reared  on the straw-based  diets during  the winter  periods. Whilst  the 
effects  of forage  type on claw development  were smaller  in the study at Hillsborough 
compared  with work from Scotland,  both studies  indicate  advantages  of feeding  heifers 
high dry matter forages during the rearing period when housing in cubicle  
accommodation.
Level of feeding  during  the rearing  period  has also been shown  to affect  the incidence  of 
claw abnormalities  (Carson  el al., 2003). When assessed  at 18-months  of age (end of 
the second  winter  period)  increasing  concentrate  feed levels  to adopt  heavier weights  at 
first calving  on silage-based  diets had no significant effects  on lesions  of the sole, but led 
to large increases  in heel erosion. Increasing  the concentrate  portion  of grass silage-  
based diets is likely to cause reductions  in rumen pH, which Greenough  and Vermunt 
(1991)  suggested  may activate  vasoactive  mechanisms  and substances  which  can cause 
degenerative  changes  in heel horn formation.  It is also possible  that the observed 
increases  in heel erosion  were simply  due to the fact that heifers  on the higher  plane of 
nutrition  were heavier  and consequently  had increased  pressure  on the claws,  which  has 
also been linked  to increased  heel erosion  (Baggott  and Russell,  1988).
Effect  of dairy heifer  management  on milk production  and fertility
Parlour  training
There  is increasing  interest  on the effects  of management  during  the rearing  period  on the 
subsequent  performance  of dairy herd replacements.  At Hillsborough,  research  in this 
area is now examining  the management  of dairy herd replacements  during  the transition 
period (3-weeks  before  and after calving).  The work so far has examined  the effect of 
introducing  heifers  to the milking  parlour  prior to calving  on subsequent  milk production, 
health  and fertility  as well as stress  responses  and behaviour  in parlour.
49
Results  to date indicate  that introducing  heifers  to the milking  parlour  before  they calve  
may enhance  their milk production  due to reduced  stress  (Table  7). The study included  
both Holstein-Friesian  and Norwegian  dairy cattle and with both breeds  the effect of 
transition  management  was found to be very important. Provisional  behavioural  
observations  indicate  that preconditioning  heifers  to the milking  parlour  before  calving  
reduces  the number  of kicks and general  restlessness  of heifers  during  the milking  routine  
post-calving.  Heifers  trained  through  the milking  parlour  prior to calving  produced  1.5 
litres extra milk per day during  the first 100 days of lactation  compared  to those  which  
were not accustomed  to the parlour pre-calving.  However,  the increased  milk yields  were  
accompanied  by increased  live weight  and body condition  losses,  which  may have been  
responsible  for the poorer  reproductive  performance  of these heifers  during the first 
lactation.  The combined  effects  of longer  intervals  from calving  to first service  and a 
tendency  for lower  conception  rates in the heifers  introduced  to the milking  parlour  pre­
calving,  meant  that the interval  from calving  to conception  was 19 days longer  for these  
heifers  (102 versus 83 days). Thus, overall the detrimental  effects on reproductive  
performance  negated  the beneficial  effects  of in parlour  training  on milk yield. Research  
in heifer management  needs  to develop  further  to identify  means  of increasing  dry matter  
intake  in early lactation  so that production  responses  are not accompanied  by reductions  
in reproductive  performance.
Table 7. Milk production  of Holstein-Friesian  and Norwegian  dairy herd 
replacements  during the first 100 days of lactation,  foilowing  either pre­
conditioning  to the milking  parlour  (preconditioned)  or no preconditioning  (control)  
(Wicks  et al., 2003)
Holstein
FriesianNorwegian Control Pre­
conditioned
Milk Production
Milk Yield (kg/d) 27.4 25.0 25.4 26.9
Fat (%) 4.07 3.79 3.99 3.87
Protein  (%) 3.32 3.29 3.30 3.31
Total Fat + protein  yield (kg) 50.2 50.3 50.3 50.2
Somatic  cell count  (‘000) 134 114 156 95
Reproductive  performance  
Interval  from calving  to: 
fSt Progesterone  rise (d) 38.3 29.7 36.2 31.8
ist oestrus  detection  (d) 59.9 43.1 492 53.8
1 service  (d) 80.5 77.1 760 81.5
Conception  (d) 96.1 89.1 83.0 102.2
Services/Conception 1.61 1.57 1.29 1.89
Managing  heifers  as a separate  group
The soclai hierarchy  that exists in a herd of cows means  that the youngest  and newest  
members  of the group normally  rank lowest. The individual  cow's rank in the herd is 
thought  to play an important  role in determining  her feed intake  (Krohn  and Konggaard,
50
1979). Thus it has been suggested  that regrouping  cows more uniformly  with less 
extremes  in social strength  will improve  the conditions  for the weaker  individuals  of the 
herd
Work carried  out 20 to 30 years ago reported  significant  benefits  from housing  heifers 
separately  from mature  cows. On self-feed  silage systems,  Drew and Altman  (1982)  
reported  that heifers  housed  separately  from mature  cows produced  3.5 kg/day  (+18%)  
more milk. With easy-feed  systems,  a Danish study (Krohn and Konggaard,  1979)  
indicated  smaller  but still significant  effects  (5 to 10%) of housing  first lactation  heifers 
separately  from mature  cows (+0.8 to 1.6 litres per day). Krohn and Konggaard  (1979)  
reported  that the milk production  responses  observed  in their study were the result of 
heifers  grouped  separately,  spending  10 to 30 minutes  longer  per day eating  compared 
with heifers  grouped  with older cows. It was suggested  that this difference  in intake  was 
due to the fact that first lactation  heifers  mixed  with mature  cows, follow  the same  eating  
pattern  of the cows (social  facilitation).  Since mature  cows eat faster  than first lactation 
heifers,  the eating  time for heifers  mixed  with cows is reduced  compared  to the situation 
when heifers  are housed  as a single  group. With complete  diets the effects  of housing  
heifers  separately  have been found to be less (Drew, 1988) or totally absent  (Lawson, 
1999),  perhaps  as a result  of total time feeding  being  less of a limitation  on total dry matter  
intake.
Housing  first lactation  animals  separate  from mature  cows undoubtedly  complicates  
feeding  and management.  Research  information  in this area is limited,  particularly  in 
relation  to effects  on reproductive  performance,  incidence  of mastitis  and lameness.  
Nonetheless,  in some  housing  systems  the separation  of heifers  from mature  cows  during 
the first lactation  may be a practical  and cost-effective  practice. However,  to develop 
improved  management  systems  which can be more easily adopted  there is an urgent 
need for an increased  understanding  on factors  influencing  the behaviour of heifers  in the 
milking  herd. There  may be easier  means  of improving  the feeding  behaviour  of heifers 
in the milking  herd. For example,  the timing  of the heifer ’s introduction  into the herd may 
have important  long-term  effects. There are some indications  that delaying  the 
introduction  of heifers  into the milking  herd from 1 until 5 days after  calving  reduces  stress  
(Lawson,  1999). Also introducing  heifers after the evening  milking rather than the 
morning  milking  is preferred  as at this time cows are less socially  active and this may 
have long-term  benefits. Research  in these areas  is underway  at Hillsborough  with the 
aim of developing  transition  management  systems  to minimise  the physiological  and 
behavioural  stress  of heifers,  thereby  maximising  their longevity.
Housing  in eariy  iactation
There is clear evidence  that claw horn lesions  in first lactation  heifers  are greater  when 
animals  are housed  in cubicle  accommodation  compared  with straw yards  (Livesey  etai.,  
1998). Recent  research  has found  that housing  heifers  for 4 to 8 weeks  after calving  on 
straw before moving  to cubicle accommodation  significantly  reduced  the severity  of 
lesions  (Webster,  2002). Even this limited  period  of housing  heifers  on straw  would  have  
a significant  impact  on the costs of production  for herds  in Ireland  and it is also important 
to consider  that there is an increased  risk of environmental  mastitis with  animals on straw 
bedded  courts  (Berry, 1998). With cubicle  accommodation  emphasis  must be placed  on 
making  cubicles  as comfortable  as possible  to maximise  lying time. In addition,  getting
51
heifers  to grass  through  the use of extended  grazing  in the late autumn  and early spring  
is likely to reduce  the challenge  to the feet and thus lower the prevalence  of feet 
problems.
Summary
Research  has provided  sound  information  on which  to base heifer  rearing  systems.  The 
target body  size for high genetic  merit  Holstein-Friesian  heifers  calving  at two years  of age 
should  be 540 to 560 kg, at a body condition  score  of 2.75 to 3.0. Appropriate  live weights  
for the various  phases  of rearing  are detailed  in Table 8. With cubicle  accommodation,  
feeding  low dry matter  forages  during  the rearing  period  (and first lactation)  increases  the 
risk and incidence  of lameness.  Training  heifers  to the parlour  increases  milk yield, but 
this increase  in production  appears  to be the result  of increased  body tissue  mobilisation  
reducing  reproductive  performance.  Housing  heifers  separately  from mature  cows  during  
the first lactation  may have benefits  but complicates  management.  Research  is required  
to develop  management  systems  to reduce  the stress  during  introduction  of heifers  to the 
milking  herd. Work in this important  area is underway  at Hillsborough.
Table  8. Target  live weights  during  the rearing  period  for medium  and high genetic  
merit heifers
Target  live weight (kg)
Medium  merit High merit
Birth 38 41
6 weeks 60 65
12 weeks 90 95
6 months 150 160
14 months 315 330
23 months 500 530
24 months 520 550
Acknowledgements
The authors  would  like to thank  the staff of the sheep  and dairy heifer  rearing  unit. The 
authors  are indebted  to the following  dairy producers,  without  whom  this work would  not 
have been possible  - Mr E. Black, Mr J. Davidson,  Mr P. Drayne,  Mr W. Gordon,  Mr J. 
Irwin, Mr D. Johnston,  Mr J. Harris  (Dunleath  Estates),  Mr M. McCollum,  Messrs  W. and 
A. McCollum,  Messrs  S. and K. Montgomery,  Messrs  W. and A. McConnell,  Messrs  D. 
and K. Telford. Thanks  are also due to Mr A. Gordon  for assistance  with the statistical  
analyses.  This programme  is funded  by DARDNI  and AgriSearch.
52
Lameness  in dairy cattle. British VeterinaryReferences
Baggot, D.G and Russell,  A.M. (1988).
Journal  137: 113-132.
Berry, E.A. (1988). Mastitis  evidence  on straw  yards and cubicles. Veterinary  Record  
141: 517-518.
Carson,  A.F., Wylie, A.R.G.,  McEvoy,  J.D.G., McCoy,  M. and Dawson,  L.E.R. (2000).  
Effects of plane of nutrition  and diet type on mammogenic  honnone  concentrations, 
growth and milk production  in high genetic  merit dairy herd replacements.  Animal  
Science  70: 349-362.
Carson,  A.F., Dawson,  L.E.R., McCoy,  M.A. and McEvoy,  J.D.G. (2002a). Research 
points  the way forward  for heifer  rearing. In: Recent  Research  In Dairying,  Proceedings 
of a seminar  held at the Agricultural  Research  Institute  of Northern  Ireland March  2002 
pp. 1-17.
Carson,  A.F, Dawson,  L.E.R.,  McCoy,  M.A. and Gordon,  FJ. (2002b). The effects  of 
rearing regime on body size, milk production  and reproductive  performance  in high 
genetic  merit Holstein-Friesian  dairy herd replacements.  Animal  Science  74: 553-565.
Carson,  A.F, Dawson,  L.E.R.,  Wylie,  A.R.G.  and Gordon,  FJ. (2003). The effects  of 
rearing  regime  on the development  of the mammary  gland  and claw  abnormalities  in high 
genetic  merit Holstein-Friesian  dairy herd replacements.  Animal  Science  (Submitted).
Dobos, R.C., Nandra,  K.S., Riley, K., Fulkerson,  W.J., Lean, I.J. and Kellaway,  R.C. 
(2000). The effect of dietary  protein  level during  the pre-pubertal  period  of growth  on 
mammary  gland development  and subsequent  milk production  in Friesian  heifers.  
Livestock  Production  Science  63: 235-243.
Drew. S B. and Altman,  J.FB (1982). The effects  of weight  at first insemination  on the 
subsequent  performance  of Friesian  dairy heifers. Animal  Science  34: 371 (Abstract).
Drew, S B. (1988). The influence  of management  factors during rearing on the 
subsequent  performance  of Friesian  heifers. British  Cattle  Breeders  Digest 43: 41-48.
Esslemont,  R.J., Kossaibati,  M.A., and Allcock,  J. (2001). Economics  of fertility  in dairy 
cows. Occasional  Publication  of the British  Society  of Animal  Science  No. 26: 19-29.
Greenough,  P.R. and Vermunt,  J.J (1991). Evaluation  of subclinical  laminitis  in a dairy 
herd and observations  on associated  nutritional  and management  factors. Veterinary  
Record  128: 11-15.
Keown,  J.F and Everett,  R.W. (1986). Effect  of days carried  calf, days dry, and weight  of 
first calf heifers  on yield. Journal  of Dairy  Science  69:1891-1896.
Krohn, C.G. and Konggaard,  S.P. (1979). Effects  of isolating  first lactation  cows from 
older  cows. Livestock  Production  Science  6:137-146.
Logue, D.N and Offer, J.E. (2001). Guest  editorial: The effect of forage  type on foot 
health  in dairy heifers. The Veterinary  Journal  162: 7-8.
Lawson,  R. (1999). To develop  improved  strategies  for the management  of heifers  after 
calving. Milk Development  Council  Report.
Little, W. and Harrison,  R.D. (1981). Effects  of different  rates of liveweight  gain during 
rearing  on the performance  of Friesian  heifers  in their first lactation.  Animal  Production  
32: 362 (abstract)
53
Little, W. and Kay, R.M. (1979). The effects  of rapid rearing  and early calving  on the 
subsequent  performance  of dairy heifers. Animal  Production  29: 134-142.
Livesey,  C.T., Harrington,  T, Johnston,  A.M., May, S.A. and Metcalf,  J.A. (1998). The 
effect of diet and housing  on the development  of sole haemorrhages,  white line 
haemorrhages  and heel erosions  in Holstein  heifers. Animai  Science  67: 9-16.
Mayne,  C.S. and Gordon,  F.J. (1995). Implications  of genotype  X nutrition  interactions  for 
efficiency  of milk production  systems.  In Breeding and feeding  the high genetic  dairy  cow 
(ed. T.L.J. Lawrence,  F.J. Gordon  and A. Carson),  pp. 67-77. British Society  of Animal  
Science  occasional  publication,  no. 19.
Mayne, C.S., McCoy, M.A., Lennox,  S.D., Mackey,  D.R., Verner, M., Catney, DC.,  
McCaughey,  W.J., Wylie, A.R.G., Kennedy,  B.W. and Gordon, F.J. (2002). An 
investigation  of fertility  performance  in dairy herds  in Northern  Ireland. Veterinary  Record  
150: 707-713.
Offer, J.E., Fisher,  G.E.J.,  Kempson,  S.A. and Logue,  D.N. (2001). The effect  of feeding  
grass silage in early pregnancy  on claw health during first lactation. The Veterinary  
Journal  161: 186-193.
Steen,  R.W.J.  and Robson,  A.E. (1995). Effects  of forage  to concentrate  ratio in the diet 
and protein  intake  on the performance  and carcass  composition  of beef  heifers. Journal  
of Agricultural  Science,  Cambridge  125: 125-135.
Webster,  A.J.F (2001). Effects  of housing  and two forage  diets on the development  of 
claw horn lesions  in dairy cows at first calving  and in first lactation.  Veterinary  Journal  
162: 56-65.
Ward,  W.R. and French,  N.R (1997). Foot lameness  in cattle. In Proceedings  of the 51st 
Scientific  Meeting  of the Association  of Veterinary  Research  Workers  p.19 (Abstract).  
Webster,  A.J.F  (2002). Effects  of housing  practices  on the development  of foot lesions  in 
dairy heifers  in early lactation.  Veterinary  Record  151: 9-12.
Woods,  S.M., Carson,  A.F, Wylie,  A.R.G.  and McEvoy,  J.D.G.  (2003). Effects  of rearing  
regimes  on milk production  and metabolic  hormone  concentrations  in high genetic  merit  
Holstein-Friesian  dairy heifers. In Proceedings  of the British  Society  of Animal  Science  
Winter  Meeting  (In press).
Wicks,  H.C.F.,  Carson,  A.F. and McCoy,  M.A. (2003). Effects  of habituation  to the milking  
parlour  on the production,  health and fertility of Nonwegian  and Holstein  dairy herd 
replacements.  In Proceedings  of the British  Society  of Animal  Science  Winter  Meeting  (In 
press).
54
Profitable  milk production  - getting  the basics  right
David French
Teagasc  Gianbia  Monitor  Farmer
Background
The farm Is located  at Newbawn,  Co. Wexford  (between  New Ross and Wexford),  and 
was transferred  to the current  owner  in 1994. At this time an extra 13 ha (32 acres)  was 
also leased. In 1996, additional  land and quota  was acquired  on a long-term  lease. This 
farm has been a Monitor  Farm under the Teagasc  Glanbia  Joint Farm Development 
Programme  for the last five years. The owner  is a member  of two Discussion  Groups  - 
the local Clonroche  Discussion  Group,  and a group  formed  from the Teagasc  Advanced  
Dairy Certificate  Course  (completed  in Kildalton  in 1998).
Farm Details
The farm comprises  46.5 ha (115 acres), and is fragmented  into six separate  blocks.  
Cows  have access  to 27.5 ha (68 acres),  the remainder  being used for replacements  and 
cattle enterprises.  Twenty-seven  paddocks  are available  to the dairy cows, the furthest  
paddock  being almost  1 mile from the milking  parlour. A number  of investments  have 
been made in recent  times  including:  - (1997)  the purchase  of a tractor;  (1998)  provision 
for cattle accommodation  - which can be used as calving  boxes during the calving 
season; (2000) improvements  to milking parlour  - eleven units; (1997 - 2001) 
improvements  to farm roadways.
Manufacturing  milk is supplied  to Glanbia  to fill a milk quota of 364,435  litres (80,166 
gallons),  one-third  of which  is leased. Sixty-three  cows  were milked  during  2002  with an 
average  milk yield of 5,822 litres per cow (1,281 gallons  per cow). Average  milk protein 
percentage  was 3.40%.
Average  farm stocking  rate in 2002 was 2.33 LU/ha  (1.06 acres per LU). Replacement  
rate was 24 per cent (15 heifers  introduced  to herd) and 26 LU of drystock  were carried.
Objectives
To increase  farm profits  and thereby  continue  to increase  net worth;
To continue  to enjoy  farming;
To set up the farm so that the average  working  week is less than 50 hours;
To provide  a good standard  of living.
Priorities  for 2003
To reduce  the dairy feed bill to 2001 levels  (feed budget  prepared); 
to measure  grass  covers  on a weekly  basis;
To actively  seek potential  partners  for a Milk Production  Partnership.
55
Grassland  Management
Aim for a long grazing  season. In 2002, cows  were out by day on February  13*^ and out 
full-time  on March  3'''^. Housing  occurred  on November  23'’*^. Cows had a total of 289 
days with grass in the diet. Full-time  turnout  was earlier  in 2002 than in the previous  
years, but housing  date was earlier. Replacement  heifers  and yearling  bullocks  are out 
by mid March,  while calves  are out by mid April.
Average  N application  rate was 260 kg/ha (208 units per acre) for 2002. Approximately 
2.5 ha (6 acres)  are reseeded  annually.
Calving  Pattern  Breeding  Performance
Calving  generally  starts around  February  1®* (in 2002 calving  started  on 28**1 January).  
The target  is to have 80 % of the herd calved  by the end of March. The calving  pattern  
for 2002 is shown  in table 1.
Table  1. Calving  pattern  2002
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Total
Total calvings  2 37 16 6 3 64
% 3 58 25 9 5 100
Start 28/1; End 8/5; Average  calving  date 1/3
The results  of breeding  chart analysis  for the 2002 breeding  season  are shown  in Table  2.
Table  2. Breeding  season  performance  2002
Submission  rate (%) 86 (55/64)
Conception  rate to 1 ®* service  (%) 52
Conception  rate to 2"** service  (%) 64
% Cows  not in calf at 13 weeks 9 (6/64)
Services  per conception 1.74
The following  management  practices  are carried  out in an effort  to minimize  the number  
of cows  empty  at the end of the breeding  season:
• All cows are condition  scored  three times  during  the year - mid October,  December,  
and April;
Thin cows are dried off early (1/11) and fed in November  and December;
Pre-service  heats  are recorded  from April 1®*. Tail paint is used from this date;
The vet examines  all problem  cows on day 1 of the breeding  season;
Heifers  are bred at the same  time as the cows;
A teaser  bull, fitted with a chin ball, has been used successfully  for the previous  two 
years.
56
Cattle  Performance
The aim is for a long grazing  season. Both cattle and replacements  are rotatlonally 
grazed  on a paddock  system,  and moved  every  three  to four days. Finishing  animals  are 
housed  early (mid October)  with the intention  of having  them sold by the end of January  
(before  the start of calving).  This has the added  benefit  of saving  grass in the autumn,  
which can be grazed  by weanlings  into early December.  A small number  of beef heifers 
are carried  each year (6 - 8); these  are fed meals  at grass  from early  July and sold in late 
August.  Table  3 shows  the average  weights  and performance  of the beef  animals  born in 
2001. These  animals  were slaughtered  in January  and February  2003 at an average 
carcase  weight  of 318 kg. All graded  'O’ with 80 per cent grading  ‘04L’. The average 
price received  was €742.
Table 3. Cattle  performance  2001,  2002
Date Average  weight  (kg) ADG (kg/day)
9/07/2001 135
25/10/2001 238 0.94
8/03/2002 317 0.58
9/09/2002 486 0.92
2/12/2002 548 0.70
Farm Profit
A Dairy Profit Monitor  has been completed  since 1998. This is useful as a means  of 
measuring  progress  over  time and as a means  of comparing  farm performance with  other  
dairy farmers.  The following  tables  list the profitability  of milk production,  the enterprise  
gross margins  and other  key financial  measures.
Table  4. Profitability  of milk production  - 2001, 2002
2001 (c/I) 2002 (c/I) 2003 (c/I) (est.)
Milk production  (1) 370,390 368,003 380,000
Average  co-op  milk price 31.5 28.5 29.0
Total dairy output 31.8 30.8 30.1
Meal 1.9 2.5 1.5
Fertilizer 1.5 1.3 1.4
Veterinary 0.8 0.9 0.7
Al 0.6 0.5 0.4
Contractor 0.9 0.6 0.7
Other  variable  costs 1.2 1.4 1.1
Total variable  costs 7.0 7.1 5.9
Machinery 1.5 0.4 0.4
Car, ESB, phone 0.6 0.8 0.7
Depreciation 2.0 2.2 2.0
Other  fixed costs 1.2 1.2 1.2
Common  costs 12.3 11.7 10.1
Common  profit 19.5 19.1 20.0
57
The objective  is to achieve  a high milk price and total dairy  output  figure. The drop in total 
dairy output  was not as big as the drop in milk price during  2002. Common  costs have 
averaged  11.8 cent per litre (42.3 ppg) for 1999 to 2002. The focus is now on reducing  
costs while maintaining  output  at a high level. Meal feeding  costs were high for 2002.  
The target is to produce  5,900 litres (1,300  gallons)  milk with between  500 to 600 kg 
concentrates  per cow. The average  meat feeding  level in 2002 was 926 kg per cow. This 
was primarily  due to the weather  in late May and June; silage cutting  was delayed  and 
there  was a grass  shortage  in July as no aftergrass was  available.  I valuable  lesson  was 
learnt  from this experience  - graze  the silage  ground  if grass is tight in May!
Table  5. Enterprise  and farm gross  margins  - 2001, 2002
2001 (€/ha) 2002 (€/ha)
Dairy 3466 3139
Drystock 1441 1901
Replacements 1215 902
Farm 2556 2478
The profitability  of the drystock  enterprise  increased  during  2002; this was due to a high 
beef price in January  2002 and an increase  in premia  payment  rates. It will be difficult  to 
repeat this performance  in 2003 as the cattle were lighter at housing  and the price 
obtained  was lower  than in 2002.
Table  6. Return  on investment,  net worth  change  and farm efficiency  - 2001,  2002
2001 2002
Return  on investment  (%) 10.1 10.1
Net Worth  Change  (€) +6,728 +16,908
Farm Efficiency  (%) 63 59
NB: Farm Efficiency  equals  the ratio of total costs  to total output 
Return  on Investment  = (Net Profit plus Interest)/  Total  Assets
The ‘return  on investment ’ figure  on this farm is satisfactory.  The mix of owned  and leased  
land and quota and the high farm profit results  in a good return on investment,  and a 
happy  farmer.
The secret  of success?
What  are the key factors/management  practices  that ensure  farm profitability?  There  is 
no great secret  or mystery,  pay attention  to detail and most importantly,  get the basics  
right !
Long grazing  season:-
• Leads  to efficient  milk production;
• Good weight  gains  by cattle and replacements;
• Aim  to start the last grazing  rotation  by 10*^ October at the latest;
• Ensure  P and K indices  are 3 on all paddocks;
• Apply  first N dressing  in early January;
• Reseed  on an annual  basis.
58
Grass  measurement  and budgeting:-
• Necessary  if want to have a long grazing  season;
• Measure  covers  on a weekly  basis;
• Complete  a grass  budget  and usel
• Avoid  making  too much silage  - a problem  in the past;
• Opening  farm cover  was 572 kg DM/ha  in early January  2003.
Cattle  and replacement  performance:-
• Cattle and replacements  made up 40 per cent of total livestock  units on the farm in 
2002. Therefore  it is essential  that profits  are maximised  from these  enterprises;
• Aim for high output  at reasonable  cost;
• Paddock  graze  all animals  and move  every  three to four days;
• Minimize  the length  of the second  winter  for finishing  animals;
• Finish  all beef heifers  off grass.
Financial  budgeting:-
• Prepare  a cash flow budget  (e g. Teagasc  Cost Control  Planner),  and monitor  receipts 
and payments  during  the year;
Breeding  season  performance:-
• Consider  scanning  cows before  the start of the breeding  season  (as opposed  to the 
problem  cows  only);
• Bull selection  is important  - base selection  on protein  percentage,  modest  milk yield 
lift and strength.
Discussion  group  membership:-
• Visiting  other  farms  provides  window  on how others  operate;
• Easier  to learn from other farmers;
• Time well spent;
• Key factor  in improved  on farm profitability.
Dairy  Herd Monitor/Dairy  Profit Moniton-
• The Dairy  Herd  Monitor  monthly  reports  help focus  on key efficiency  factors;
• Useful  for ongoing  comparison  with other  farmers;
• Deadline  for completion  prompts  record  keeping.
Family  support:-
• Parents,  wife and family  absolutely  crucial  to achieving  future  objectives.
Teagasc  advisory support:-
• Thanks  to Tom O Dwyer,  Dairy  Specialist  and Catherine  Colfer,  Dairy  Adviser,  for their 
help over the last number  of years.
59
A strategic  vision  for the Irish dairy industry
Pat Kenny
Introduction
How many times has it been said that changes  perpetrated  by the EU., or by world  
conditions,  have been so dramatic  as to go to the core of whatever  it is that is being  
considered  at that moment  in time? What is certain is that the Fischler  CAP reform  
proposals  unveiled  earlier  this year, coupled  with the Harbinson  WTO  proposals  and their 
‘compromise ’, will go to the core of Irish agriculture  particularly  the dairy industry.
Position  as is
Irish agriculture  in its broadest  manifestation  is fully aware  that the WTO negotiation  (to 
begin seriously  in 2003 and end in 2005) is coming  down the track. The industry  was 
equally  aware  that the EU CAP review,  arising  out of an Agenda  2000 decision,  was 
agreed  to run to the end of 2006.
The industry  did not seem  to be unduly  upset  by the proposals  published  in July 2002 by 
the EU Commissioner  for Agriculture  and Rural Development,  Franz  Fischler.  However,  
the bombshell  arose  on January  22, 2003,  when  Commissioner  Fischler  issued  in greater 
detail his mid-term  review  of Agenda  2000.
Commissioner  Fischler's  view of his new proposals  encapsulated  in his own statement  
“The Commission  proposal  will provide  EU farmers  with a clear  policy  perspective  to go 
with the financial  framework  until 2013 for agricultural  expenditure,  as decided  by the 
Heads  of Government  in October  2002. It will also make European  agriculture  more  
competitive and market  onented,  promote a substantial  simplification  In the CAP, facilitate  
the enlargement  process  and help to better  defend  the CAP  in the WTO. The proposed  
adjustments  allow maximum  flexibility  in production  decisions  of farmers  while  
guaranteeing them  income stability.  The implementation  of the Commission  reform  would  
remove  environmentally  negative  Incentives  in the current  policy and provide  further  
encouragement  for more sustainable  farming  practices. These adjustments  are 
necessary  to ensure  that the EU is able to provide  a sustainable  and predictable  policy  
framework  for the European  Model  of Agriculture  over  the coming years ”.
At the same  time Mr Harbinson  (Chairman  of the WTO Negotiation  on Agriculture),  was 
issuing his ‘compromise ’ proposal  on February  17, 2003. The mainstay  of this 
‘compromise ’ proposal  is: - 
Tariffs
The product with  the highest tariff rate will have the greatest  reduction  in tariffs.
• For existing  tariffs over 90%, a simple average  reduction  of 60%, subject  to a 
minimum  reduction  for all products  of 45%, over 5 years.
• For  existing  tariffs  in the range  of 15% - 90%, a simple  average  cut of 50%, subject  to 
a minimum  reduction  of 35%.
• For tariffs  of 15% or lower, an average  reduction  of 40% and a minimum  cut of 25%.  
EU butter  will fall into the first category  and most of the other products  into the second  
category.
60
Special  treatment  for developing  countries
Developed  countries  should provide  for greater  opportunity  and terms of access  for 
agricultural  products  of particular  interest  to developing  countries.  Developing  countries  
should  be allowed  to designate  a number  of products  as strategic  in terms of food security 
or rural development.  A 10% average  tariff reduction  would  apply  to these  products,  with 
a minimum  cut of 5%.
Export  competition  and  subsidies
For a set of products  covering  50% of the current  expenditure  on export subsidies,  export  
subsidies  shall be reduced  to zero over 6 years.
In general  therefore,  combining  Fischler  and Harbinson  together,  the omens  are not good 
for Irish agriculture.
Ireland  in the EU
At present  Ireland,  as a member  of the EU, is considered  to be a developed  country.  
Currently,  we are running  at 115% of EU average  income,  and therefore  cannot  claim to 
be a developing  country. In overview  the EU is essentially  getting  itself into the best 
shape  it can for the WTO  debate. By preparing  its members with  a mid-term  review  and 
essential  changes,  and timing  changes,  it is putting  agriculture,  as it sees it, in the best 
defensible  position  to defend  against the US and other  WTO  countries  in the agricultural  
debate  in WTO.
The changes  enunciated  by Commissioner  Fischler,  even if watered  down,  will affect  the 
core of Irish family  farm incomes  in the dairying  sector. Even allowing  for slippage  in the 
WTO negotiations,  the probability  is that^by  the end of 2006 a completely  changed 
landscape  will exist going  forward.
At the time of writing,  it looks as if Ireland  will opt for decoupling.  Payment  entitlements  
will be expressed  in a per hectare  amount,  and be decoupled  from production.  Farmers 
will be expected  to maintain  their land in good agricultural  condition.  Payment  entitlement  
may be transferred  with or without  land. National  ceilings  will apply for payments  from 
2004.
Cross  compliance  involving  thirty-eight  regulations,  on food safety,  environment,  animal 
welfare  etc., will also be obligatory.  Failure  to comply  will carry a penalty. Further  
modulation  and degressivity  is proposed  from 2007 to 2012. There  will be a minimum 
threshold  exemption  of €5,000. Payments  from €5,000  to €50,000  will be reduced  by 
1% per annum,  up to a total of 12.5%  reduction  in 2012 and payments  over  €50,000  will 
be reduced  by up to 19% at the end of that period.  The mid-term  review is thus a proposal 
for a ‘fundamental  adjustment ’ of the CAP. Effectively  it has brought  forward  a review  and 
enunciated  a reduction  in support,  allied with a move  towards  world market  prices.
Lack of clarity
For the moment,  the Fischler  proposals  are up for debate  and discussion,  and to be 
fought  for. Nothing  is certain  except  that change  will occur,  and that this change  will firstly  
be EU instigated,  and will then have  to be fought for  and defended  in the Harbinson  round  
of WTO  at Doha. Looking  strategically  forward  in Irish agriculture,  certain  things  become  
clearer.
61
EU and WTO
When the EU sits down to negotiate  seriously  in WTO on all world issues  affecting  the 
US, New Zealand,  Australia,  Brazil and Argentina,  agriculture  (while  high on the agenda)  
will not form the core agenda. There is much to fight for in EU terms. The EU will 
negotiate  as an entity right across the range of intellectual  property,  technology,  
engineering,  all elements  of manufacturing  and films, everything  that has a world stage  
In this context  agriculture  is only an element.  A level playing  pitch to serve  the emerging  
markets  of China etc., will be a major issue among the big players. Substantial  
compromises  in the interest  of the greater  EU economy  will have to be negotiated  in order  
to conclude  the Doha round of WTO, and against  that background,  agriculture  may win, 
lose or draw.
When one includes  the new entrants  to the EU from Eastern  Europe,  and the budget  
constraints  that will arise, it is difficult  to see agriculture  holding  on to the essentials  of a 
price support  mechanism  into the future. Whilst some  fonri of support  and quota  systems  
are likely  to continue,  dependency  on them  will diminish  as market  conditions  increasingly  
come  to dominate.
What  can we do?
As a nation  we must prepare  ourselves  to ensure  that we are in the best possible  position  
to maximise  Ireland ’s natural  advantages,  and to ensure  that there is a future  in Irish dairy  
farming. This must include  the big productive  units (which  may well benefit  on a world  
stage from open competition),  the highly productive  small and medium  sized operators,  
and also young farmers  coming into the industry  in the future. This is against  a 
background  where Irish agriculture  today, is not as relevant  to the overall national  
economy  as it used to be in real terms. The total product  of agriculture  on and off farm is 
certainly  well below  10% of GDP. It is still vitally important,  but not as was.
The Irish Government will, no doubt,  fight hard within  the EU to protect  as much as it can 
those things  which are in the best interest  of Irish agriculture.  However,  ultimately  one 
voice in an expanded  EU, will no doubt  have to compromise  and improvise,  to reach an 
overall  conclusion
Self help
Cost effectiveness  and efficiency
It is absolutely  vital that Irish dairying  be absolutely  cost conscious,  efficient  and effective.  
It is incumbent  on each unit of production  to ensure  that production  methods  and delivery  
methods  employed  per product  are state of the art. If this does not happen,  survival  (all 
other  things  being equal)  will be made  so complex  and difficult  that it will be impossible  to 
argue  the case. It is essential  in the debate  that, while cost effectiveness  and efficiencies  
are addressed,  that there is also regard  for the social fabric, even if there is to be an 
increased  dependency  on off farm income.
Unit size
The average  unit size of the Irish holding  for historic  reasons  is too low to sustain  full-time  
family farm units, more so today because  of world price conditions  and reduction  in 
subvention  and the reduction  of protection.  What is true is that the average  milk
62
production  from an Irish dairy farm today is 42,000  gallons The equivalent  figure in 
Northern  Ireland  77,000  gallons. In Denmark  and Holland  the figure is between  80,000 
andtOO.OOO  gallons,  and in New Zealand  190,000  gallons. If this is considered  the 
viability  level (either on protected  production  or world market condition  production), 
Ireland  lies far behind  the necessary  average  unit size based  on production
Where  to in the future  7
Dairying  will have to determine  its future  as against  the backdrop  of economic  reality. Off 
farm income  will become  more important  going  fonward,  and it could  be that both spouses 
in a family  farm will be earning  off farm income. It is probable  that the 27,000  currently 
involved  in dairying  will be reduced,  or certainly  have to be more productive  or depend  on 
non-farm  income Irish farming  should  now be looking  at leasing  options,  co-ownership  
options,  joint venture  options,  partnership  options  and any other  options  or structures that 
help It should  look at modules  in other  jurisdictions  and apply imagination.
In NZ, agricultural  land exchanges  at about 15% of the total volume  of land per year In 
Ireland  it is probably  around  0.7 of 1%. In NZ it is a means  to profit  and in Ireland  it is an 
asset, a means to profit and emotional.  It may be necessary  for some to assess 
maximum  usage.
Processing  and production
Depending  on what elements  of milk are taken and where the relatively  large niche  
operators  are, there may be up to twenty  processors/producers  in the production  of milk. 
This makes  for uneconomic  use of capital,  supply  difficulties,  distribution  difficulties  and 
competition  difficulties.
In Denmark  and Holland  there are one or two, and in NZ only one dealing  with output 
Therefore,  strategically  from the farm gate, production  and processing  must  be addressed 
in the greater  interest  of national  efficiency  and survival.  Also in Ireland,  the emphasis  is 
on the production  of low value commodities,  where all price sensitivity  and commodity 
dangers  exist There  are vast quantities  of capital  required  to develop  research  facilities 
to bring the production  of milk further  and export  a higher  value added  product  for niche  
markets.
Who has a role to play going  forward?
Farmers,  the co-ops  and processors,  the State (DAF),  and the farm representative  bodies 
all have a role to play. There  is a need for these  groups  to address  the issues  and work 
in harmony.  All of these  organisations  have got to work  together to ensure that a strategic  
national  plan exists  for Irish agriculture,  and that going forward  the plan is adhered  to and 
put into operation.
Flexibility
It is vitally important  that in the dairying  sector  maximum  flexibility  is brought  into any new 
regime,  in particular  with regard  to the transfer  of quota,  where  the quota  goes, who gets 
it, and what is the criteria  for using quota Economic  reality  and perhaps  breakdown  of 
geographical  differentials  within  the country  will have to be addressed  in the fullest  sense
63
The short-term
The short-term  must be to defend  and maximise  while  preparing  for the reality  that things  
will never  be the same  again,  and that change  is now upon us and must be acted upon.  
As soon as clarity  arises  from the Fischler  mid-term  review  proposals,  there  will be a need 
to establish  a forum of all interested  parties. These  must work together  in the greater  
interest  to determine  the way forward.
The positives
The efficient  cost conscious,  cost controlled  farmer focused  totally  on profit may do well, 
or even better. The green  Isle concept,  our natural  advantage  with grass  and the cost of 
production  has not been totally  exploited  and must be. We have a natural  advantage  in 
the clean food and clean island image,  which  we must cash in on. We have invariably  
done well in adversity  and must continue  to work together  in the greater  interest  of 
identifying  the advantages,  the methodologies  and the actions  necessary  to continue  to 
do so in the interests  of the Irish economy,  the Irish agricultural  economy  and the 
individual  farmers who  make  it up.
There  are large  markets  for us to exploit.  We still have leverage  in the EU, which  we must  
use to ensure  that the changes  that are coming  are cushioned,  and that the lead in and 
transition  periods  are such that we have the opportunity  to prepare  appropriately.  The 
things we are doing  today we will not be doing  into the future  because  they will neither  be 
profitable  or acceptable.  Things  we are not doing today  we will be doing into the future,  
and we must identify  what  they are, why we are doing  them and what  our profit  from them  
will be.
Social  Aspect
Overlying  all of the above  is the social  aspect,  where  the intertwining  of Irish rural society  
and agriculture  are totally  interdependent  one to the other. The social argument  carries  
a substantial  amount  of weight that  may now be disproportionate  to the economic  reality.  
It is incumbent  on Ireland  Inc., to address  the social  implication  of the Fischler  proposals,  
and what might  come  out of WTO as it affects  agriculture.  It will be too late to do this in 
2006, it needs  to be done immediately  as part of the strategic  overview  of where  we are.
Conclusion
There  is always  a place  for good productive  business  to be carried  on no matter  what  the 
size of the enterprise,  or the unit. There  is always  a place  to niche and succeed.
Initial surveys  in Europe,  albeit different  in impact  terms from Ireland,  indicate  that the 
certainty,  even with reduction  into the future,  which  might  be created  out of the mid-term  
review,  is in itself  a good thing. A certain  future  for CAP going  fon/vard  is important.
What is certain is that dairying  will prosper  and flourish  where good productive  and 
production  methods  are used, costs are controlled  and science  and research  is applied.  
Also, the marketing  of our product  and government  support  is vital, and these  things  just 
don’t go away  because  of a mid-term  review  or a WTO.
64
Encouraging  change  in the dairy industry  - the 
Danish/Swedish  perspective.  Coops  - the future
Lars Lamberg  
Arfa Foods,  Amba
Introduction
The cooperative  model  is the predominant  one in the dairy sector in Scandinavia  and has 
been for many  years,  and is gaining  increasing  popularity  in other  parts  of Europe  as well. 
It is expected  that coops  will play an increasing  role in the future  dairy industry  both in 
Europe and the rest of the world. However,  significant  listed or privately  owned 
companies  will continue  to exist alongside.  Long-term,  the current  trend suggests  that 
large international  coops  and branded  conglomerates  will occupy  the dairy scene.
Coop is a structural  solution,  but importantly  it can also be a business  approach. 
Successful  coops do not allow the structure  to define the approach  - but rather the 
approach  to define  the structure.  It is believed  that the coop approach  and increased 
market requirements  combined  will contribute  towards  an accelerated  consolidation  
within  the Dairy Industry  and possibly  also to new formats  for doing so.
In general  non-coops  have tended  to concentrate  on various  kinds of niche production, 
while coops  (in the main) have developed  a wider range  of dairy products  - given their 
obligation  to handle  the whole milk volume  from members.  Nonetheless,  the bigger  
coops  have attracted  increased  milk volume,  suggesting  them as a vivant  model  for the 
future.
As already  mentioned,  there is an expectation  that the consolidation  of the dairy industry 
will continue  in the years  to come,  driven  first and foremost  by market  requirements  and 
secondly  by the need for high levels  of ongoing  investments  in efficiency  throughout  the 
entire  business  system.  Consequently  strong  financial  capabilities  by market participants  
become  a prerequisite.  This latter requirement  in isolation  could be a driving factor  
behind  companies  joining  forces  to provide  goods  in its broadest  sense. It might  also be 
argued  that in the long term - specialisation  could come on to the agenda,  since only a 
few companies  can be expected  to have the scale and strength  necessary  to maintain  a 
fully fledged  dairy operation,  and the ability  to handle  all members milk. Elements  of such 
development  have been faced for a long time now, and it is no exaggeration  to say that 
the dairy industry  in Europe  is undergoing  a process  of serious  transformation.
Industry  under  transformation
New Mergers,  acquisitions  or strategic  alliances  involving  increasingly  larger  companies  
are taking place - if not all the time - then frequently,  leaving  no room for resting  on 
laurels. The top 5 companies  in the EU have increased  their milk intake  by more  than 50 
% over a short period of time. The level of international  investments  has increased 
significantly  over this period.
With a few important  exceptions,  the dairy industry  in the middle  of the last century  was 
basically  a local industry.  Ten years  ago, the industry  was primarily  a regional  or national 
industry.  Today,  the leading  group  of companies  has an international,  or even global  set­
up.
65
This development  is not only taking  place in the dairy industry.  It is characteristic  of most 
business  sectors,  and should  be seen as an important  indication  of the trend towards  
globalisation.  In recent years we have seen an exponential  growth in international  
investment.  It is a remarkable  development,  indicating  that we are in the midst of a very 
important  transition  of the business  world. The transformation  process  of the European  
dairy industry  however  will go on for a considerable  period  of time. The end is not yet in 
sight!
A number  of factors  are driving  this development:
1. The trade/oolitical  background  defined  by WTO and the EU. Without  going into too 
much detail, it would be fair to say that downward  pressure  in the earning  power  of 
the dairy sector  can be expected  within  the coming  years. This results  from the WTC  
agreement  as well as EU policy  through  the implementation,  and further  development  
of agenda  2000. The latest proposal  from the Commission  - a speeding  up of the 
planned  reductions  in the intervention  prices  supports  this view. Enlargement  will also 
add to this development  by intensifying  the level of competition  and the need for 
continuous  investment  in innovation  and efficiency.
2. The EU milk balance  and the continued  reduction  in the number  of milk producers .
Milk production  among  the 15 EU-member  countries  is expected  to continue  at the 
existing  level. Enlargement  will lead to a significant  increase  in the EU milk pool, and 
a corresponding  increase  in the number  of consumers  Therefore  the overall  balance  
will probably  not be seriously  disturbed.  However  in a number  of product  areas,  we 
must be prepared  for tougher  competition  from new countries  entering  the EU,
In Sweden  and Denmark  there has been a drastic reduction  in the number  of milk 
producers  over the last 40 years, indicating  that income  from milk production  has been  
under continuous  pressure,  particularly  on smaller  farms. Obviously,  as farmers  and 
owners  we actively  work together  with our processing  arm to increase  efficiency  and 
earnings  in the company,  in order  to generate  as high a milk price as possible.  However,  
with the external  pressure  on milk price, further  reductions  in the number  of milk farmers  
in Denmark  and Sweden  are expected  over the coming  years. On the positive  side, milk 
output will stay more or less at the same  level, and the average  age of farmers  will come  
down, both implying  higher efficiency  upstream These developments  will maintain  
pressure  on the coop to continue  its own development  in order to ensure  its earning  
power,  and in this overall  context.  Aria Foods  will contribute  positively  to consolidation  of 
the industry.
3. Consolidation  within the retail sector. Out of an ongoing  process  of mergers,  
acquisitions  and strategic  alliances,  major  retailers  are increasingly  crossing  national  
borders  and expanding  into regional  market participants.  The cross border  
consolidation  in Europe  has taken  the top 10 retail companies  from a market  share  of 
28 % to one of 41 % in the last ten years. Retailers  are focusing  on cost, choice  and 
service,  and in Aria Foods  we believe  we have  to grow  to continuously  meet  the needs  
of these  very large customers  Choice  and differentiation  of products  are some  of the 
major  challenges  going forward,  and will require  further  cooperation
Development  among  retailers  themselves  has up until now been an important  driving  
force  in itself behind  the development of the dairy industry,  and is likely  to continue  for the 
foreseeable  future
66
4. Consumer  trends  indicate  an increased  demand  for healthy  and convenient  products 
tailored  to meet specific  needs  and occasions.  It is estimated  that by the end of this 
decade,  about  40 % of the turnover  in the food industry  in Denmark  and Sweden  will 
be within  the catering  & food service  sector. Similar  trends  can be expected  in most  
EU-countries.  As dairy consumption  is today mainly  in the home,  this development  
poses another  challenge  to the dairy industry. Products,  brands,  customer  and 
distribution  channels  will have to be adapted
These  four factors  have been key reasons  behind  the structural  development  in the dairy 
sector  so far, none of which  seem  to have been played  out yet, so more of the same  can 
be expected  in the years  to come.
The merger
At the time of the merger,  Swedish  Aria a domestically  based  company  - were facing  the 
prospect  of intensified  competition  both at home and abroad  following  on from Sweden 
joining  the EU in 1995. MD Foods  had just finalized  a long journey  of consolidation  of the 
Danish dairy industry,  and was heavily biased towards  exports. Together  the two 
companies  created  a strong  Scandinavian  base with a significant  international  profile.  
Both Sweden  and Denmark  are small countries  population  wise. Therefore,  the Aria 
merger  can be seen as an early example  that it is no longer  only enough  to look at the 
national  level when considering  structural  moves on the market. The fact is, that 
integration  of national  markets  within  EU has come  far, and structural  development within 
a specific  EU-country  must be seen as part of the greater  picture.
The cooperative  consists  of approximately  13,600  members  - around  7,100 in Denmark 
and 6,500 in Sweden. The group structure  is formed around  three core divisions, 
Sweden,  Denmark  and the UK, and five other  smaller  divisions.  In terms  of Aria Foods,  
of the 7.2 billion litres of milk processed  annually,  approximately  one billion litres is 
processed  in the UK. Around  half of the turnover  comes  from domestic  markets  in 
Sweden  and Denmark,  with about 18 % derived  from the company ’s activities  in the UK. 
Today  Aria Foods exports  to more than 100 countries  round the world and has sales 
offices  and/or  production  facilities  in around  20 countries.  Regionally  we provide  the full 
range of dairy products Globally  we provide  butter, cheese,  milk powder  and other  
ingredients.  Strategy  and investment  are based  on the vision  that Aria should  aim to be 
the dairy company,  which on a global basis is best at creating  value. In Northern 
European  markets,  the intention  is that Aria should be the preferred  dairy company 
among  all stakeholders.
The challenge  for co-ops
Rabobank  lists the top 21 dairy companies  in the world. Nine of these  are co-operatives. 
In general  these companies  supply  the full range of dairy products  as opposed  to a 
number  of the other  companies,  who focus  on being  strong  in selected  products and niche  
markets.  It can be expected  that in the years  to come,  the major coops  will participate  in 
the consolidation  process,  which in itself  will initiate  cross border  developments.
When MD Foods  and Swedish  Aria merged  in 2000, it was the first cross border  merger  
between  coops. The legal framework  for such a merger  was not clear and issues  still
67
remain to be sorted out with both the Danish and Swedish  authorities. Other  
complications  included  the difference  between  the two countries  with regard to 
representation  of ownership  and differences  in the milk price and in payment  systems.
In Aria Foods  it was decided  to have a transitional  period  of three years  up to October  1, 
2003, in order to harmonize  the differences  between  the two companies.  In general  
Swedish  Aria and MD Foods  had much  in common,  so that it probably  could be regarded  
as a reasonably  simple  alignment  exercise.  However,  the complexity  of future  mergers  
should not be underestimated.  Appropriate  transition  periods  will be needed  to align 
parties  and bridge  differences  in relevant  areas. Protocols  will have to be developed  to 
cope with the challenges  that cross  border  mergers  of Coops  represent.  This will not be 
time wasted.
Conclusion
In conclusion  the coop model  has by no means  outlived  its role (as perceived  in some  
quarters!).  Rather  is it extremely  well suited to cope with the challenges  in the dairy 
industry  in Europe  and elsewhere.  Of course non-coop  companies  will continue  to 
survive  and thrive,  serving  important  niche markets,  but a major  part of dairy products  is 
expected  to be supplied  by Coops. The future  will be challenging  for all concerned.
68
Technologies  for profit
George  Ramsbottom
Teagasc  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co Meath,  Ireland
Introduction
All industries  depend  on using the most up to date and relevant  technologies  to maintain 
their competitiveness.  The technologies  for profitable  dairy farming  in Ireland  centre  on 
grazed  grass. This will continue  well into the future.
The costs associated  with producing  grass silage, in particular  second  cut grass  silage,  
have risen dramatically  over  the past number  of years. The reasons  for this include  rising  
fuel and labour  costs,  which  have increased  by 36 and 28 per cent respectively  between 
1997 and 2001 (CSO 2002a, 2002b). Over the same period, the possible  role of 
alternative  forages  has been widely  debated  and publicised  in the media.  These  crops  
have the potential  to reduce  the cost of winter  forage  and possibly  increase  profitability.  
While the overall  contribution  of such forages  may be small, on individual  farms their 
potential  impact  on farm profitability  may be substantial.  However,  it is still important  to 
maintain  focus on grazed  grass as the principal  and cheapest  forage  available  to Irish 
dairy farmers.
Grassland  management  on dairy  farms
The argument  in favour  of grazed  grass  centres  on three issues:
It's role as the cheapest  ingredient  in the cow’s diet;
It’s ability to increase  milk protein  content;
Ultimately  it’s potential  to increase  the profitability  of production  systems.
Total grass  intake
Recent  research  at Moorepark  with spring  calving  cows has shown  that it is possible  to 
produce  over 6,500 kg (1,388  gallons)  of milk from spring  calving  cows calving  close to 
the start of the grazing  season. On dry mineral  soils, stocked  at 2.4 cows/ha  (Icow/ac),  
such animals  will consume  almost  70% of their annual  dry matter  intake  as grazed  grass 
with the balance  made up of grass silage and concentrate.  The quantities  and costs of 
these three ingredients  fed at the Curtins  ’low concentrate ’ system  is presented  in Table  
1.
While it forms  over two thirds  of the cows  diet, grazed  grass  accounts  for just over half of  
feed and forage  costs. Concentrates,  comprising  less than one tenth of the total diet 
account  for approximately  one seventh  of feed and forage  costs. Silage  makes  up one 
quarter  of the diet and accounts  for just under  one third of total feed and forage  costs
69
Table  1. Volume  and estimated  costs  of ingredients  in the diet of a 6,540kg  spring  
calving  cow
Ingredient D M/cow/year
(kg)% of 
dietTotal annual  
cost (€/cow)% of feed and 
forage  costs
Grazed  grass 3291 68 294 54
Silage 1198 25 174 32
Concentrate 340 7 77 14
Source  of dry matter  inputs:  J. Kennedy,  personal  communication
Costs  of grass  and grass  silage  based on O'Kiely  (1994)  (adjusted  for Inflation  to 2002);
Concentrate  costs  based on average  of 81 Monitor  Farms  in 2002.
Increasing  grazing  days
Calculations  of the relative  costs  of the different  ingredients  in the cows diet suggest  that 
as the proportion  of grazed  grass in the diet increases,  the margin  over feed and forage  
should  also increase.  Research  from Moorepark  suggests  that each extra grazing  day 
increases  profit  by €1.06 per cow. This supposition  is again  supported  by evidence  from 
Teagasc  Monitor  Farms. Data was analysed  using the Teagasc  financial  programme  
'Dairy  Herd Monitor ’. The data presented  in Figure  1 was obtained  in 2002  from 81 winter 
and spring  milk producers  located  from Louth to Kerry.
Figure  1. Trend in number  of days of full time grazing  and adjusted'  output  less 
feed and fertiliser  on 81 Monitor  Farms  in 2002
Days at grass  full time
The data show  that as the number  of days of fulltime  grazing  increases,  output  less feed 
and fertiliser  tended  to increase.  Output  less feed and fertiliser  increased  by €1.56  per 
cow per extra days full time grazing. Every month of extra full time grazing  increased  
output  less feed and fertiliser  by over €1,900  per 227,000  litres of milk produced.
70
The second  reason  for focusing  on grazed  grass is the effect that grazed  grass has on 
milk composition.  Part of the extra €1.06 profit realised  per cow per days grazing  in the 
Moorepark  model is due to an increase  in milk protein  content. Data from the same 
Monitor  Farms  confirms  the trend for protein  content  to increase  as the number  of days 
of full time grazing  increased  (Figure  2).
Figure  2. Trend  in the number  of days of full time grazing  and milk protein  content  
(%) on 81 Monitor  Farms  in 2002.
Days at grass  full time
The data show that milk protein  content  increased  as the number  of days of fulltime 
grazing  increased.  On average  milk protein  content  increased  by 0.045%  per month  of 
full time grazing. Such an increase  is worth 0.22c/litre  or €518  for every month  of extra 
full time grazing  per 227,000  litres of milk produced.
Grass however  is not without  its deficiencies  and they are reflected  in the changes  in 
monthly  milk protein  content  for spring  calving  cows  on grass-based  diets (Figure  3). The 
trend in monthly  protein  content  of the milk supplied  by 66 spring milk Monitor  Farmers 
reflects  the two weaknesses  of pasture-based  diets. The data in Figure  3 is data from 66 
spring milk Monitor  Farms  where forage  formed  87% of total diet and cows spent an 
average  of 260 days at grass. The drop in average  protein  content  in March  reflects  the 
seasonal  drop in protein  content  of the freshly  calved  cow. The move  to grass  earlier  in 
lactation  has lifted the lowest  point milk protein  content  by approximately  0.2%. In herds 
where  spring  calving  cows  go to grass  after mid-April,  it is not unusual  for protein  content  
to drop below 3% In March. The drop in protein  content  in the November/December  
period  reflects  the fall off of grass  supply  in the late autumn.  The drop in June is due to 
supply  and quality  issues  with grass on some farms in short supply  before  after-grass 
from first cut silage  becomes  available.  On other farms the quality  of available  pasture  
declines  as grasses  head out in the late May/early  June period. One of the 
recommendations  from the Monitor  Farms  component  of the Teagasc  Kerry programme  
was that grass  digestibility  should  average  82-84%  in the mid-summer  period.
71
Figure  3. Average  2002 monthly  milk protein  content  on 66 spring  calving  Monitor  
Farms.
Technologies  that improve  profit
The data presented  from research  and from on-farm  analysis  show  that the technologies  
that improve  profit on dairy farms are those  that increase  the number  of grazing  days in 
the diet Two of the key technologies  are:
• Grass  budgeting;
• Compact  calving.
In focusing  on these two technologies,  it is assumed  that other aspects  of grassland  
management  are deemed  satisfactory,  e g.:
• Soil fertility  is adequate;
• Swards  are principally  composed  of late heading  perennial  ryegrass;
• An effective  roadway  system  is in place permitting  access  to all of the grazing  area 
(especially  important  in early spring  and late autumn);
• Quota  management  is good and average  lactation  length is between  280 and 300 
days.
The issues  to do with stocking  rate and silage  cutting  date will not be considered  here.
Grass  budgeting
Increasing  the number  of days at grass can be achieved  without  resorting  to budgeting.  
However,  grass growth rates vary between  years and between  seasons. Budgeting  
overcomes  the inaccuracies  inherent  in this variability  of supply. It allows  the farmer  to 
accurately  assess  whether  or not concentrates  are needed.  It helps  prediction  as to when  
farm cover  is coming  into surplus  or deficit. It enables  a planned  respond  in advance  of 
an impending  deficit either by reducing  stocking  rate or supplementing.  In essence  
budgeting  provides  a competitive  advantage  over other  dairy farmers.  A secondary  effect  
of budgeting  is its impact  on grass  quality. The timely  removal  of surpluses  helps  maintain  
grass quality  throughout  the grazing  season,  lifting grass intakes  and improving  milk 
composition.
72
Kelleher  (2002)  reported  that while almost  all discussion  group  members  were aware  of 
grass budgeting,  only a small proportion  were practising  the technique.  Plate meter  and 
‘cut and weigh'  methods  of assessing  grass  cover  are available.  However,  most farmers 
will only continue  to use a system  of grass  budgeting  if it can be done quickly,  and deliver  
a result within 1-2 hours. The eyeball  method  has a lot to offer in this regard. Once  
learned,  it allows  the grass manager  to quickly  estimate  pasture  covers  and, combined 
with a computer  spreadsheet,  keeps  the time needed  to calculate  average  farm cover  to 
a minimum. A set of target farm covers for season  and stocking  rate is available 
(O'Donovan  et a!., 2000)  (Appendix  1) against  which the cover  can then be compared  and 
management  decisions  made.
Compact  calving
Targets  for a compact  calving  pattern  are 75% of the herd calved  (95% of heifers)  in the 
first 6 weeks  of the calving  season  with the balance  calving  over the next 7 weeks. Failing  
to calve compactly  affects  profitability  One estimate  showed  that compared  with March  
calving  cows, the milk produced  from January  calving  cows cost 1.51 c/litre more; that 
from February  calving  cows cost 0.59 c/litre more and that from April-calving  cows cost 
0.31c/litre  more to produce  (Crosse  et at., 1994). This economic  analysis  warrants  re­
evaluating  as earlier  full-time  turnout  is now being achieved  than was envisaged  when  the 
calculations  presented  in the paper were formulated.  Achieving  compact  calving is 
dependent  upon developing  a breeding  plan where both management  and genetic  
decisions  are set out well in advance  of the breeding  season.
Effective  farm-proven  breeding  plans have been developed  to achieve  compact  calving 
(Teagasc,  2002). Key elements  of successful  programmes  include:
• Monitoring  condition  score during  the dry period,  and condition  score changes  pre­
breeding  and during  the breeding  season.  Targets  are 3-3.25  for cows and heifers  at 
calving  with condition  score  falling  to no less than 2.75 post-breeding;
• Calving heifers just before or at the start of the main calving season (using 
synchronisation);
• Maintaining  accurate  records  of calving  dates,  problems  etc.;
• Using pre-breeding  heat detection  to identify  and induce  heat in anoestrus  cows in 
advance  of the breeding  season;
• Dates  and targets  set and clearly  laid out on a chart for all of the events  to take place  
during  the breeding  season;
• Scanning  pre-breeding  to identify  non-cycling  cows and again at 8-9 weeks  into the 
season  to confirm  pregnancy.  A clear programme  developed  to treat cows thought  to 
be pregnant  to this mid-breeding  season  scan but found  to be empty;
• Tail painting  during the season and using a vasectomised  bull to improve  heat 
detection.
Management  alone  will not achieve  excellent  herd fertility.  A high heat detection  rate may 
mask some of the consequences  of low conception  rate. However  cows genetically  
predisposed  towards  poor fertility  will have a higher empty  rate at the end of the breeding 
season  no matter  how excellent  is the breeding  season  management  plan. At the end of 
the 2002 breeding  season  on the Teagasc  Curtins  farm, 31% of the high yield cows  were
73
empty  compared  with an 8% empty  rate for the two strains  of Holstein  Friesian  bred for 
higher  fertility  - the 'High Durability ’ and New Zealand  strains.
Research  at Moorepark  has identified  two potential  approaches  to breeding  cows  suitable  
for grass-based  milk production.
• Breeding  from Holstein  Friesian  sires within  the EBI that have  good fertility  proofs  (i.e. 
positive  for survival  %, negative  for calving  interval).
• The  fertility  benefits  of crossbreeding  are well researched  (Harris  and Winkleman,  
2002). Research  at Moorepark  with crossbreeds  is underway.  Results  to date 
indicate  that compared  to Holstein  Friesian  cows, crossbred  Montbeliarde  X Friesian  
and Normande  X Friesian  cows are comparable  in terms  of milk yield (between  5,430  
and 5,520 kg/cow)  and milk solids (between  384 and 398 kg/cow)  at medium  
concentrate  feeding  levels  (548 kg per cow). Only 11% of the crossbred  cows were  
empty  compared  with 31% of the Holstein  Friesian  cows after a 13 week breeding  
period.
Conclusions
The focus  on alternative  forages  for dairy cows  must not take dairy farmer ’s eyes off what 
must be their principal  focus, grazed  grass. Increasing  the number  of days at grass  
increases  dairy profitability.  Grass  budgeting  and a planned  breeding  season  resulting  in 
compact  calving  timed to coincide  with the grazing  season  will increase  the number  of 
days at grass.
Grass budgeting  underpins  grass supply  and quality  and so the practice  needs  to be 
adopted  onto all dairy farms. Compact  calving  to grass is critical. Fertile  cows obtained  
using the EBI or by crossbreeding  to high genetic  worth alternative  sires have a role to 
play. Neither  genetic  route will ensure  compact  calving  and a low empty  rate without  a 
clear breeding  plan prepared  well in advance  of the grazing  season. In conclusion  ‘...a 
lot of people ... are not the best farmers  because  they haven't  become  expert  In the 
basics  of pasture  farming,  yet they want to move on to high-input  farming. ’ Dr. Colin  
Holmes,  Massey  University  speaking  at the Dairy 2003 Conference,  Hamilton,  New 
Zealand.
References
Crosse,  S., O’Farrell,  K. and Dillon, P (1994) Why calving  date and compact  calving  are 
so important  to profitable  dairying Proceedings  of the Irish Grassland  Association  Dairy  
Conference  Irish Grassland  Association
CSO (2002a)  Agricultural  Price Indices Central  Statistics  Office,  Dublin  
CSO (2002b)  Earnings  of Agricultural  Workers Central  Statistics  Office,  Dublin  
Harris,  B.L. and Winkleman,  A M. (2000) Influence  of north American  Holstein  genetics  
on dairy cattle performance  in New Zealand  Large  Herds  Conference,  Canterbury,  New 
Zealand
Kelleher,  B. (2002) Research  to practice  - the experience  with monitor  farnis Teagasc  
National  Dairy Conference  Teagasc,  Dublin
Mee, J.F., Fahey,  J. and Crilly, J. (1999) Breeding  the dairy cow of the future . today's  
challenges  Teagasc  National  Dairy Conference,  Teagasc,  Dublin
74
O’Donovan,  M., Dillon, P. and Stakelum,  G. (2000) Grassland  measurement  : benefits 
and guidelines  Teagasc/IFI  Publication
O’Kiely, P. (1994) The cost of feedstuffs  for cattle lAWS  Technical  Bulletin  No. 6 lAWS,  
Dublin
Teagasc  (2002) Breeding  the spring  calving  dairy cow Teagasc,  Dublin
Appendix  1. Target  average  farm (kg Dm/ha)  and per cow (kg DM/cow)  grass  
covers  for the March  to June period.
Date Target  cover  
per cow 
(kg DM)Target  Farm  
cover  
(kg DM/ha)Stocking  Rate  
(LU/ha)
Mar 04 253 608 2.4
Mar 11 265 636 2.4
Mar 18 263 631 2.4
Mar 25 260 623 2.4
Apr 01 145 651 4.5
Apr 08 170 765 4.5
Apr 15 163 734 4.5
Apr 22 166 748 4.5
Apr 29 184 830 4.5
May 07 202 909 4.5
May 13 230 1035 4.5
May 20 233 1050 4.5
May 27 235 1059 4.5
Jun 04 222 998 4 5
Jun 10 223 1003 4.5
Jun 17 233 1050 4.5
Jun 24 292 1050 3.6
' Adjusted  to exclude  different  milk processors  milk price by setting  a standard  value for 
milk fat and protein  content.
75
ICOS vision  for the Irish dairy sector
John Tyrrell
Director  General,  Irish Co-operative  Organisation  Society
Introduction
Last September,  the International  Diary Federation  held a major  Dairy Congress  in Paris.  
This provided  an opportunity  for dairy farmers,  processors,  scientists,  academics,  policy  
makers,  marketers  and politicians  to come  together  to consider  a wide range of themes  
relating  to dairying.  The themes  considered,  related  to health,  nutrition,  consumer  trends  
and communication,  product  promotion,  safety and retailing. Few could fail to be 
impressed  by the enormous  potential  of the industry,  and the opportunities  that the 
growing  diversity  among  consumers  provides.  It is easy to forget  that in milk, the dairy 
industry  has a product  that is so versatile,  that it can be presented  in more forms than 
nearly  any other  naturally  produced  commodity.
What strategy  should  the industry  (farmers  and processors/marketers)  adopt in order  to 
meet the requirements  of consumers  and provide a prosperous  future for the 
stakeholders  In the industry?
Strong  points
The Irish dairy industry  has a number  of strong  points:
• As part of the EU Ireland  (Irl) has access  to a large, wealthy  and growing  market;
• Although  relative  competitive  advantage  may have been eroded  somewhat  in recent  
years, IRL is still a low cost producer  of raw milk, with climatic  and environmental 
advantages,  which  provide  cost and consumer  image  advantages;
• Production  scale at farm level is above  the EU average  - although  it is below  that in 
Flolland  and Denmark  which  are significant  EU export  competitors;
• Irl has a strong integrated  structure  with farmers  co-operatives  involved  in farm 
supply,  milk collection,  processing  and marketing  of milk and milk products;
• There is strong export  dependence  - approximately  80% of the milk produced  is 
exported. A number  of indigenous  food companies  and co-ops have expanded  
overseas  to process,  market  and distribute  dairy products  of Irish and foreign  origin,  
thus providing  valuable  access  to information  and marketing  channels  in overseas  
markets;
The industry  has taken steps to consolidate  and organise  to meet future challenges,  
however the pace of this change  is not as rapid as it is among  competitors.
Weak  points
It should  also be recognise  that the Irish dairy industry  has a number  of weak  points;
• Milk  yield per cow and component  concentration  are below  those  of our competitors;
• Ireland  has a very seasonal  milk supply  pattern,  resulting  in significant  over capacity,  
which is only fully utilized  for 2 months  in each year. This adds greatly  to this cost of
76
processing.  Recent  trends  indicate  that this seasonality  effect is increasing  as more  
farmers  seek to produce  all their milk off grass and winter  milk schemes  are scaled 
back;
Processing  margins  are lower  than that of our main competitors  due to seasonality,  a 
lower  scale of production,  different  product  portfolios,  and the focus  of co-ops  to pay 
the best possible  pric® to producers;
• Due to the way the industry  evolved  from a small domestic  market  with a traditional  
emphasis  on the production  of butter and SMP, there is heavy  reliance  on low growth 
and low margin products. Such products  have been supported  by the EU dairy 
support  system,  and can only be exported  in a dried or preserved  form, capable  of 
being transported  and stored.
A number  of factors  are going  to influence  the future  of the Irish Dairy Sector.
W. T. O. negotiations  -Doha  Round
The EU has committed  itself to further reductions  in tariffs and supports  in these 
negotiations  (launched  in Doha in December  2001). This will have the effect  of reducing 
the level of protection  against  imports,  which  can be applied  by the EU The EU’s opening 
offer proposed  reducing  tariffs by a further  36% on average,  and a cut in export  refunds 
of 45% (Irl has been assured  by the Commission  that the EU offer is within  the Agenda  
2000 agreement).  The Chairman  of the Agriculture  Negotiations,  Stuart  Harbison,  has 
proposed  even more severe  reductions  in tariffs and export  refunds. The effect of any 
outcome  on the lines of the Harbison  Proposals  would  be to open the EU dairy market  to 
more imports  and to reduce  the quantity  of dairy product  that can be exported  from the 
EU The precise  impact  will be unclear  until the negotiations  are completed.
Mid Term Review  of Agenda  2000
The Commissions  Mid Term Review  proposals  which were published  in January  2003,  
propose:
• A further  10% cut in support  price beyond  that proposed  in Agenda  2000 (Now  total 
cut of 25% is proposed);
• Further  proportionate  compensation  for this price cut in the form of direct  payment;
• Continue  quotas  until 2015;
• Limit on annual  quantity  of butter which  may be purchased  into intervention;
• Decoupling  direct  payments;
• Modulation  of direct payment  i.e. transfer  a percentage  of the direct payments  for 
each farmer  above  certain  thresholds  into funds for rural development  or reform  of 
other sectors.
Industry  Structure  
Primarv/Production
• Professor  Boyle ’s study  on competitiveness  of dairy farming  has shown  that Id's cost 
advantage  over 7 other EU countries  has gradually  fallen over the 10 years up to 
1999. This has been due in part to cuts in cereal  supports  - making  cereals  more  
competitive,  the introduction  of the maize  silage premium  and to Id's higher  rate of 
inflation.
77
• Average  milk quota in 2001 was 180,000  litres and average  herd size is 45.7 cows.  
Professor  Boyle  also pointed  to the relatively  low scale activity  on Irish dairy farms  as 
a contributing  factor  to our weak competitive  performance.  He pointed  to the link 
between  greater  efficiency  and lower  production  costs with greater  scale on farms.
• Policies  for restructuring  quota in Irl have been determined  by a consensus-based  
approach,  which  has included  Department  of Agriculture,  Teagasc,  farm organisations  
and co-operatives.  This has also recognised  the need to support  smaller  scale  
producers  and dairying  in less favoured  areas, which is a result of lower average  
supply  and more dispersed  supply  pattern  than other  parts of the country.
Rate of milk quota restructuring  has been slower than in some EU countries.
Processing  Sector
• There  are currently  15 processors  of milk, plus baby food and chocolate  crumb  
manufacturers.  Liquid milk is not included  in this figure as it satisfies  local and 
regional  markets.
• Six processors  account  for 80% of Ireland ’s milk pool. When compared  with 
processors  in Netherlands,  Denmark  and New Zealand,  this demonstrates  that our 
scale is significantly  smaller  than our competitors
• There has been steady  consolidation  of the Irish Dairy over the past 15 years and 
further  progress  has been made  over the past 3 years,  but much more remains  to be 
done.
• The  recent Prospectus  Report  on the Irish Dairy Sector  analyses  the industry  and 
provides  comparison  with the performance  of our competitors.
• At an international  level, dairy companies  in France  (Bel, Lactalis  and Danone)  are 
expanding  at a rapid rate outside  France,  to such an extent  that over 50% of their total 
sales are outside  France. They believe  that growth  can only be achieved  in foreign  
markets
Many other  foreign  dairy businesses  are focussing  on specialising  their production  sites,  
investment  in higher  value  added,  high brand  profile  products  and expanding  into markets  
in Eastern  Europe,  Middle  East and Asia.
The amounts  spent on new product  development,  reinvestment  research  and 
development  is lower in Irl's dairy industry  than among  our competitors  in Denmark  and 
the Netherlands.  According  to the Prospectus  report,  Id's expenditure  on R & D was 0,2%  
of turnover,  which is well below  the levels in the Netherlands  (0.4%)  and New Zealand  
(0.6%). Ireland ’s reinvestment  rate is 2.6% of turnover,  which again is less than the 
industry  average  in the Netherlands  (2.8%),  New Zealand  (4.8%)  and Aria (4.5%)
The recommendations  from Prospectus  highlight  an enormous  challenge  for our Industry.  
They have estimated  that for our industry  to rationalise  and shift its product  portfolios  to 
higher  value products,  an investment  of Euro 300m  will be required,  which  will be mainly  
incurred  in the early years. Payback  will be of the order of 70m pa - according  to 
Prospectus,  but there will be a six-year  payback  period.
Market/retail/consumer  trends
There  are a number  of trends  in the market,  which  the dairy industry  must be conscious
78
of as it prepares  for the future. Many  reports  have been written  which  detail  these  trends
eg
• Globalisation/regionalisation  of markets,  customers  and competitors.  There are an 
increasing  number  of businesses  operating  on a regional  and global scale.  
Businesses  such as Nestle,  McDonalds,  Coca Cola are international  brands,  which 
benefit  from significant  brand  support.  In the dairy sector Danone,  Yoplait,  Mueller are 
well known and supported  international  brands. The Kerrygold  brand is Id's most 
recognised  international  dairy brand;
• Growing  scale and market share of retailers. Many of the retailers  have now 
developed  in more than one country  and are expanding  significantly  beyond  their 
original  market. Examples,  are Walmart  (US) now in UK, Germany,  Tesco, Royal  
Ahold,  Aldi are expanding  their business  models  across  Europe.
This very large scale is giving  them enormous  buying  power  and they are passing  more  
of the costs onto suppliers.  An example  of this is demanding  contributions  to advertising 
and promotion,  merchandising,  development  of own label products.  These  supermarkets  
work together  with food manufacturers  to exploit opportunities  that exist in the 
sophisticated  marketplace  in which increasingly  affluent  and aware consumers  are 
looking for convenience,  quality and safe food. Consumers  also have less time to 
purchase,  prepare,  cook and consume  their food.
The food service  sector  has also been going through  dramatic  change  and rapid growth. 
Estimates  suggest  that this sector  is growing  at twice the rate of the retail sector. This 
sector, which has also shown  significant  consolidation,  includes  restaurants,  fast food 
outlets,  hotels  and the catering  sector. Some  of the food service  operators  are globally  
branded  operators  such as Pizza Hut, Kentucky  Fried Chicken,  and McDonalds  etc. 
These companies  offer consistent  product  regardless  of where in the world it is sold. 
Food service  operators  therefore  demand  a very consistent  quality  of product  in order  that 
they can supply  to all of their outlets. A number  of Irish dairy co-ops  and companies  
supply  the food service  sector  including  Glanbia,  Kerry, Dairygold,  Carbery  and others.
Consumers  are also seeking  functional  foods  in an effort  to achieve  balance  in their diet. 
This is an effort  to make up for nutritional  shortfalls  from fast foods, ready meals  and no 
breakfast  in many cases. They are looking  for products  that will provide  them with the 
essential  proteins,  vitamins  and minerals  and other supplements  to make up for their 
modern  eating  habits. Functional  foods  and nutritional  solutions  is a major growth  sector.
Vision  for the dairy sector
The objective  for the Irish dairy industry  should be to optimise  the value of the sector  by 
developing  a strategy  to produce,  process  and market  milk products  in a way that wilt 
create  sustainable  long-term  value for producers,  employees  and consumers.
in order  to deliver this objective  a number  of steps  will need to be taken.
• Ireland  must aim to be efficient  and competitive  at primary  and processing  levels.  
Recent  reports  such asAgri  2010 Report,  Prospectus  Strategic  Development  Plan for 
the Irish Dairy Sector  and others  recommend  that a national,  average  milk production  
per farm of 70,000  gallons  (or more)  is required  to ensure  viability.  How  can this target  
be achieved?  It will require  a change  of thinking  among  farm organisations  and policy 
makers  in the light of the new challenges  (Mid Term Review,  Cost/Price  Squeeze,  loss 
of competitiveness),  which  are being faced
79
How can account be taken  of the importance  of milk production  to the economy  in less 
favoured  areas and the shortage  of alternatives  in agriculture  In those areas? Are 
there changes  needed in the implementation  of national  and European  Union  
schemes,  which  would  help to improve  our competitive  position  at farm level?
There  is a need to create  a dynamic  and innovative  industry  that is focussed  on the 
needs  of the market. Ireland  has a significant  dependence  on products  that receive  
support  from the milk regime of the CAP. Under the European  Commission's 
proposals,  the support  measures  are to be reduced,  which  will have a greater  impact  
on Irl because  of the current  product  mix.
We will have a choice  to make.
Either  our focus for the future  can be on commodities,  in which case we will have to 
be as efficient  as the best or we will lose out.
Alternatively,  we can develop  value added  products  for consumer,  food service,  food 
ingredient  and other specialist  sectors  that will not be reliant  on public  policy  support.
We should  recognise  that the value added route Is not one, which will yield results  
quickly  because  of the long lead-time,  and it will be costly.
Our industry  has a strategic  choice  to make. This will require  a significant  investment.
I expect  that we will have combination  of commodities  and added value products,  
which will involve  a focussed  effort to increase  the share of total milk going to the 
higher value  products.  We need to set targets  for this shift in order  to decide  how our 
processing  assets are configured  and where investment  will be made. The 
Prospectus  Report  has recommended  that we set a target of changing  the product  
portfolio  mix from 65% for base products  at present,  to 45% by 2015.
In New Zealand  a number  of years  ago, the New Zealand  Dairy Company  (the larger  
of the 2 processing  co-ops  which merged  to form Fonterra)  decided  to select  from 
amongst their  11 or 12 processing  locations,  that they would  focus  their  investment  in 
about  4 mega  sites and that the remaining  locations  would  be phased  out and closed  
over a 5-10 year period.
Our competitors  in the Netherlands,  Denmark,  New Zealand,  Germany  and elsewhere  
have adopted  aggressive  strategies  in order to achieve  efficiency  and cost 
effectiveness.  These have included  Increasing  the scale and efficiency  of dairy 
processing  facilities  and gaining  from economies  of scale.
The Irish Industry  needs  to adopt  a similar  aggressive  strategy  by increasing  the scale  
of processing  facilities  for the bulk products  such as butter, SMP, WMP, Cheddar  
cheese  and casein.
Ensure  that our dairy industry  is controlled  by milk producer  shareholders  and 
operates  for their benefit  and for the benefit  of their customers.
There are a number  of issues, which arise from the shareholding,  control and 
governance  In co-ops,  which  arise in the context  of the changes  that the industry  will 
experience.
Shareholding  by milk producers  in co-ops  does not reflect  the business,  which that 
producer  carries  out with the co-op. While a number  of co-ops  operate  patronage  
bonus  schemes,  thereby  distributing  part of the annual  financial  surplus  in the co-op  
to those  members  who traded  with it, perhaps  we should  look at the case for operating
80
a share standard  similar  to that, which operates  in many U.S., Australian  and New 
Zealand  co-ops. This would require  a producer  to hold a given number  of shares  in 
the co-op  for every 100 litres of milk, thus as producers expand  they purchase  shares 
and as producers  leave or retire they have their shares  redeemed.  In this way a 
producer ’s investment  in the co-op would reflect the investment,  which the co-op 
makes  on his behalf  to process  and market  his milk.
Another  issue that arises is the necessity  to ensure  that the Boards  of co-ops  are 
made up of the best and most capable  people  to govern  the co-op. The democratic  
system  of election  is operated  in all co-ops. Training  programmes  are available  for 
co-op directors  and should become  a condition  for all newly elected members.  
Ongoing  director development  is also essential.
Directors  of co-ops  should  be paid a director ’s fee, which reflects  the responsibilities,  
and time, which directors  have to make available  to their co-op, and the time that 
directors  give up on their own farms  to fulfil their duties  as directors.
In some countries  such as the Netherlands  and the US, co-operatives  elect some of 
the directors  from a pool of suitable candidates,  which are drawn from the 
membership.  This pool of candidates  may have particular  skills, expertise  or 
leadership  qualities  or may have completed  an approved  advanced  development  
programme.  Should  this be considered  in Ireland?
Co-ops  in many countries  now appoint  independent  directors  to their Boards. In 
Fonterra  for example  4 of the 13 directors  are appointed  as non-farmer  directors.  This 
reflects  the growing  complexity  of the business  and the need for skills on the board,  
which can only be found in this way.
We want to have an industry  that encourages  excellence  In producers,  management  
and staff and is fully aware  of the Importance  of their contribution.
Consumers  are showing  a greater  interest  in where  their food comes  from, how it is 
produced,  conditions  under which animals  are kept. They are looking  for assurance 
that what they eat will be safe and will be produced  under  conditions  that they are 
happy  with.
The industry  at every  level must take account  of these  consumer concerns.  The food 
chain is a partnership  and must have no weak links. All parties  in that chain has to 
work to apply the standards  that the consumer  expects  - not just the minimum 
statutory  standards.
Farmers  control  most  of the Irish Dairy Industry  through  their co-operatives.  They are 
in a much better position  than the beef sector  (which has only a very small co-op 
involvement  in processing)  and the sugar sector, where farmers  are in a weak 
bargaining  position. However,  it is in farmers ’ interests  to influence  the vision and 
strategy  for the future  development  of the dairy sector. It is their industry;  they will be 
beneficiaries  of its success. Those who will be In dairying  for the future should 
become  actively  Involved  in their co-ops  and make their contribution  through  the 
relevant  structures.
Our co-op structure  has provided  a sound  basis for development  so far. We should 
build on what we have, and develop  a dairy industry  that will deliver  the objective  of 
a prosperous  future  for Irish dairy
81
Labour  efficiency  on drystock  farms:  a core issue  
for the future
P. Bolger''  and J. McNamara^
''Irish Farmers  Journal  
^Safety and  Labour  Specialist,  Teagasc
Introduction
Labour  is a declining  resource  available  to Irish farming. Central  Statistics  Office data 
indicates  that total labour  input has declined,  on average,  by 3.4% per year since 1991.  
However,  the Teagasc  Grange  Labour  Study (TGLS)  indicates  that there is considerable  
variation  in the labour  input on suckler/drystock  farms  in Ireland  (Leahy  et ai, 2003a,b,c).  
This research  indicates  that the most efficient  25% of farms in the study used less than 
one third of the labour  input of the least efficient  25%. Both the declining  availability  of 
labour, and the variation  identified  in labour use on farms should challenge  drystock  
farmers  to 'benchmark'  labour use against  the most efficient  group. This should be 
followed,  where  necessary,  by implementing  strategies  to improve  labour  efficiency
This paper  examines  issues  of labour  use in relation  to farm income  and efficiency.  The 
use of work time in relation  to quality  of life is also explored.
Labour  use in relation  to Income
When family farm incomes  are related  to hours worked,  it becomes  apparent  that, on 
average,  drystock  farmers are the lowest  paid sector  in society  (Table  1). This information  
should  provide  a challenge  to strive  to earn an income  per hour at least comparable  with 
the average  industrial  wage,  which can only be done by optimising  both the efficiency  of 
farming  and hours  worked.
Table 1. Gross  earnings  and hours  worked  for various  occupational  groups
Earnings
€/hour  €/weekHours
worked/week
Electricity,  gas and water  supply'' 19.95 814.93 40.9
Mining  and quarrying'' 15.47 702 42 45.4
Manufacturing'' 12.72 498.90 39.2
Agricultural  workers^ 8.16 333.77 40.9
The average  farmer^ 8 23 304.00 37.2
Social  welfare  (2 adults,  2 children) 241.20
Cattle  farmers^ 4.16 139.96 33.6
Source: ''CSO Industrial  earnings  and hours worked  March 2003; ^CSO Earnings  of 
agricultural  workers  2001; ^National  Farm Survey 2001; ‘^Department  of Social  
Community  and Family  Affairs  Guide  for Unemployed  People  2002
82
(Note: Earnings  per week is the average  family  farm income  (FFI) 2001 (€15,840)  for all 
farms divided  by 52 weeks. Earnings  per hour are FFI divided  by family labour  units 
(1.08) for all farms).
With the impending  implementation  of the 'single  farm payment ’ following  the recent  Mid- 
Term Review  (MTR)  of the Common  Agricultural  Policy  (CAP),  income  from farming  net 
of the 'single  payment ’ will become  transparent  It is unlikely  that any farmer  will want to 
channel  a proportion  of their per hectare  payment  towards  the running  of the farm.  
However,  it is difficult  to see how commercial  agriculture  without  supports  will become  a 
paying  proposition  in its own right (Table  2).
Table 2. The contribution  of direct  payments  to family  farm income
Cattle  rearing  
€/FarmCattle  other 
€/Farm
FFI including  direct  payments 7,278 7,822
Direct  payments 6,439 8,674
FFI less payments 839 -852
Source:  National  Farm Survey  2001
Following  the MTR, farmers  will radically  rethink  their systems  of farming  with economic  
return and labour  input becoming  key parameters  in any efficient  system. Becoming 
extensive  in an effort to hold onto as much of the single payment  could leave some  
farmers financially  better off, especially  where off-farm employment  is available  
However,  committed  commercial  farmers  will In the future 'farm for profit and not for 
numbers ’. It is likely that farmers  currently  operating  efficient  and profitable  enterprises  
have the formula  for success  going forward. Figures  from the Teagasc  National  Farm  
Survey (TNFS), Management  Data for Farm Planning  (MDFP) and the TGLS, 
demonstrate  actual  and potential  performance  at farm level (Table  3).
Table 3. A comparison  between  actual  and potential  performance  of suckler  and 
cattle units
Suckling Cattle
Actual Potential ActuaM Potential
Gross  margin/farm  (€) 14,822 17,8132 17,305 19,9462
Fixed costs (€) 7,544 8,8473 9,483 9,2853
FFI (€) 7,278 8,966 7,822 10,661
Area farmed  (ha) 30.3 30 3 31.8 31.8
Total L.U 30.2 54.5 39.6 57
Stocking  rate (L.U./ha) 1 1.8 1.24 1.8
Hours  per L.U. 58 19.163 42 19.163
Return/hr  worked  (€) 4.17 8.59 4.67 9.76
Sources: ''National  Farm Survey  2001; ^Management  data for farm planning  (single 
suckling  and calf to 2 years  with a 'good'  level of performance);  ^Jeagasc/Grange  labour 
study most labour  efficient  farmers
83
Under  the current  CAP system,  the potential  earnings  of individual  farms  are double  what 
are actually  being achieved.  Stocking  rate and labour  requirements  are the noticeable  
differences  between  potential  and actual situations,  however  farm efficiency  factors  are 
also involved.  Achieving  an ‘excellent ’ level of performance  and minimising  fixed costs  
has the potential  to increase  return  per hour worked  by a further  30%.
Research  to establish  the precise  relationship  between  work time input and profitability  in 
drystock  farming  has yet to be concluded.  However,  the generality  of information  from 
labour  studies  in other  enterprises  suggests  that efficient  labour  use goes hand-in-hand  
with profitability.  Data from the TNFS (Table  4) gives a very clear indication  on where  
drystock  farmers should  be spending  most  of their  time - namely,  on work  activities  related  
to optimising  profit. These include  work and facilities  related  to achieving  low cost 
livestock  weight  gain of high value output.
Table  4. Economic  margins  from ‘top’ and ‘bottom ’ cattle  farms
NFS
bottom  1/3'"'*NFS
topAdvantage
Gross  margin  €/ha 193 630 +437
Premia €/ha 215 311 +96
Fixed costs  €/ha 210 292 -82
Profit  €/ha -17 339 +355
Source:  Teagasc,  National Farm Survey,  2001
Labour  use at farm level
The TGLS  on suckler/drystock  farms  gives  a good insight  as to what is happening  at farm 
level regarding  labour  use. The 115 suckler farms  in this study had on average,  93 cattle  
livestock  units,  with an average  suckler herd size of 54 and land area of 72 hectares.  The 
average  labour  input over the 12-month  period  was 9.90 hours per farm per day. The 
average  labour input peaked  at 11.45 hours per day in March and was lowest in 
December  at 8.32 hours. Labour  efficiency  as measured  in hours per livestock  unit per 
year varied greatly  (Table 5) ranging  from 11.71 to 116.05  hours per livestock  unit per 
year.
Table  5. Grange/UCD  labour  study  of labour  use on 115 sample  suckler farms
Efficiency  level Average  hours/L.U./year
Most efficient  25% 19.16
Middle  50% 33.98
Least  efficient  25% 65.04
The TGLS  (Figure  1) indicates  that most  time is utilised  at animal  husbandry  tasks,  which  
average  2.58 hours  per day over the whole  year.
84
Figure 1. Teagasc  Grange/UCD  labour  study:  total labour  input (hours  per farm  
day) for predefined  tasks. All farms  (115 farms)
■ FEEDING  ea CLEANING
Q ANIMAL  HUSBANDRY  ■ MAINTENANCE
B GRASSLAND  ■ MANAGEMENT
14 1 BOTHER  ENTERPRISES
Source:  Leahy  et al., (2003a)
This task used 3.37 hours per day in the months  of March,  April and May. Grassland 
management  and feeding  are also time consuming  tasks using 1.51 and 1.15 hours  per 
day, respectively,  throughout  the year. Grassland  management  peaked  in July at 4.63 
hours, the majority  of which was accounted  for by silage making,  topping  and fertiliser  
spreading.  Time allocated  to feeding  stock, declined  from 2.24 hours in March  to 0.23 
hours  in July. Maintenance  and cleaning  required  a steady  demand  for labour,  averaging 
1.41 and 0.78 hours per day throughout  the year respectively.  Notably,  management  
averaged  0.78 hours per day throughout  the year. Included  in this task is 'office work' 
such as record  keeping  and trading  of stock (Leahy  et al., 2003a).
Factors  leading  to a labour  efficient farm
In the TGLS  many  factors  were  found  to influence  labour  efficiency.  These  included:  farm 
size (hectares,  herd size), other farm enterprises,  land quality,  farmland  and farmyard 
fragmentation.  Over the spring  period  (March,  April, May), the greater  the distance  from 
the dwelling  house  to the calving  unit, the longer  the working  day devoted  to suckling 
tasks. Over the winter months  (November,  December,  and January),  labour input 
increased  with the number  of feed areas on the farm. Over 70 % of farmers  who 
participated  in the study said that their farm buildings  and facilities  could be improved  to 
reduce  labour  requirements  (Leahy  et al., 2003b). Use of mechanical  aids for bedding, 
using calving  observation  cameras  and keeping  records  on services  and returns  to heats  
were positively  associated  with efficient  use of labour  (Leahy,  per. comm.). Calf health 
problems  in contrast  had an adverse  impact  on labour  efficiency  (Leahy  et al., 2003c).
A study investigating  current  and future  labour  issues  on farms  in Tipperary  South  Riding 
(Ruane  et al., 1999)  indicated  that from a labour  use perspective,  26 % of those  surveyed, 
needed  to pay more attention  to methods  used for feeding  cattle.
85
Characteristics  of iabour  efficient  drystock  farming
Every farm has a unique  set of circumstances  that affect labour  requirement.  These  
include: availability  of labour, farming system, farm layout, buildings  and farm 
fragmentation.  Therefore  approaches  to achieving  efficient  use of labour  need to be 
tailored  to suit individual  farms. The following  areas are likely to be crucial  to achieving  
labour  efficiency;
Buildings,  farmyard  and farm layout
• Buildings  and farmyard  must be designed  to allow for efficient  management  and 
movement of stock  (in the main by one person)  to calving  facilities,  crush,  and loading  
area
• Mechanical  feeding  equipment  should be used and sized to suit the scale of the 
operation. There should be little or no requirement  for heavy physical  work.  
Passageways  and access  routes  must allow  efficient  machinery  operation.  Time can 
be saved by feeding  some animal  types e g. suckler  cows, less rather  than more  
frequently  during  the week.
• The  farm layout must facilitate  efficient  movement  of stock. Internal  roadways  are 
required  in many  cases. This is coupled  with an appropriate  number  of paddocks  and 
good fencing.
• Livestock  handling  facilities  need to be functional  and accessible.  Fragmented  farms  
or fields remote  from the farmyard  need to be serviced  by a simple  crush to treat or 
breed  animals
Management  of livestock
• A clearly  defined  livestock  systemfs)  cuts demand  for labour  especially  where  labour  
input  can be predicted.  Running  less rather  than more  groups  of stock has a dramatic  
effect  on labour.
• Animal health deserves  special attention. Use recognised  animal husbandry  
practices  like; ensuring  calves get adequate  colostrum,  maintaining  hygiene  
standards,  vaccination,  preventative  treatments,  adequate  ventilation  indoors  or early  
turnout.  Additional  precautions  should  be taken if stock is bought-in.
Grassland  management
• Consider  using contractors  for grassland  management  tasks that are predominantly  
mechanical.  Fertiliser  can be spread  on most areas of the farm at once rather  than 
after each grazing.
Management
• Maintain  a tidy and organised  farm office. Detailed  physical  and financial  records  are 
a highly  important  aid to good farm management.  Use of a computer,  internet/e-mail  
and mobile  phones  are invaluable  labour  saving  tools for managing  a business.
• Membership  of a producer  group to sell stock and buy farm inputs can have a 
significant  saving  on time.
86
• Efficient  farmers  continually  review  their current  situation  and planned  developments. 
Setting goals including  time management,  are crucial to turn 'aspiration'  into ' 
achievement ’. Having  'goals'  in writing  serves  as a constant  reminder  of what one 
wishes  to achieve.
• Attending  advisory  events  and participating  in discussion  groups  is an important  use 
of work time. Discussion  groups have been found to be particularly  effective  in 
facilitating  positive  change  (Byrne,  1997; Christie,  2002). Improving  labour  use is a 
topic that merits  consideration  especially  as labour  saving  is a topical  subject.
Teagasc  has produced  a booklet  to assist  farmers  to focus  on efficient  use of work  time.  
This booklet  'Take control  of Your Time ’ is available  from Teagasc  offices  nationally.
Relationship  between  work time and ‘quality  of life ’
Work time has a considerable  influence  on 'quality  of life’ for farmers  and their families. 
For instance,  as many spouses  are now working,  time is required  for family purposes 
during the 'working  day ’ such as collecting  children  from school or other childhood 
activities.  Care for the elderly  is also an important  social issue related  to use of time. 
Excessively  long work hours,  can impact  negatively  on valuable  social  and family  time.
Farm accidents  and disability  are other serious  issues  in farming. Securing  health  and 
safety  can never  be considered  as a waste  of time. Personal  health,  to some  extent  is a 
decision.  Heavy  manual  work can lead to physical  injuries  and certain  types of arthritis.  
A recent  study  of health  and safety  practices  among  farmers  and other workers  (Hope  et 
al., 1999)  suggested  that confusion  between  physical  activity  and aerobic activity  has lead 
to a low participation  rate in exercise  outside  work activities.
As farmer  numbers  decrease,  there  is potential  for farmers to become  isolated.  The study  
of health  and safety  practices  found  that perceived  loneliness  is a greater  source  of stress 
among  farmers  than for other workers.  The study also found that pressure  of work is a 
source  of stress  for farmers,  rural and urban  workers.  Clearly  use of work  time has social 
consequences  and long working  hours  have the potential  to cause  isolation.
Conclusions
• A good ‘benchmark ’ for labour  use on drystock  farms is the most efficient  25 % of 
farmers  who achieve  an average  work time of 19 hours per livestock  unit per year. 
Reaching  or exceeding  these  should  be the aim of every  farmer.
• A considerable  range of physical  and organisational  factors  affect labour use on 
farms. Improving  labour  use commences  by identifying  where  work time is being  
used. Devising  approaches  to reduce the labour requirement  follows from this 
exercise.  Examples  of best practices  can be found  within  the TGLS,  while  discussion 
groups  have a lot to contribute  where  the experiences  of other farmers  regarding 
labour  use are highlighted.
• In view of what the average  industrial  wage is and the relative  availability  of work 
outside  the farm gate, profitability  and return  per hour  worked  on farm must be a key 
consideration  when choosing  to stay within  the industry.  With a rate of €10 per hour 
readily available  for any type of work outside  the farm gate, the average  farmer  
earning  €4.50  per hour is forgoing  €5.50  for every hour spent  on the farm.
87
• Use of work time impacts  on quality  of life. This along with income  will influence  the 
sustainability  of drystock  farming  into the future.
Acknowledgement;
The authors would  like to acknowledge  the considerable  assistance  regarding  TGLS  data 
provided  by Ms Hazel Leahy,  Postgraduate  Student,  Teagasc  Grange/UCD  in preparing  
this paper.
References
Byrne,  F.P. (1997).  A study  of the impact  of modified  New Zealand  type discussion  groups  
in technology  transfer  on Irish dairy farms. Unpublished  M.Agr. Sc. Thesis,  National  
University  of Ireland,  Dublin.
Christie,  M. (2002). Discussion  groups In: - Teagasc  opportunities  and options  for 
expansion.  Unpublished  thesis  submitted  in partial  fulfilment  of the requirements  for the 
degree  of BA in education  and training.  NUI, Galway.
Hope,  A., Kelleher,  C., Holmes,  L. and Hennessy,  T. (1999). Health  and safety  practices  
among  farmers  and other workers:  a needs  assessment.  Occup.  Med 49: 231-235
Leahy,  H., O’Riordan,  E G. and Ruane,  D.J. (2003a).  Labour  efficiency  on suckler  farms.  
In: Teagasc  discussion  groups  open day Grange  Research  Centre,  June 2003
Leahy,  H., O’Riordan,  E G. and Ruane,  D.J. (2003b).  Counting  the hours  and making  the 
hours count  - A study of labour  use efficiency  on suckler  farms. In: Conference  papers  
for Irish Farm Buildings Association  Spring  Conference
Leahy,  H., O’Riordan,  E G. and Ruane,  D.J. (2003c).  Working  around  the clock-spring  
calving  on suckler farms. In: Proceedings of Agricultural Research  Forum  2003  p40.
Ruane,  D.J,, Phelan,  J., Darcy,  A., Butler,  T. and Hennessy,  M. (1999). Labour  use on 
Irish livestock  farms.  A study investigating  current  and future labour  issues  on farms in 
Tipperary  South Riding. Report  Prepared  by Rural Development  Unit, Department  of 
Agribusiness,  Extension  and Rural  Development,  UCD.
88
Factors  affecting  finishing  cattle  performance
M.G. Keane
Teagasc,  Grange  Research  Centre,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Introduction
In recent  years the costs of winter  finishing  have generally  exceeded  the value of the 
carcass  gain. In the past, profitability  depended  on an autumn  to spring  price rise, which 
more recently  it has been sustained  by premia.  With the likely decoupling  of premia  from 
production,  the value of production  must at least cover all direct costs (otherwise  why 
produce),  so if winter  finishing  is to be sustainable,  costs of gain must decrease  and/or  
the value of gain must increase.  The main factors  affecting  the profitability  of winter  
finishing  are the cost of feed, the rate of gain and the value of gain. To some  degree  all 
are within  the control  of the producer.
Feed efficiency  as affected  by liveweight  and rate of gain
The two major  factors  affecting  the efficiency  of feed utilization  and hence  the costs of 
gain, are animal  weight  and rate of gain. The theoretical  feed requirements  of animals  of 
three liveweights  (550, 650 and 750 kg) with two rates of gain (0.8 and 1.0 kg dayi)  are 
shown  in Table 1. At a fixed rate of gain (e g. 0.8 kg day*^),  feed requirements  increase 
by about 15 % per 100 kg increase  in liveweight.  Thus, a 650 kg animal  will require  15 
% more feed to put on the same liveweight  as a 550 kg animal. Once the animal  is 
achieving  a moderate  level of gain it is quite efficient to further  increase  rate of gain. For 
example,  a 550 kg steer gaining  0.8 kg dayi requires  7.1 UFV dayi (UFV = Unite  
Fourragere  Viande  = 1 kg barley),  but for an input of an extra 0.5 UFV dayi, liveweight  
gain is increased  by 0.2 kg day ^ to 1.0 kg day'V Thus,  there is an increase  in liveweight  
gain of 25 % for an increased  feed input of 7 %. More feed is required  to put the same  
increment  (0.2 kg) of gain on a heavy  animal  than on a lighter  animal. For example,  it 
requires  1.0 UFV dayi  to put 0.2 kg extra daily gain on a 750 kg animal  already  gaining 
0.8 kg dayi (i.e. twice as much as for the 550 kg animal). Still, even for the heavier  
animal,  gain is increased  by 25 % (0.8 to 1.0 kg dayi)  for a feed input increase  of 11 % 
(1.0 UFV in 9.2 UFV day ^). These  data clearly  indicate  that feed requirements  are least 
and efficiency  is greatest  when light animals  are fed for high rates of gain all else beino  
equal.
Table 1. Theoretical  energy requirements  (UFV dayi) of finishing  steers by 
iiveweight  and daiiy gain
Daily gain (kg) 550Liveweiaht  fkot
650 750
0.8 7.1 (100) 8.1 (114) 9.2 (130)
+ 0.2 0.5 (100) 0.7 (140) 1.0 (200)
Total 1.0 7.6 (100) 8.8 (116) 10.2 (134)
UFV = Unite Fourragere  Viande  = 1 kg barley  (Jarripe,  1989)
89
Effects  of feeding  level on performance  and carcass  traits
As the effects  of feeding  level are well documented  elsewhere  they are only covered  
briefly here. The performance  of finishing  steers (mix of Charolais  x Friesians  and 
Belgian  Blue x Friesians)  fed on silage  plus a range  of concentrate  levels  from zero to ad 
libitum  is shown  in Tables  2 and 3. The silage  analysis  was (g kg" ’’): dry matter  (DM) 210, 
DM digestibility  758, and pH 3.7. The concentrate  formulation  was (g kg"’’): rolled barley  
870, molasses  47.5, soyabean  meal 67.5, and minerals/vitamins  15. The feeding  period  
was 132 days.
As concentrate  level increased,  silage  intake  decreased  at an increasing  substitution  rate 
(Table 2). For the first 3 kg day" ’’ increment  of concentrate  DM, silage DM intake  
decreased  by 0.30 kg kg"’’ concentrates,  so total DM intake increased  by 0.70 kg kg"’ 
concentrates.  From low to high concentrates  (i.e. from 3 to 6 kg day"’ DM approx  ), the 
decrease  in silage intake was 0.68 kg kg"’ concentrates,  so the increase  in total DM 
intake  was only 0.32 kg kg"’ concentrates.  Obviously  the response  to the second  3 kg 
day"’ concentrate  increment  was less than to the first, because  the effect on total DM 
intake was less. Going from high to ad libitum  concentrates  (i e. the 3’’’^ 3 kg day" ’ 
concentrate  DM increment  approx.)  resulted  in a reduction  in silage DM intake greater  
than the increased  concentrate  DM intake  (1.10 kg silage  kg"’ concentrates).  As a result,  
total intake  was reduced  by about  0.1 kg silage DM per kg increase  in concentrate  DM 
intake. In summary,  the substitution  rate of concentrates  for silage increased  with 
increasing  concentrate  level. Maximum  DM intake  occurred  when the ration was about  
60 % concentrates  and 40 % silage but maximum  net energy  intake occurred  with ad 
libitum  concentrate  feeding.
Table  2. Performance  of finishing  steers  by supplementary  concentrate  level
Silage
onlySilage  + 
low cone.Silage  + 
high cone.Cone.
Ad Lib.Mean ’
Intakes  (kg DM day"’)
Silage 7.6 6.7 4.8 1.6 4.4
Concentrates 3.0 5.8 8.7 5.8
Total 7.6 9.7 10.6 10.3 10.2
UFV intake^ 6.1 8.7 10.2 10.9 9.9
Daily gains  (g)
Liveweight 0.34 0.86 1.01 1.13 1.00
Carcass 0.25 0.58 0.70 0.82 0.70
Carcass  as % LW 74 67 69 73 70
’Excluding  silage  only treatment;  ^Values  of 0.8 for silage  and 1.1 for concentrates.  
Liveweight  gain on silage  only was 0.34 kg day"’. This seems  to be underestimated  as 
carcass  gain was 0.25 kg day"’ and generally  at low levels  of performance,  carcass  gain 
is only 55 % to 60 % of liveweight  gain (it was 74 % here). Thus, a more realistic  value  
for liveweight  gain is 0.42 kg day"’. The response  to the first concentrate  increment  was 
147 g liveweight  (assuming  0.42 kg day"’ on silage  only) or 110 g carcass  weight  per kg. 
For the 2'’*’ concentrate  increment,  the response  was 54 g liveweight  or 41 g carcass  
weight  and for the final concentrate  increment  the response  was 39 g liveweight  and 43 
g carcass  weight.
90
Slaughter  weight  and carcass  weight  (Table  3) reflect  the liveweight  and carcass  weight  
gains. Kill-out increased  and conformation  improved  with increasing  level of 
concentrates.  Fat class Increased  with increasing  concentrate  level up to the high 
concentrate  level but not thereafter.  If kidney  plus channel  fat (scaled  for carcass  weight) 
is used as an indicator  of fatness,  then there was no increase  in fatness  above  the low 
concentrate  level. This is in agreement  with earlier  findings  showing  that substitution  of 
concentrates  for silage  either  decreased  or had no effect  on fatness  even though  carcass 
weight  was increased.
Table  3. Slaughter  traits of finishing  steers  by supplementary  concentrate  level
Silage
onlySilage  + 
low cone.Silage  + 
high cone.Cone.
Ad Lib.Mean''
Slaughter  weight  (kg) 583 653 673 687 671
Carcass  weight  (kg) 308 352 367 382 367
Kill-out  (g kg"'') 528 539 545 557 547
Conformation  class 2.11 2.64 2.75 2.83 2.74
Fat class 2.17 3.39 3.64 3.60 3.54
Kidney  + channel  fat (g kg"'')^ 24.6 33.1 35.3 32.1 33.5
■'Excluding  silage  only treatment  as not commercially  relevant;  ^Of carcass.
Duration  of finishing
It is often assumed  that the rate of daily gain is constant  over the whole  finishing  period.  
This is not so. At the start of the finishing  period  daily gain increases  somewhat  initially,  
but after a relatively  short period  of time it starts  to decrease  and continues  to decrease 
with increasing  length  of finishing  period. An example  of this is shown  in Table 4. In two 
experimental  treatments,  finishing  cattle were fed either  silage only or silage plus 6 kg 
day'' supplementary  concentrates  for 147 days. Mean daily gains  were satisfactory  at 
0.65 and 1.10 kg day"'' for silage only and silage plus concentrates,  respectively.  
However,  these means  were comprised  of gains, which were higher  in the early part of 
the finishing  period  and lower towards  the end. For silage only, daily gain In the first 8 
weeks  was 0.80 kg but it was only 0.54 kg over the final 7 weeks. The corresponding  
values  were 1.43 and 0.79 kg for silage  plus concentrates.
Table  4. Daily gain (kg) by finishing  interval
Interval  (d) Silage + 6 kg Cone.
0 - 147 0.65 1.10
0- 56 0.80 1.43
56- 98 0.59 1.02
98 - 147 0.54 0.79
The proportional  fall In daily gain was greater  for the higher  feeding  level because  the 
animals  were further  advanced  on the growth  curve  on any particular  date. As the rate of 
gain on a fixed feeding  level declines  with increasing  length  of finishing,  clearly  therefore, 
the mean daily gain over a finishing  period  depends  on its duration. In the example  in
91
Table 4, if the animals  had been slaughtered  after 98 days rather  than after 147 days,  
mean daily gains would have been 0.71 and 1.25 kg day"'' for silage and silage plus 
concentrates,  respectively  rather  than 0.65 and 1.10 kg day"''. These  data indicate  that 
daily gain declined  by about  0.020  and 0.045  kg day"'' per week of finishing  for silage  only 
and silage plus concentrates,  respectively.  There are many reasons  why rate of gain 
decreases  during  finishing.  They include  an increase  in gut contents  in the early stages,  
static  intake,  and increased  fat (energy)  content  of the gain. Deposition  of a fixed energy  
increment  results  in decreased  weight  gain as the energy  content  of the gain increases.
Effects  of level of feeding  and duration  of finishing
Earlier the effects of feeding level on animal performance  were described  for an 
experiment  in which  the feeding  treatments were all applied  for a constant  period  of time. 
Consequently,  slaughter  weight  differed  greatly  between  treatments.  It could be argued  
that this approach  is not valid, and the objective  should  be to take animals  to a constant  
carcass  weight  (or perhaps  constant  level of fatness).  If this  were done the animals  on 
the higher  feeding  levels  would  require  shorter  finishing  periods  and/or  those  on the lower  
feeding  levels would require  longer  finishing  periods. Since daily gain is affected  by 
duration  of the finishing  period,  the performance  values shown for the fixed finished  
period  would be different  for feeding  periods  of varying  duration.  It would be expected  
that the mean  daily gains  on the higher feeding  levels  would  increase  (due to the shorter  
finishing  period)  and those on the lower feeding  levels would decrease  (due to longer  
finishing).
To ascertain  the effects  of finishing  period  at varying  supplementary  concentrate  levels  an 
experiment  similar to that described  above  was carried  out with two slaughter  dates  (105 
and 174 days). The silage  was of poorer  quality  than that used earlier  and when  fed alone  
supported  gains  of little more than half those recorded  earlier  (i.e. 0.23 - 0.24 kg day"'').  
The performance  data (Table 5) show that the decrease  in performance  with time was 
greater  at the higher  feeding  levels. On silage  only, there was no decline  (from 105 to 
174 days compared  with earlier)  in liveweight  gain with time. For the low concentrates,  
the liveweight  gain decline  was 0.2 kg day"'',  for the high concentrates  it was 0.4 kg day- 
1, and for the concentrates  ad libitum  it was 0.5 kg day"''. This trend would  be expected  
in that by 105 days, the animals  on the higher  feeding  levels  were at a more advanced  
stage  of maturity  than those  on the lower feeding  levels.
The decreases  in carcass  gain were much less, relatively,  than the decreases  in 
liveweight  gain. There was  no reduction  in carcass  gain after 105 days on silage  only and 
neither  was there  any reduction  on low concentrates.  On high concentrates,  carcass  gain 
decreased  by 0.22 kg day"'' while  on concentrates  ad libitum  the decrease  was similar  at 
0.16 kg day"''. While the relationship  between  liveweight  and carcass  weight  gains  before  
and after 105 days  did not follow a consistent pattern,  it is clear  that the decline  in carcass  
weight gain with time was proportionately  less than the decline in liveweight  gain. 
Averaged  over the three concentrate  treatments  (i.e. the commercially  relevant  feeding  
levels)  mean liveweight  gain was 0.37 kg (32 %) lower  in the period  after 105 days than 
earlier. The corresponding  decline  in carcass  weight  gain was 0.13 kg (20 %).
92
Table  5. Performance  of finishing  steers  by feeding  level and period
Silage
onlySilage  + 
low cone.Silage  + 
high cone.Cone.
Ad Lib.Mean’
Liveweight  gain (kg day'^)
Start to 105 days 0.23 0.98 1.17 1.35 1.17
105 to 174 days 0.24 0.78 0.77 0.86 0.80
Carcass  gain (kg day"’)
Start to 105 days 0.12 0.52 0.67 0.79 0.66
105 to 174 days 0.14 0.52 0.45 0.63 0.53
Carcass  as % of liveweight
Start to 105 daysgain
54.2 52.4 57.2 58.7 56.1
105 to 174 days 56.6 67.2 57.9 73.7 66.3
1 Excluding  silage  only treatment  as not commercially  relevant.
Slaughter  weight  ranged  from 496 to 613 kg at 105 days and from 513 to 651 kg at 174 
days (Table  6). Corresponding  carcass  weight  ranges  were 251 to 329 kg, and 264 to 
361 kg. Kill-out  ranged  from 506 to 523 g/kg at 105 days and from 514 to 543 g/kg at 174 
days.
Table  6. Slaughter  traits of finishing  steers  after two finishing  periods
Slaughter  weight  (kg)
After 105 days 496 573 599 613 595 
After 174 days 513 634 653 665 651 
Carcass  weight  (kg)
After 105 days 251 291 311 329 310 
After 174 days 264 334 346 361 347 
Kill-out  (g/kg)
After 105 days 506 508 518 523 516 
Mer 174 days 514 527 530 543 533Silage Silage  + Silage  + Cone,  
only low cone, high cone. Ad Lib.Mean
Excluding  silage  only treatment  as not commercially  relevant.
Effects  of diet mixing  on finishing  performance
Feed mixer wagons  are now commonplace  on cattle farms. They have many  
advantages,  but it is unclear  if mixing  as compared  with separate  feeding  of the same 
feeds improves  performance.  To examine  this finishing  steers (mix of Charolais  x 
Friesians  and Belgian  Blue x Friesians)  were fed silage  plus concentrates  separately  or 
by mixer  wagon. Two levels of concentrates  were used, namely  3 and 6 kg DM dayT  
The mix was adjusted  weekly  to ensure  that those  fed the mixed  diet consumed  the same 
quantity  of concentrates  as those fed the ingredients  separately.  The duration  of the 
finishing  period was 132 days and 72 animals  (18 per treatment)  were used. The 
rationale  for examining  the effects  of mixing  at two concentrate  levels  was the possibility
93
that there may be an effect at the high but not at the low concentrate  level. This could  
arise if the higher level of concentrates  tended  to cause digestive  upsets  when fed 
separately.  The concentrates  were fed once daily to the separate  treatment  groups.  
Mean  daily concentrate  intakes  were 3.0 and 5.8 kg, and were the same  (as intended)  for 
the separate  and mixed  feeding  treatments.  The animals  fed the mixed  ration  consumed  
0.3 to 0.4 kg day-i more silage  and consequently  more total DM. This difference,  while  
statistically  significant was  small in practical  terms. Liveweight  and carcass  weight  gains  
were higher  for the high concentrate  level but there was no effect of mixing at either  
concentrate  level (Table 7). There was an effect of concentrate  level on all slaughter  
variables  except  conformation,  but there was no effect of mixing  on any variable. It is 
concluded  that mixing of silage and concentrates  had no effect on any parameter  of 
performance  or carcass  traits compared  to separate  feeding  of the same  ingredients.
Table 7. Diet mixing  and performance  of steers
Concentrates Low High
Method'' S M S M
Liveweight  gain (g day') 862 860 1022 1002
Carcass  gain (g day') 585 576 711 678
Slaughter weight  (kg) 653 652 674 671
Carcass  weight  (kg) 352 351 369 364
Kill-out  (g kg"') 539 538 547 543
Conformation 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.8
Fat score 3.4 3.3 3.6 3.7
Kidney  + channel  fat^ 36 36 37 39
= Silage  and concentrates  fed separately,  M = Total Mixed Ration;  ^g kg‘i carcass.
Pattern  of concentrate  supplementation
With the advent  of premia  payable  at a fixed age rather than weight,  and stipulated  
retention  times, flat rate feeding  of concentrates  was too inflexible  and could lead to 
animals  being under finished  or over fat. Accordingly,  more flexible  approaches  were  
examined.  The most extreme  of these  involved  delaying  the introduction  of concentrates 
for about  2 months,  then building  up gradually to  maximum  intake,  and thereafter  offering  
concentrates  ad libitum  to slaughter.  This was designated  ADLB as opposed  to the 
standard  flat rate approach  which  was designated  FLAT A summary  of all the data for 
the FLAT and ADLB  comparisons  is shown  in Table 8. On average,  the ADLB  animals  
consumed  more concentrates  and less silage. Due to their slightly  higher  concentrate  
intake,  liveweight  and carcass  weight  gains  were slightly  higher  for the ADLB  group,  and 
efficiency  of energy  utilization  was slightly  better. The small differences  in slaughter 
weight  and carcass  weight  were due to the difference  in gain.
Some  producer/processor  schemes  require  that animals  be fed on a high concentrate  diet 
for two to three months  before  slaughter  and that fat colour  is white rather  than yellow.  
The ADLB approach  should meet the requirements  of these schemes  without  any 
increase  in the total concentrate  input in the finishing  period.
94
Table  8. Performance  of steers  fed Flat or ADLB  patterns
FLAT ADLB
Silage 5.14 4.66
Concentrates 4.49 5.02
Slaughter  weight  (kg) 664 670
Carcass  weight  (kg) 346 352
Kill-out  (g kg"') 523 525
Conformation 2.59 2.70
Fatness 3.97 3.63
Kidney  + channel  fat (g kg"')' 50.1 42.7
■'Of carcass.
Delayed  introduction  of concentrates
Sometimes  winter-finished  animals  may not be targeted  for sale until late spring,  or a 
heavier  carcass  is desired  than that which results from a normal finishing  period.  
Alternatively,  it may be desirable  to finish animals  quickly,  ensuring  that level of fatness  is 
acceptable  at lighter  carcass  weights.  Both these alternatives  were explored.  Finishing 
steers  (mix of Friesians  and Charolais  x Friesians)  were offered:  (1) silage  plus a flat rate 
of 6 kg concentrates  per head daily (after a 3 weeks  adjustment  period)  for 154 days, (2) 
concentrates  ad libitum (after  a 4 weeks  adjustment  period)  to slaughter  after 104 days,  
and (3) silage only for 112 days followed  by concentrates  ad libitum  (after a 3 weeks  
adjustment  period)  to slaughter  after 196 days. The objective  was that all groups  would 
receive  the same total concentrate  allowance  and this was achieved.  Silage intake 
increased  with increasing  length  of finishing  period. Performance  data are shown  in Table  
9. Performance  on silage  only (for those  that received  silage  only for 112 days)  was quite 
good at 0.5 kg dayi. The performance  of the group fed silage plus a flat rate of 
concentrates  was also quite good at about 1.0 kg day'. The performance  of the group 
fed concentrates  ad libitum  from the beginning  was about  1.25 kg day'.
When  concentrates  were offered  ad libitum  to animals,  which  had received  silage  only for 
the previous  112 days, they gained  about  1.5 kg day' or about  0.25 kg day' more than 
those offered  concentrates  from the beginning.  There  was no difference  in mean daily 
liveweight  or carcass  gains between  the flat rate group and the delayed  introduction 
group. Efficiency  of energy  utilization  was best for the group offered  concentrates  ad 
libitum  from the start, but interestingly,  and contrary  to expectation,  efficiency  was better  
for the group  in which  concentrate  introduction  was delayed  than for the flat rate group.
95
Table  9. Performance  of steers  finished  on different feeding  patterns
Flat rate Cone.  Day 0 Cone.  Day 112
Days 0 to slaughter 0.98 1.24 0.95
On ad libitum  concentrates'' - 1.24 1.48
Slaughter weight  (kg) 634 623 668
Carcass  weight  (kg) 328 323 353
Kill-out  (g kg"'') 518 527 527
Conformation 2.17 2.33 2.50
Fatness 3.70 4.13 4.13
Kidney  + channel  fat (g kg"'')2 48.7 37.1 42.2
■'Including  the introductory  period;  ^Of carcass.
Slaughter  traits reflected  growth rates. Kill-out was similar for the two ad libitum  
concentrate  finished  groups  and higher  than for the flat rate group. Conformation  was 
better for the two ad libitum concentrate  finished  groups - particularly  the delayed  
introduction  group,  probably  because  of the greater  carcass  weight. Fat score  was higher  
for the two ad libitum  concentrate  finished  groups  but kidney  plus channel  fat scaled  for 
carcass  weight  was lower. The results  show  that the maximum  potential  finishing  gain of 
18-19  month old steers which have had good performance  at pasture  the previous  
season  is about  1.25 kg day"''. Delaying  concentrate  introduction  for 112 days increased  
performance  on ad libitum  concentrates  by about  0.25 kg day" ’' or about 16 g day'' per 
week delay in concentrate  introduction.  This higher  performance  was due in part to 
higher  intake.
Conclusions
Efficiency  is highest when  light cattle are fed for a high rate of gain. 
Response  to concentrates  declines  with increasing  concentrate  level.  
Performance  declines  with increasing  length  of finishing  period.  
There  was no advantage  to mixing  silage  and concentrates.  
Programmed  feeding  can aid management,  fatness  and colour.  
Performance  is a function  of animal  potential.
Delayed  concentrate  introduction  increases  sale weight.
96
Brazil  - The world ’s food producing  giant
John Shirley  
Irish Farmers'  Journal
Introduction
Food producers  of the old world of Europe  are under  threat  from the new world of South  
America.  Products  that are immediately  vulnerable  include;  -
• Beef
• Pork
• Poultry
• Sugar
Longer  term, milk and sheep  products  also look vulnerable.
Focussing  on beef, both in terms  of export  and home markets,  Irish beef is increasingly 
in competition  with South  American  beef, in particular  Brazilian  beef. Key output  figures  
from South  America  are outlined  in Table 1.
Table 1. Area, human  and cattle statistics,  
and the USA.Ireland  compared  with South  America
Area
(M/ha)Human
Pop'^
(Million)Cattle herd 
(Million/hd)Cattle
Slaughter
MillionExports
TonnesKill rate 
per 100
Brazil 855 176 167 40 890,000 24%
Argentina 279.1 36.6 49 13 300,000 26%
Uruguay 17.6 3.36 11.1 1.6 200,000 15%
USA 916 288 96 35 1,061,000 36%
Ireland 7 3.8 7 1 1.78 450,000 29%
This shows  that Brazil dominates  South  America  in terms  of land area, herd size and is 
fast overtaking  the US as the world ’s biggest  beef exporter.
More facts on Brazil
• At 167 million,  its cattle herd is double  that of the EU.
• Beef  exports  from Brazil have doubled  in the past 5 years.
• If stocked  at the same rate as Ireland,  Brazil  could carry four times  as many cattle  
Brazil is on the same latitude  as India, which has 7.3 times  the human  population.
Overall  South  America  is a vast area with fertile land, adequate  rainfall,  thinly populated, 
large farms,  very low costs and huge food production  potential.  Of the three countries, 
Brazil, Argentina  and Uruguay,  Brazil would seem to have the growing  ambition,  
organisation  and political  will to exploit  this potential. Indeed  the process  is already 
underway  in that in the past decade;
97
• Pork exports  have grown  from 100,000  to 500,000  tonnes.
• Beef  exports  have grown  from 400,000  to 900,000  tonnes.
• Poultry  exports  have grown  from 500,000  to 1,600,000  tonnes.
Timing  and coincidences
A number  of developments  have coincided  to increase  the threat  from Brazilian  beef;
• New  technology  giving 5 months  shelf life for South American  beef. This allows  
chilled  product  to compete  in the higher  priced  EU fresh beef market.
• Sharply  reduced  shipping  costs. Chilled  product  is transported  from Brazil  to the UK 
for 12 c/kg (4.8p/lb).
• An  effective  new Government  in Brazil  that has stabilised  the economy,  bringing  down  
inflation  to less than 10% and interest  rates to below  20%.
• Ambitious  plans  to reduce  the slaughter  age and increase  carcase  weight
• Flat rate tariffs on boneless  chilled beef, which facilitate  entry into the EU of high 
quality  beef cuts paying  full tariffs.
• New  WTO talks where South America  will look for freer entry into EU and other  
markets.
Already  the list of export  destinations  for Brazilian  beef reads like Ireland's  beef outlets
ten years  ago; Egypt.  Iran, Israel,  Algeria. In 2002 Brazil plans  to export  200,000  tonnes
of beef  to Russia  twice the Irish level.
Brazilian  strengths
Grassland,  because  of its tropical  climate  has the capacity  to produce  double  the dry 
matter  output  of the best Irish grassland.
Huge units of up to 200,000  suckler  cows in a herd. 1,000 plus herds  are common
Good research  and the adoption  of irrigation,  grass reseeding,  fertilisation  and 
rotational  grazing  technologies.  This is based  on 100 ha irrigation  circles  and one day 
paddocks  using electric  fencing.
Zebu cattle,  which  can match  a good continental  animal  in Ireland  for growth.
An average  cattle slaughter  age that is falling rapidly.
Farmers  who were selling  beef last April at €l/kg  carcase  weight  (36 p/lb) and still 
making  a profit. This has since increased  to 116 c/kg (41.4 p/lb).
Huge  tracts  of maize  and soya bean meal that, are the basis  of major  pork and poultry  
industries  and now beef feedlots  are starting  up as well.
Beef slaughter  plants  that can compete  with anywhere  in the world for hygiene  and 
cleanliness.  Otherwise  chilled  beef cuts with a guaranteed  five-month  shelf  life would  
not be feasible.
Provinces,  which  are free of FMD  without vaccination,  provinces  that are free of FMD 
with vaccination,  and provinces  of indeterminate  status. The latter are around  the 
Amazon  basin and do not carry many cattle.
Laws to deter the cutting  down of the rain forests  even if it is not always  possible  to
98
police  them.
Extremely  cheap  labour. The minimum  wage  is about  €60 per month,  which  is shortly 
to be increased  by 20%. In practice,  factory  floor wages  are reckoned  to be about  
€120  a month.
Brazilian  deficits
• Fears that the raging  inflation  that went as high as 2000%  in 1993 could return. In 
1999 1 Brazilian  Real approximately  equalled  a US Dollar. Last April the exchange 
rate was 3.4 Real to buy a Dollar. Today  the Real has hardened  to 3/$.
A reputation  of producing  tough beef, due to the breeds  of cattle and the age at 
slaughter.
Huge tracts  of the country  are badly served  with roads. It can often cost as much  to 
get the beef from the slaughter  point to the port, as it costs  from the port to Europe.  
A 7% VAT and rural fund tax which  the beef plants  collect  from cattle slaughtering.
Constant  fears of FMD - since the disease  is poorly policed in some of its 13 
neighbouring  countries.
Grassland,  which is based on C4 grasses  (like maize plants). These are less 
digestible  than the C3 temperate  grassland  varieties  in Ireland  et at.
A climate  that is mostly  too hot for the British  and European  beef breeds.
An inequitable  society  with a class  of huge landowners,  many  of whom  live and work  
in the cities, while gauchos  herd the cattle for little more than food and lodging.
While  the Government  has committed  Brazilian  farmers  to cattle tagging  this may be 
a long time coming.
Hormones  are discouraged  but probably  still used.
Brazilian  production  costs
With no accommodation  costs and little winter-feed  involved,  experts  compute  the cost of 
producing  a live kg of beef at between  30 and 40 c/kq depending  on fertiliser  use and 
supplementary  feeding.  A similar  all in figure  for the best farms in Ireland  is 125 to 140 
c/kg.
Poor  facilities  in Brazilian  meat  plants  - a myth?
As far as hygiene  is concerned,  some  of the Brazilian  meat plants  are way ahead  of most 
plants  in Europe.  They have  to be. They  are exporting  chilled  beef  to Europe,  with a four- 
month shelf life. Cattle are brought  into lairages  the day before  slaughter  to allow gut 
contents  to empty  out. As they go up the line for slaughter,  they are washed,  and the 
hindgut  is tied and sealed  on the line. Visitors  to these plants  change  all clothes  and wash 
hands  and boots  when changing  from factory  floor to floor.
Factories  pay for cattle 35 to 45 days post slaughter,  or else pay in the first week at a 
significant  discount.  Some plants  still buy cattle on liveweight  rather  than the carcase 
weight.
99
Table  2. Share  out of EU ‘Hilton ’ tariff  free quota into the EU July 1, 2002 to June  
30, 2003.
Country Tonnes
Argentina 38,000
USA 11,500
Australia 7,000
Uruguay 6,300
Brazil 5,000
Paraguay 1,000
New Zealand 300
Shipping  your  steak  from Brazil  for 5 cent
• A 40 ft container  carrying  25 tonnes  of frozen beef can be shipped  from Santos  in 
Brazil  to Tilbury  in England  for about  $2950  or $118 a tonne  or 11.8 US cents  a kg,
• The same container  filled with chilled  beef will only cost an extra $200. The chilled  
beef  cannot  be filled as closely  so that the weight  may be reduced  to about  23 tonnes.  
This works  out at about  $137 a tonne  or 13.7 US cents a kg. Translated  back to the 
steak  on your plate this is less than 5 cent.
Traceability
Cattle  are followed  through  in large batches  and by day of slaughter.  Farm units are so 
large that most farmers  will sell at least 100 cattle at any one time. These  100 cattle are 
treated  as a batch,  and travel  through  the slaughter and boning  halls in that single  batch.  
This batch is bar coded  and the beef  traceable  on that bar code. Since  July, farms  selling  
cattle have to tag animals  at least 40 days pre slaughter.
Tariffs  on EU beef imports  
Table  3. Tariffs  on EU beef imports
Carcase
Boneless  fresh/chilled  
Boneless  frozen1,738  euro/tonne  + 12.8% ’* 
3,034 euro/tonne  + 12.8%*  
2,211 euro/tonne  + 12.8%*
*Of declared  import  price.
Boneless  striploin  beef is available  FOB in Brazil  at €3,636/tonne  Add transport  costs  of 
about  €135/tonne  and include  tariffs; the cost of Brazilian  striploins  landed  in Ireland  is 
approximately €7,260/tonne  or€7.26/kg.  This is still €2/kg  less than the wholesale  price 
of best quality  Irish striploin  beef on the Irish market  in the summer  of 2003. Last April 
before  Brazilian  prices  improved,  the gap was €4/kg.
Lula ’s Success
Luis Ignatio  Lula Da Silva is a former  communist  leader,  and is now President  of Brazil.  
He has huge public  support  for a three-pronged  fiscal reform. These  are; -
100
• Giving autonomy  to the central  bank in Brazil to control  currency  matters  (already 
achieved).
• Reform  of the costly public  pension  system,  and removal  of civil servant  privileges  - 
this legislation  recently  enacted.
• Simplification  of tax code from 45 to 8 different  taxes.
The upshot  of the president's  economic success  and promise  of stability  is an upsurge  of 
interest  in investment  in Brazil  from at home  and abroad.
Latest  news from Brazil
Land and property  prices  rocketing  in settled  Brazil  - $2,000  a hectare.
Breakthrough  in pre-packing  beef for supermarkets  in Sweden  going well - 800g  
packs  (four containers  shipped  in the first two months  of this business).
Two phenomenal  years  for soya and sugar  cane.
Land for sugar  cane is now paying  for itself in one year - industry  now de-regulated.
Ex minister  for Agriculture  taken over as head of beef - great contacts  and 
professionalism.
Interest  rate down by 2.5% to about  22% Inter bank rate.
April FOB strips $2,350  to $2,500  a tonne. August  $4,000/tonne.
FQ boneless  $1,300/$1,400  a tonne in August,  $1,100  in April.
New legislation  for export  factories.  From July 15 all cattle to be tagged  or chipped,  
and held on farm for 40 days pre sale.
Irish companies  have a very high proportion  of the GATT  licences.
According  to Brazilian  sources,  the two biggest importers  in recent  months  have been  
Fair Oak Foods  and QK/Dawn  Meats.
Conclusions
• Ireland  cannot  compete  with Brazil  on commodity  beef
• Irish farmers  must target the EU beef customers  that are paying  premium  prices 
based  on 52-week  delivery  of consistent  young  beef reared  on grass  and finished  on 
meals. South  America  is less likely to compete  in this market.
• Commissioner  Fischler  has offered  an average  cut in import  tariffs  on the WTO round  
with less on sensitive  products  like beef The Irish beef market  cannot  absorb  any 
further  tariff cuts. An absolute  ceiling  on South  American  beef imports  into the EU is 
needed. Mr Fischler  has hinted  at this.
• A big investment  lies in producing  the suckler  calf In light of total decoupling  of 
premiums  the best prospect  for Irish beef farmers  lies in keeping  cows cheaply  on 
long grazing  seasons  with intensive  early finishing  of progeny.
101
Cattle  farming  after Fischler
Bernard  Smyth
Chief  Beef  Adviser,  Teagasc,  Grange
Introduction
In considering  the impact  of the Fischler  changes  to the CAP, the most recent  data on 
cattle farm incomes  from the National  Farm Survey  and from Teagasc  Drystock  Monitor  
Farms  for 2002 has been examined.  This facilitates  the examination  of income  levels  on 
cattle  farms  and more  importantly  the components  of income  and the differences  bet\ween  
the top and bottom  farms  on the basis of technical  efficiency.  Gross  margin  per hectare  
excluding  premium  is an excellent  financial  measure  of technical  efficiency  and will be a 
very important  figure  in determining  farm income  post Fischler  and decoupling.
Fischler assumptions
It is assumed  that from 2005, the total decoupling  of premia  from animals  will be the 
decision  taken in Ireland. This will provide  freedom  to farm without  the existing  premia  
rules of retention  dates, age eligibilities  for application  and operating  at a particular  
stocking  rate to maximise  extensification  payments.  Production  systems  after Fischler  
will therefore  have to be financially  efficient,  and will need to produce  a gross margin  
excluding  premium  to justify  their existence.  If a system  cannot  generate  a margin  over 
feed, veterinary  and marketing  costs, then it is making  no contribution  to farm overhead  
fixed costs  and will be eroding  the single  farm payment  even before  the deduction  of fixed 
costs from the single  farm payment.  Production  systems  that will prosper  post Fischler  
will be generating  a high gross  margin  and this will be achieved  by high levels  of technical  
efficiency  combined  with selling  into premium  EU markets  at premium  prices. Beef price 
in Ireland  compared  with mainland  EU beef price and animal  transport  regulations  will 
determine  whether  animals  are exported  live or as carcass  beef. Cross compliance  
issues  that will require  land to be kept in a good agricultural  condition  will encourage  
farmers  to stay farming  and should  be compatible  with efficient  Irish cattle farming.
Cattle  farm incomes  2002
The national  farm survey  for 2002 shows  that 51% of Irish farms  have cattle as the main
enterprise,  and they farm on average  27 ha generating  on average  €322 family farm 
income  per ha. The larger  cattle farms  that require  at least 0.75 labour  unit account  for 
8% of Irish farms,  farm 56 ha and earn an average  €390 per ha. Premia  account  for over 
100%  of family  farm income  on cattle farms.
Table 1 looks at gross  margin  per livestock  unit excluding  premium  for two cattle systems  
on soil group  2 from the 2002 national  farm survey  for the bottom  25%, middle  50% and 
top 25% of farmers.
102
Table 1. Gross  margin  per Livestock  Unit (excluding  premium)
System  (No Farms) Bottom  25% Middle  50% Top 25%
Single  suckling  (195) €62 €106 €223
Mixed  production  (173) €22 €116 €287
Source:  - National  Farm Survey  2002 - Comparative  Analysis  (Gerry  Quinlan)
With full decoupling  many of the farms in the bottom 25% will need to modify  their 
production  system  and/or  improve  efficiency  in order to  produce  a positive  gross  margin.
Table 2 examines  gross margin excluding  premium  per hectare  for Teagasc  Monitor 
Farms  (plus  other  farms  with drystock  profit  monitor  completed  for 2002). This table looks  
at farms  by system  and groups  by top third, average  or bottom  third.
Table  2. Gross  margin  - € /ha (excluding  premium)
Suckling  (56) Non Suckling  (42)
Top 1/3 €490 €366
Average €301 €107
Bottom  1/3 €89 -€134
Source:  - Teagasc  Drystock  Profit Monitor  Analysis  2002 - Monitor  Farms
Farms  at suckling  have on average  a much higher  gross  margin  excluding  premium  than 
farms  buying  weanlings  or stores  for finishing  - €301 per ha compared  with €107  per ha 
respectively.  In addition  the top third at suckling  are much  better  than the top third without  
suckler  cows - €490 per ha compared  with €366 per ha. Even the bottom  third at 
suckling  are achieving  about  €100 per ha while the bottom  third without  sucklers  are in 
negative  gross  margin  excluding  premium.  Table  2 tells us that suckling  is a more secure 
system  and has a higher  potential  gross margin  pre Fischler.  This would  be especially 
true for suckling  system  selling  weanlings  or stores  before  claiming  male special  beef 
premium.
Wth full decoupling  post Fischler,  male animals  will not have the high premia  potential 
value attached  and would be expected  to reduce  in value somewhat,  but this could be 
offset  to some  extent  by an increase  in value  of heifers.  On balance  this is likely  to reduce 
the potential  gross margin  excluding  premium  for suckling,  which can only be offset at 
farm level through  efficiency  improvements  with existing  cow numbers  or adding  the few 
extra cows that will be allowed  with the removal  of premia  stocking  rate restrictions.
For non-suckling  systems  a somewhat  reduced  raw material  price for male animals  post 
decoupling  should improve  potential  to increase  gross margin excluding  premium. 
However,  there is a need for an increased  beef price plus efficiency  improvements  if all 
efficient  farms at this system are to achieve  a worthwhile  gross margin excluding 
premium.  Table 3 compares  suckling  and non-suckling  farms in more detail looking  at 
output,  costs and premia  per hectare.
103
Table  3. Summary  - Drystock  Profit  Monitor  Analysis  by system  - 2002
Suckling  (56) Non Suckling  (42)
Farm size (Adj. ha) 59 53
Stocking  rate (LU/ha) 1.91 1.62
Output  Excl Pr/ha €745 €552
Variable  costs/ha €444 €442
Gross  margin  (excl pr) €301 €107
Premia/ha €693 €782
Fixed costs/ha €455 €424
Profit/ha €539 €464
Premia  retained  as profit (%) 81% 61%
Source: - Teagasc  Drystock  Profit Monitor  Analysis  2002 - Monitor  Farms
Premia  retained  as profit is lower on non-suckling  farms,  as some  of the potential  premia  
receipts  are bid into the male animals  at purchase.  Stocking  rate on the non-suckling  
farms  is significantly  lower  than suckling  farms  and has significant  potential  for increase  
once premia  stocking  rate restrictions  are removed  post Fischler.
Options  post Decoupling
With premia  retention  as profit only amounting  to 60 - 80 % on efficiently  run monitor  
farms,  the first question  post decoupling  is whether  to keep cattle at all, or de-stock  and 
collect  the single farm payment?  Total de-stocking  will allow for significant  reduction  in 
variable  costs and the possible  elimination  of total variable  costs if it were not for cross  
compliance  costs. Without  cattle,  fixed cost savings  will only be possible  with machinery  
running  and interest  costs, and overall  savings  in fixed costs with de-stocking  will be 
small The single farm payment  post decoupling  will suffer a reduction  due to the 
deduction  for national  reserve  and modulation  cut, plus a further  possible  cut if the sum 
of individual  entitlements  exceed  the national  quota  - in total this could amount  to a cut of 
8 -10%.
Table 4. Profit post Fischler  with no cattle on 50 ha (based  on Drystock  Profit  
Monitor  Analysis  for 2002)
Monitor  Farms  2002 With no production  post 
Fischler
Output  from production €33,500 €0
Premia €36,500 €33,000
Output  including  Pr €70,000 €33,000
Variable  costs €22,500 €5,000
Fixed costs €22,500 €12,500
Profit €25,000 €15,500
Despite  significant  savings  in variable  costs and fixed cost savings,  ceasing  production  
will result  in a major  fall in farm profit as can be seen in table 4.
104
How extensively  should  you farm?
Cattle  farms  with the highest  stocking  rate pre Fischler,  did not always  enjoy  the highest 
income  per ha as additional  premia  as extensification  made more extensive  systems 
more profitable  in some  situations.  However  within  the more  efficient farms  (as shown  by 
Teagasc  Monitor  Farms)  the top third achieved  €18,000  more profit on 50 ha compared 
with bottom  third - see table 5.
Table 5. Farm profit and stocking  rate pre Fischler  (based  on Drystock  Profit  
Monitor  Analysis  2002
Data for 50 ha Farm
Top 1/3 Bottom  1/3
Stocking  rate (LU) 
kg Beef liveweight  produced  
Value  of output102
33,300
€45,75075
23,500
€20,550
Value  of extra output  on Top 1/3 
Less premia  on Top 1/3 
Extra costs on Top 1/3
Extra profit on Top 1/3€25,200
-€3,500
-€3,650
€18,050
The extra profit for the top third was achieved  due to better stocking  rate and animal 
performance  resulting  in higher  beef output  per ha combined  with a better  selling  price  
due to better  quality.
Production  System
Tables  2 and 3 demonstrated  that non breeding  systems  were achieving  a lower  gross 
margin  excluding  premium,  and unless  price  differentials  between  stores  and beef  change 
significantly  many non breeding  farms will have to consider  starting  a breeding  herd to 
supply  at least some of the raw material  for beef production.  Systems  finishing  animals 
in the Spring  after an expensive  indoor  winter  had the benefit  of a 21 month  special  beef 
premium  (and possible  extensification  premium)  to subsidise  the finishing  winter  up to 
now, and this helped  to ensure  supplies  of beef in the first 6 months  of the year. Post 
decoupling,  systems  with high cost winter feeding  will only be justified  with a price  
premium  for out of season  production  - greater  seasonality  of beef supply  is likely post 
Fischler Poorer  quality animals  are likely to depend  on 3rd country  markets  and 
commodity  beef prices which will be less attractive  - this could see a greater  price  
differential  between  high yielding  well conformed  animals  suited  to best EU markets  and 
poorer  quality  beef animals.
Increases  in the scale  of operation  will be possible  for some  individuals  post Fischler,  and 
this will present  the possibility  of increased  profit through  increased  stocking  rate and/or  
greater  spreading  of fixed costs. With decoupling  the 1.4 and 1.8 LU/ha stocking  rate 
ceilings  will be removed  as well as the 180 head limit for special  beef premium.  Farms  
with low stocking  rates or with no cattle could possibly  take cattle in for grazing  in order  
to ensure  their land is kept in a good agricultural  condition  - this could provide  cheap  
feeding  for other  cattle farmers  with cattle.
105
Conclusions
Since  most of the fixed costs  and some  variable  costs  will remain  on farms  that de-stock,  
there will not be an Incentive  to abandon  production  post decoupling.  The incentive  to 
farm will be to generate  a positive  gross margin  excluding  premium,  which will make a 
contribution  to covering  all, or part of fixed costs, thereby  safeguarding  the maximum  
amount  of the single  farm payment  as profit. Some cattle farms  in the bottom  25% will 
change  systems  and improve  efficiency  while some will exit production.  Technically  
efficient  farms in the top 25% achieving  a good gross margin  excluding  premium  will 
intensify  and expand.
It will be essential  to exploit  premium  markets,  combined  with production  and marketing  
efficiency  through  more partnership  involvement  with farmers  and beef processors.  
Seasonality  issues  will have to be resolved  through  partnerships.  Breeders  and finishers  
of quality  beef animals will  have  to be rewarded  with improved  prices  and a closing  of the 
gap between  Irish and EU beef prices. The price differential  between  weanlings/stores 
and beef  will determine whether  animals  are finished  in Ireland  or exported  live. Detailed  
and ongoing  financial  analysis  will remain  important  for all cattle farms to help identify  
strengths  and weaknesses  of the business.
Obtaining  the maximum  contribution  from grazed grass will help dilute unit cost of 
production  and is our greatest  asset on Irish cattle farms. Based on performance  on 
monitor  farms in 2002, many technically  efficient  farms have a target gross margin  
excluding  premium  of up to €500/ha  to aim for. With the lifting of some restrictions  on 
stocking  rate post  Fischler  this target can be further  increased  on good farms  in the future.
106
Report  on Irish Grassland  Association  Study  Tour  to New
Zealand  2003
i) Best  New Zealand  Farming  Practices  - Finance
Michael  Brady, Michael  Kelly, Bryan Daniels  and Noel Bowen
Financial/future  planning/goal  setting
The entire management  of the farm business  (both financial  & physical)  is focused  on 
increasing  net worth. There  exists  a concept  of 'backward  budgeting'  i.e. a % return on 
capital  of 15% is targeted,  and management  decisions  are influenced  accordingly.  Farm  
business  can grow by: -
• Maximising  economic  farm surplus  (net profit);
• Capital  appreciation.
There  is a career  structure  in dairy farming,  which  drives  the farmer  to increase  his equity,  
and focuses  on business  goals, e g.
• Education,
• Contract  milker,
• Share  milker,
• Farm owner  and/or  equity  partner,
• Business  owner,
• Retire.
The following  factors  have greatly  increased  net worth (equity):
• Increased  capital  appreciation  of land and milk shares  in recent  years has enabled 
leverage  of farm business  assets  to fund new farms  or off farm investments.
• Farmers  are very mobile  in the pursuit  of increased  net worth. They are prepared  to 
move home 3-4 times in a lifetime.
• Farmers  are prepared  to upskill  e.g. "strategic  planning".
• There is an ability  to focus on the 'bigger  picture ’ rather than focusing  on excellence 
in one area of interest  or importance.
• KISS principle  (Keep  it stupidly  simple)  drives  the NZ attitude.
'Ultimately  the business  direction  must head toward  your life goals ’.
Budgeting/monitoring/ana  lysis
A financial  budget  is the basis of ensuring  financial  goals  are achieved.  A budget  is done 
'on farm ’ and monitored  monthly  by a programme  called Cashmanger.  Consultants  
encourage  farmer  to do the budget  themselves,  so as to ensure  ownership  of the budget 
plan. If a farm is over budget,  the concept  is to 'take it from some place  else’.
It is suggested,  "farmers  are bad profit takers ”. There are KPI (Key Performance 
Indicators),  which are monitored  regularly.  Throughout  the year the bank is presented 
with the "budget  V actual"  reports  to keep  them up to date on the farm business,  cash flow 
and general  progress.  This ensures  that the bank manager  has no end of year surprise.
107
Conclusion
Single  focus  on Net Worth.
KISS principle  (Keep  it Stupidly  Simple).
Challenge  the concept  of retaining  equity  tied up in the family  farm.  
Farmers  should  become  better  profit  takers.
Farmers  should  do their own budget.
Farm business  direction  must head toward  your life goals.
ii) Breeding  and Fertility  Management
Sean O’Meara,  Richard  Meehan,  Matt Phelan  and Donal  Harte
Introduction
Aspects  of breeding  and fertility management  are discussed  under the following  
headings,  fertility  management,  breeds and  crossbreeding,  minerals  and 'cost of service  '.
Fertility  management
While there were some variations  and the odd exception  the following  procedure  was 
practised.
Tail painting  began  one month  before  AB (Al) commenced.  Heat detection  commenced  
from this same date. (On detection  the paint colour  is changed).  Cows not observed  
cycling  in weeks  1 to 3 receive  CIDR’ s. (While  CIDR's  are widely  used at present,  farmers  
visited  were looking  at alternative  ways of getting  cows to cycle). This was one week  
before breeding  began which means  that most of these cows cycled early in the AB 
season. While not widely  used, Kaymar  ($1.80  each) were applied  when A B. began.  
Cows are observed  up to four times per day with paint being topped  up daily where  
Kaymars  were not used. AB was used for four to five weeks,  followed  by stock bulls for 
four to five weeks  - 3 bulls to 100 cows
Bulls were removed  nine weeks  into breeding  season Note - bulls were sometimes  
leased  for $350 each. Submission  rates in the herds visited  was over 90% with a non­
return rate of 60 to 65 for first service (Note LIC’s figures  for calves  born to first service  
throughout  NZ were 50%).
Once  a day milking. Cows  not cycling  in the first three weeks  of observation  were put on 
to once a day milking  with most cows cycling  normally  within  three  weeks.
Flushing.  Cows  put on a higher plan of nutrition  prior to start of AB by tight grazing  during  
the first rotation  and lax grazing  during  the second
Culling  of cows that do not cycle early in the breeding  season  i.e not submitted  for AB. 
Another  fertility management  tool used in NZ is - Induction.  This is where  late calvers  are 
induced  to calve at the start of the calving  season  (6fi months  pregnant)  and so have a 
better  chance  of going in-calf  early the following  season,  but this is being phased  out.
108
Heifers  that are normally  grazed  on runoff  (out farms)  were bulled by Jersey  stock bulls 
and all calves  were sold off.
Two variations  on the above  deserve  mention.
i) Tail painting  and observation  began  only ten days pre AB. Then ten days Into AB non 
cycling  cows can be CIDR'd  or put on once a day milking  so that over 95% of cows 
are AB’d in first three  weeks. This system  is very good where  labour availability  is an 
issue.
ii) Cows were tail painted  the day before  AB started  and only observed  leaving  the 
milking parlour  - intensive  observations.  Bulling cows were taken out and kept 
separate  until the next milking  (to minimise  ground  damage).  The advantage  is that 
it cuts down on observation  time, but an extra person  is needed  at milking  for four to 
six weeks  to observe  and draft these  cows.
Conclusion
Fertility  management  would  rank as the second  most important  task on any NZ dairy farm,  
not far behind  grass management.  In many ways the two are tied together  as they 
manage  the grass  to assure  that there is an ample  supply  just prior  to breeding  the cows.  
Extra labour  is employed  at breeding  time to ensure  that the task is completed  efficiently.  
However  taking all other factors into consideration,  (including  their bull and cross 
breeding  programs)  the single  biggest  reason  why NZ dairy herds  calve more compactly  
than comparable  dairy herds  in Ireland,  is the use of induction  to calve late calvers  early.  
It reduces  their calving  season  by about  30% and if used here to the same  extent  could  
reduce  our calving  season  by up to 50%. It will be interesting  to see how they will manage 
when induction  is banned  and if as some  farmers  are starting  to do, culling  the late calves 
will lead to more fertile  cows in the future.
Breeds  and crossbreeding
The most notable  aspect  of the NZ breeding  policy is the breeding  out of the Holstein- 
Friesian  blood In the Friesian  herd, and the use of the Jersey  breed  in crossbreeding  with 
the Friesian  cow.
When  deciding  what bulls to use on their herd, NZ dairy farmers  are happy  to use the bull 
of the day (fresh semen). These bulls will have a high BW (breeding  worth),  which is 
heavily  weighed  towards  the production  of milk solids. All bulls selected  for AB testing  are 
from cows that have calved  in the first four weeks  of the breeding  season. In order  to 
keep BW and Genetic  Merit high, only heifers  by AB sires  whether  Friesian  or Jersey  are 
being bred back into dairy herds.
Genetic  evaluations  conducted  by Bill Montgomery  (LIC),  where  Jersey  bulls are crossed 
with Friesian  cows are showing  a marked  improvement  in hybrid  vigour  (heterosis).  The 
Friesian  X Jersey  crossbred  animals  are easier  to calve,  have  better  feet, are much  lighter  
and so easier  on the land in bad weather.  It is believed  that Jersey  and Jersey cross  cows 
are the most  efficient  converters  of feed into milk solids,  which  suits the payment structure 
of the NZ dairy system. Problems  that farmers  are faced  with cross  breeding  are what  to 
cross back on the crossbreed  in order to continue  the rate of improvement.  At the 
moment  there is mixed  opinion  on this with some  farmers  opting  for the Jersey  again,  and 
others  selecting  on the appearance  of the first cross  cow. The downside  for Irish farmers
109
in crossbreeding  Jerseys  with Friesian  is the loss in calf value, which is not an issue in 
NZ as calf prices  are low and the loss of income  from selling  replacement  stock  which  is 
a significant  part of many Irish farmers  income.
Conclusion
Having  studied  the results  of the crossbred  NZ herds,  it was concluded  that there is little 
difference  between  the infertility  of the Irish/British  Friesian  or NZ type herds,  and their NZ 
counterparts  (based  on LIC/Dexcel  figures). Empty  rates for NZ herds range from 4 to 
18%, which is definitely  achievable  in Ireland.
Comment
New Zealand  dairy farmers  receive  their milk solids results within 24 hours of milk 
collection,  which is a huge management  tool in relation  to herd nutrition  during  the vital 
breeding  season. Over 90% of dairy farmers  in NZ milk record  which leads to a very 
reliable  1®^ proof  for all the bulls of the day, and helps  to fast track genetic  improvement.  
Since  almost  all farmers  raise replacements  byAB  bulls only, the AB technicians  are able 
to check  the breed  of every  cow with the aid of a computer  handset  so as to avoid close  
breeding.  All AB is done by technicians.  This is one job less to do for farmers,  something  
we cannot  financially  justify  doing in Ireland  because  of our  poor breeding  policy.
Minerals
In NZ, minerals  are administered  in various  ways, e g. through  the water, dusting  
paddocks,  or oral drench. Cows are blood tested (1 in 80) for deficiencies  prior to 
breeding,  and where possible  if a deficiency  is detected,  minerals  are administered  
through  the water. In severe  cases, animals  are drenched  daily during the breeding  
season  with copper,  magnesium  and also drenched  for bloat. Where  there is no major  
problem,  paddocks  are dusted  for staggers  (grass  tetany).
Conclusion
It would appear  that heavy  doses  of individual  minerals  are being administered  without  
due regard  for the effect  on the overall  balance  of minerals  in the cows system.
Cost of Service
As previously  referred  to, due to the structure  in place for proving  young bulls and the 
whole  bull of the day scheme,  the cost of AB to NZ farmers  is quite low at $15 - $17 per 
head (€8 - €10). New Zealand  dairy farmers  use a percentage  of test bulls on their 
herds  at a cost of $4 - $5 (€2 - €3) per service.
Conclusion
There  is major  potential  for Irish dairy farmers  to increase  profitability  through  improved  
breeding  and fertility  management.  However,  the Irish breeding  industry  has to make  
major improvement  in its structures  for this to be achieved.  Farmers  can change  from
110
using Holstein-Friesian,  low protein  bulls to imported  bulls that suit their systems.  If we 
had our own proven  BW bull pool and using trained  technicians  we could further  reduce  
our Al and labour  costs.
Over 90% of NZ dairy farmers  milk record,  so bulls can be proven  very quickly,  but they 
have to record  only twice a year to satisfy  the requirement for proving  test bulls. The low 
cost of only recording  twice  a year  would  attract  far more Irish farmers to use test bulls on 
their herds and this would be a first step on the road to improving  our whole breeding 
industry.
It would be a major step forward  to have our own selection  of high EBI (BW) bulls to 
choose  from (as they have in NZ) instead  of having  to use imported  semen  at a high cost 
to help improve  Irish breeding  and fertility  management.
iii) Industry  and Structures
Tim O’ Leary, Nicholas  Kelly and John O’Sullivan
Introduction
The industry  and its structures  are examined  under three  headings,  equity  partnerships,  
share  milking  and the dairy  industry
Equity  partnerships
Equity  partnerships  are used by NZ farmers  to expand  their business  in dairying  since 
land prices  have risen so much in recent  years. There  is also an attitude  that the 50:50 
share milking  system  is currently  too generous  to the sharemilker.  With low milk prices,  
the value of land and milk shares  is not adequately  paid for. An equity partnership  is 
where  a number  of people  pool resources  to invest in a business  venture,  e g. a dairy 
farm. The critical components  involved  in such a partnership  are based on a written 
agreement  with each party having  equal voting  rights irrespective  of shareholding.  This 
agreement  is normally  of a 3 to 5 year duration  with a sunset  clause,  i.e. at the end of the 
agreement  the partners  can decide  to continue,  re-structure,  or cash in. The shares  in 
the partnership  are tradable  with the consent  of all partners  either to a third party or more  
likely  the other  partners  will buy out a retiring  member.  The most suitable  arrangement  is 
where one partner  is working  the farm, as a manager  as this leads to hands on 
involvement.  In order  to secure  the right person  to work the farm equity  could be secured 
on his behalf  by one of the other partners. Strict budgets  are done annually  for the 
business  and there  is regular  reporting  to all partners.  Partnerships  are run as a company  
and pay tax @ 33%. There  is no capital  gains  tax in NZ and this makes  capital  growth  a 
very attractive  way of increasing  wealth,  which is probably  what, really drives equity  
partnerships.
Share  milking
Share  milking  is part of an established  system  in NZ for people  with ability  to enter  dairy 
farming.  People  get their first foot on the ladder by contract  milking  cows. This is where  
they develop  their managerial  skills and build up some capital. The next step is for the
111
person  to buy cows and enter a share milking  agreement.  The most common  share  
milking  agreement  is a 50:50  one where  the farmer  owns  the land and buildings  and the 
share  milker  owns  and milks the cows. The proceeds  are divided  equally.  The final step 
is where  the share  milker  buys his own farm, has the cows  to stock it and is in business.
The industry
The three critical  components  of the dairy industry  in NZ are; Fontera  (milk processing  
and marketing),  Dexcel  (farm advice  and agri research)  and LIC. (Livestock  Improvement  
Corporation  for animal breeding  and performance  testing). These three industry  
branches  are all farmer  owned  co-ops,  funded,  controlled  and run by farmers.
Fonterra  was formed  in October  2001 by the amalgamation  of the NZ dairy board. Kiwi 
co-op and the NZ dairy group. A board of nine elected  farmer  shareholders  controls  
Fonterra,  elected  directly  from 13,000  co-op shareholders  plus 4 non-farming  directors.  
There  is also a shareholders  council  with forty-six  members  elected  by shareholders  in 25 
different  wards  throughout  NZ. This council  is completely  separate  from the board of 
Fonterra  with its own office management  and staff. Its principal  duty is to set the true 
share value of Fonterra  each year. It deals with milk complaints,  monitors  the board  
performance,  and disseminates  information  from farmers  to the board and vice versa.  
Fonterra  is now an established  major  player  on the world dairy market,  selling NZ dairy 
products  into 120 countries.  Its strategy  is quite simply to maximise  milk price and 
markets  for NZ dairy farmers.
Dexcel  is the main farm advisory  service  in NZ with both an advisory  and research  role. 
It Is a farmer  owned  co-op  funded  by a levy on milk sales. This gives all farmers  in NZ 
free access  to advisory  services,  normally  in the form of discussion  groups. It operates  
under  four principles:  -
• Plan for success;
• Feed for profit;
• Farming  for tomorrow;
• People  for dairying.
LIC is the main breeding  and herd performance-testing  co-op  in NZ. It herd tests 81% of 
all NZ cows and performs  77% of all A.I. Its scale allows  it to run an extremely  efficient  
progeny-testing  programme,  which provides  bulls ideally  suited  to the NZ dairy industry.  
LIC. also provides  a specialist farm consultancy  service  called  Farmwise  that farmers  pay 
for separately.  LIC is a co-op  whose  shareholders  are its users
112
iv) Grassland  Management
David French,  Ambrose  Rowe  and Donie  O Donovan
Introduction
Grass  is the engine  that drives  NZ dairy farmers  profits  and low cost. Consequently,  the 
management  of their grass  to maximise  growth  and utilisation  per hectare  is paramount. 
An essential  feature of efficient  grassland  management  Is the provision  of farm 
infrastructure  (see (v) below). Grassland  management  Is examined  under  a number  of 
headings:  -
• Stocking  rate;
• Grass  budgeting;
• Winter-feed  budgeting.
Stocking  rate
This varied  enormously,  ranging  from 2.8 to 4.1 cows per hectare.  It is affected  by: - 
Local growth  rates;
System  of wintering  stock,  whether  on home  farm or on an outside  farm;
Level of supplements  bought  onto farm;
Level of nitrogen  and soil fertility  (P+K);
Quality  of land;
Quality  of grass swards;
Ability  of farm manager;
The balance  between  per cow or per hectare  milk output
Thus, the very high stocking  rates could really be described  as cows per feed hectare,  
while the lower ones are cows per forage  hectare.  The following  target  drives  stocking 
rate calculation;  - 80 -90 kg of animal  liveweight  per t DM produced  or available.  For 
instance  if a farmer  grows 16 t grass DM/ha  and buys in 1.35 t DM supplementary  feed 
(maize,  meal, grass silage, hay etc), then there are 17.35 t DM feed available.  This 
means  the farm can carry 1561 kg of cows/ha,  calculated  by multiplying  17.35 by 90. 
Therefore,  this farmer  will aim to carry a stocking  rate of 3.47 cows/ha,  if each cow 
(average)  weighs  450 kg (1561/450).
Grass  budgeting
This is a 'must  do’ management  chore  on all farms. It takes  the form of a ‘spring  rotation  
planer'  or a computer  programme.  Measurement  Is achieved  by means  of a weekly  walk 
with a plate metre or eyeballing.  Some  large farmers  (200 - 400 ha) will eyeball  as they 
drive a quad or jeep through  the fields  because  of the time factor. Over  time each farmer  
will have established  individual  grass  cover  targets  for the critical  times - drying  off date]  
calving  down  date, and ‘Magic  day’, that is, when grass  growth  matches  animal  demand.
Budgeting  allows  farmers  to Identify  grass surpluses  and deficits  early. Surpluses  are 
either  saved  as pit silage,  wrapped  silage  (known  as gift-wraps),  hay or saved  for deferred
113
grazing. Deficits  are generally  dealt with in two ways, depending  on the system  of 
farming,  viz. -
Low input  system  per cow. - this option  involves  drying  off thin cows plus heifers,  selling  
cull cows and empties,  or ‘controlled  starvation’ . The principal  for the latter  being  to stick 
with the necessary  rotation  length  for the time of the year, taking  a ‘hit’ (loss)  on milk yield 
and body condition.
High input  system  per cow: - the basic  aim here is to maintain  yield and cow condition  by 
purchasing  supplements  or using home produced  pit silage.
Grass  budgeting  is so much  part of the NZ psyche  that little is recorded  in paper,  but grass  
is measured  weekly  so that the average  cover  can be compared  with targets,  which are 
known  to each farmer  from experience.
Winter-feed  budgeting
Since  winter-feeding  is the most expensive  part of the NZ system,  a lot of thought  is put 
into providing  winter  feed for the lowest  possible  cost. The options  are: - 
'Grazing  off’ - where  ‘winterage ’ is rented  from another  farmer  and cows are managed  
daily by the grazer  or the owner  of the cows. This costs €7 - 12/cow/week,  and can be 
very expensive  depending  on supply  and demand.
‘Run off’ - where  the herd owner  feeds  the cows as in ‘grazing off but has purchased  the 
necessary  land, even though  it is away from the home farm. Interestingly,  the daily 
allowance  is 13 - 14 kg DM/cow/day  depending  on land price, whilst it costs €12 - 
15/cow/week.
'Herd  House'  - where  feed is produced  on home  farm or forage  bought  in and fed ‘feed 
-lot ’ type from stand off pads. Cost varies,  but tractors,  feeders,  yards, slurry etc., are 
pushing  costs  very high.
‘Forage  crops ’ - stubble  turnips,  swedes,  kale, rape, and triticale  can be fed in situ with 
baled silage  or hay on the owner's  farm or on rented  ground.
Nitrogen  is regarded  as a supplement  and they use it to create  surplus  grass,  calculated  
at a yield rate of 10 kg grass DM/kg  nitrogen  used. Nitrogen  is used at the rate of 90 to 
240 kg/ha. Clover  seems  to be very scarce  on the ‘top’ farms.
Conclusions
Grass  and feed budgeting  plus high stocking  rates with judicious  use of nitrogen  drives  
high utilisation  of grass in NZ. Tight grazing  of the first rotation  and some topping  
maintains  quality grass. Wet weather  grazing  techniques  are essential  to minimise  
ground  damage  and maximise  grass utilisation.
114
v) Best Practices  New Zealand  - Farm Infastructure
Brendan  Meagher,  Billy Kennedy.  Michael  Kelly and Shane  Fitzgerald
Introduction
Infrastructures  on NZ dairy farms  will be investigate  under the following  headings:  -
• Cow tracks;
• Paddock  system;
• Milking  parlour;
• Milk collection;
• Calf and heifer  rearing.
Cow tracks
Considerable  thought  is invested  into the strategic  location  of roadways,  with a view to 
optimising  access  to all parts of the farm. The width of the roadway  is largely  dependent  
on herd size, e g. Alistar  Rayne  farm; 650 cows - the road was 10 m wide. Features  of 
all the roadways  inspected  were no sharp bends, a good camper  and generally  a 
satisfactory  surface. Cow flow to and from the parlour  was excellent  in most cases 
Roadways  were also generally  higher  on wet farms (used as stand-off  in wet weather)  
and on farms featuring  borderdyke  irrigation.  Most of the farmers  visited  placed  huge  
emphasis  on the slow movement  of cows on roadways  (good  stockmanship)  to minimise 
the amount  of lameness  In the herd.
Paddock  system
The paddock  systems  on all farms visited  were very impressive.  All paddocks  were 
numbered  and in most cases  of equal size as an aid to management.  Generally  there  
were two entrances  to each paddock  from the roadway,  and also access  between 
adjoining  paddocks.  Fencing  in general  was excellent  and shelterbelts  were a strong 
feature  particularly  on the South Island. Paddocks  were serviced  by centrally  located  
water  troughs  (360 gals) serviced  by 40 - 60 mm mains  (looped  system). Fligh output 
ballcocks  featured  on all troughs.
Milking  parlour
The majority  of parlours  visited  were herringbone.  Rotary  parlours  featured  strongly  on 
new conversions  on the South Island. The herringbone  parlours  were of a basic  design,  
curved romp rails, adjustable  breast rail etc. The drafting  systems  on both types of 
parlour  were simple  but very effective.  Cow  flow into and exiting  parlours  in all cases  was 
excellent  (no sharp  bends,  dark areas  etc). In the future  it is likely that the rotary  parlour  
will become  increasingly  popular  due to Its higher  output  and better  working  conditions, 
but they are twice as expensive.
Collection  yards were of either a circular  or rectangular  design, featuring  motorised 
backing  gates and in some  cases  automated  yard-washing  systems.
115
Milk collection
Efficient  milk collection  and co-ordination  was impressive.  High capacity  tankers,  well 
signposted  farms (Fonterra  Creamery  No XXX) and good access  to storage  tanks on 
farms (roundabout)  resulted  in extremely efficient milk collection.  The introduction  of GPS 
to help optimise  milk collection  runs is an interesting  new development.  Milk testing  is 
carried  out each day by an independent  milk testing  company  (covering  all of NZ). Test 
results  are made available  to each farmer  the following  day, informing  him of yesterdays  
fat and protein  percentages,  presence  of bacteria,  supply  comparison  with last year etc.
Calf and heifer  rearing
Calf rearing  systems  in NZ are designed  to be simple  and labour  efficient. Calves  are 
collected  from the calving  mob each morning  (and evening  if weather  is poor), navels  are 
sprayed  and calves  removed  to the calf house. Two litres of saved  colostrum  is fed in two 
feeds  per day for the first 10-14  days. Calves  are grouped  according  to age, bedded  on 
woodchips  or sawdust  (labour  saving  - no maintenance)  in open fronted  sheds. Calves  
have access  to pellets,  water  and hay/straw.
At two weeks  of age calves  are generally  turned  out to a sheltered  paddock  (additional  
shelter  is often provided  i.e. homemade  huts) and fed 3 - 4 I milk a day. Calves  are 
weaned  when target weights  have been reached  i.e. 70 kg for Jersey ’s, 90 kg for 
Friesians.  At this stage  calves  are generally  moved  off farm for rearing  until calving.  They  
graze  on a weight  gain contract or a per head  weekly  fee - the former being best. Maiden  
heifers  are generally  mated  to Jersey  bulls before  the main herd to facilitate  early and 
trouble  free calving. Target  weights  at calving  depend  on breed i.e. Jersey  400 kg, 
crossbred  450 kg and NZ Friesian  500 kg.
Conclusions
Infrastructures  and systems  on NZ dairy farms are designed  to be simple and 
uncomplicated  in order to maximise  labour  efficiency  and profitability.  Each labour  unit 
has a clearly  defined  role with involvement  in management  to varying  degrees. Each  
labour  unit on the most efficient  farms  can manage  approximately  200 cows, working  a 
60-hour  week  during  the calving  & breeding  season  and a 40-hour  week  for the remainder  
of the year.
The emphasis  is on working  efficiently  per hour rather than on the number  of hours  
worked.  The cornerstone  of the NZ dairy industry  is simplicity,  efficiency  and profitability.
116
