Irish Grassland 
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal  
1983
NO OTHER  PAPER  
gives the Farmer  so much  ... 
as THE
IRISH  \
FARMERS
JOURNAL
THE VOICE  OF IRELAND  S BIGGEST  INDUSTRY
Week after week over 100,000  farmers  read through  tht pages  
of the Journal.  They find it full of up-to-the-minute  
facts, features,  prices  and market  trends. It employs  the 
finest feature  writers,  leading  farming  experts,  skilled  
vets and legal and income  tax brains  to give Irish farmers  
a first-class  Newspaper.
Nowadays,  no wise farmer  would  be without  it . . . that ’s why 
more and more you'll hear the Journal  quoted  in farming  
circles. If you are not a reader  you're  missing  a lot.
ONLY  45p
(iiu-liidine  tax)EVERY  THURSDAY
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 17 1983
edited by 
Sean Flanagan
Printed  by Lithographic  Universal,  Dargle  Vale, Bray
N. Culleton
R. W. J. Steen 
N. E. Downey 
M. J. Drennan
P. Power
R. J. Moore  
J. J. Murphy
D. B. R. Poole 
P. F. J. van BurgCONTENTS
Page
The potential  of Italian  ryegrass  for silage  
production  3
Production  of young  beef at Hillsborough  12
Make the best use of worm drugs  15
Ammonia  treatment  as a method  of
improving  the feeding  value of straw and 
hay 24
Policy  and schemes  in relation  to the cattle  
and beef industry  31
A guide to export  markets  for steer beef 43
Silage for dairy cows — conservation  and 
method  of feeding  50
Trace  element  deficiencies  in the dairy  herd 60
Grassland  and dairy farming  in the 
Netherlands  68
Abstracts  76
COUNCIL  1983/1984
President : P. McCanna  
Vice-President : J. Flood
Council  Members :
M. Barlow,  D. Booth,  D. Browne,  D. Cashman,  J. Dardis,  M. Drennan,  
D. Fay, V. Flynn,  P. Gleeson,  J. Jennings,  J. Leeson,  D. MacCarthy,  
P. McFeely,  O. Manly,  M. Murphy,  W. Murphy,  P. O’Keeffe,  J. Roche.
Hon. Secretary  / Treasurer :
Dr. S. P. Flanagan,
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
The Potential  of Italian  Ryegrass  for 
Silage Production
N. CULLETON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
Traditionally  Italian  ryegrass  has been sown as a component,  and often  
a major component,  in general  purpose  mixtures.  In such mixtures  it 
performed  well for a few years at the expense  of the other grasses  and 
then tended  to die out leaving  an open, poor sward. As a result Italian  
ryegrass  became  unpopular  as a variety. Nowadays,  if it is included  in 
a permanent  mixture,  it is only at the rate of 3-4 lbs/acre  at most.
The importation  of Italian  ryegrass  reflects  this trend as shown  in Table
1. The reason  why its use has not declined  further  is that nowadays  an 
increasing  proportion  is being  sown  as a monoculture  and being  managed  
as a specialist  crop.
Table 1
Tonnage  of imported  Italian  ryegrass
1966-  1970 
1978 - 1979 
1980-  1981 
1981 - 1982950 tonnes  annually  
800 tonnes 
600 tonnes  
700 tonnes
Against  this background  work began  on Italian  ryegrass  at Johnstown  
Castle in September  1980, to evaluate  Italian  ryegrass  as a conservation  
grass grown  in monoculture.
There is a wide choice of cultivars  currently  available,  but most of 
them are not sufficiently  productive  in yield or in persistency.  On the 
Department  of Agriculture ’s list (1) only 5 are recommended  as shown  in 
Table  2. The Danish  cultivars  lack persistency,  the Dutch  grass is rather
Table 2
Recommended  list of Italian  ryegrasses
Variety Heading  Date Yield* Persistency  1-9
Meritra 22 May 98 3
Dalita 24 May 93 3
Lemtal 24 May 100 3i
Delecta 26 May 95 21
Ninak 26 May 97 3
♦ DM yields are shown  as a % yield of the control,  Lemtal  (19.18  tonnes/ha).
3
suspect  in yield and the English  variety  ‘Delecta ’ tends  to suffer  from leaf 
diseases  at silage time. Thus,  the list is reduced  to two cultivars,  Lemtal  
and Meritra.
Meritra  was chosen  for the following  reasons  :
1. Yield and persistency  are nearly  as good as Lemtal.
2. Being a tetraploid,  its digestibility  at a similar  stage of growth  is 
slightly  better than Lemtal  and also the decline  in digestibility  after  
heading  is not quite as rapid as in Lemtal  (2).
3. It grows  a little earlier  in spring  than Lemtal.
Italian  ryegrasses  start to grow a few weeks  earlier  in spring  than the 
early perennials.  They do not head until 24 May. An early perennial  on 
the other  hand such as S24, heads  on 7 May.  Thus,  there  is a long interval  
in which  there is rapid growth;  this growth  is all vegetative  and therefore  
digestibility  remains high. Once flowering  commences  at the end of May,  
it continues  to flower  through  to September  and therefore  digestibility  is 
difficult  to maintain  during  this part of the year.
The first trial commenced  in late August  1980 and two management  
systems  were imposed  on it; a 5 cut and a 4 cut management  system.  
The dates of cutting  and the yields  are given in Table 3.
Table 3
Cutting  dates  and yields  of Italian  ryegrass  (kg DM/ha)  1st harvest  year
5 cut30 April  
441216 June 
563914 July 
216310 August 
194117 Sept.  
2456Total
16,611
4 cut10 May 
469229 June 
576710 August 
549017 Sept.  
2484Total
18,433
The yields were extremely  high; the 4 cut system exceeded  the 5 cut 
system  and the heaviest  cut in both systems  was in June.
The DMD  values  are given in Table  4. The 5 cut system  had higher  
DMD  values  than the 4 cut system. By early application  of nitrogen,  it 
was possible  to cut a good crop in late April and then take the major  cut 
in June. Despite  a heading  date of 24 May, it was possible  to delay this 
and therefore  to delay the decline  in digestibility  until the 2nd cut is 
taken in June.
Table 4
DMD  for 4 and 5 cuts of Italian  ryegrass  (1981)
Cut 1 Cut 2 Cut 3 Cut 4 Cut 5
5 cut 79.0 73.5 75.1 62.5 68.6
4 cut 76.4 70.2 61.4 67.0 —
Thus, both yield and quality  can be maintained  at a high level until 
mid-June,  by which time over 60% of the total is harvested  or a little 
over 10,000  kg DM/ha.  Subsequently,  yield declined  in the 5 cut system  
but quality  was maintained  until the 4th cut when it declined  to 62.5% 
DMD. Quality  and yield increased  in the final cut. In the 4 cut system  
high yields  were maintained  until August  although  the quality  was poor.  
The final cut was similar  in both systems.
In September  1981 a further  trial was commenced  and harvested  
during  1982. This trial consisted  of a comparison  between  a 5 and 3 cut 
system. The yields  and cutting  dates are given in Table 5.
Table 5
Cutting  dates and yields  of Italian  in first harvest  year (site 2) kg DM/ha
Date of cut 23 April  9 June 9 July 17 August 17 Sept. Total
5 cut 4337 4367 2027 2155 1049 13935
24 May 9 July 17 Sept. Total
3 cut 7513 4357 4579 16449
The most notable  result is the reduction  in yield in both systems  from  
1981-1982.  Most of the differences  can be explained  by examination  of 
meteorological  data for the two years 1981 and 1982. Using a formula  
described  by Brereton  (3) it is possible  to relate growth  to accumulated  
soil moisture  deficits. In 1981 there were no soil moisture  deficits  but in 
1982 growth  rate for the second  cut in May and early June was seriously 
reduced  by drought.  Another  difference  in the two years was drought  
in late July and August.  While the drought  was common  to both years,  
it lasted  considerably  longer  in 1982 and again yields  in the 5th cut were 
considerably  less than in 1981.
Table 6
Accumulated  soil moisture  deficit  (ASMD)  and % reduction  in growth  rate due
to drought  in 1982
ASMD% Reduction  in 
growth  rate
April 1 0 0
2 20 0
3 44 14
May 1 46 17
2 51 22
3 54 25
June 11 51 22
Italian ryegrass  is susceptible  to drought  in terms of tillering,  leaf 
extension  and leaf appearance  (4) and this is confirmed  by the results  at 
Johnstown  Castle. Also, digestibility  values  in 1982 were lower than in 
1981. Because  of the drought  leaf appearance  was reduced,  yet the 
flowering  head still emerged.  This resulted  in higher  lignin and crude 
fibre levels and lower digestibilty.  It is concluded  therefore  that this 
crop should  not be grown  in land that is liable to serious  drought.
One of the main problems  with Italian  ryegrass  is the drop in yield  
over a 2-4 year period  and the lack of persistency.  Individual  plants  of 
Italian  tend to die out, leaving  the crop progressively  more open. Tradit ­
ionally  the approach  has been to plough  and reseed;  more recently  direct  
drilling  has been tried. Since these methods  can be expensive,  a third 
technique  is being  tested namely,  slurry  seeding  (5). After  the last cut of 
silage on 17 September  four treatments  were imposed  on the crop 
(Tab ’e 7).
Table 7
The tiller population/m^  of slurry  seeded  and non-slurry  seeded  plots
Established
Tillers New seedlingsTotal Tiller 
Nos.
Control 1875 14 (2%) 1893
Slurry 1423 18 (2.4%) 1441
Seed -f slurry mixed 1762 354 (48%) 2116
Seed + slurry applied 
separately1640 215 (24%) 1855
S.E. 168 41 168
There were 6,000 gallons  of slurry applied  per acre and this rate 
proved  high because  some of the existing  tillers were killed. The most 
successful  method  was mixing  the seed with the slurry,  where  354 plants/  
m’’ were established,  although  there was some success  where the seed 
and slurry  were applied  separately.  Yields  are given in Table  8.
Table 8
Yield kg DM/ha  of slurry  treated  and control  plots
Control
Slurry
Seed -I- slurry mixed
Seed + slurry applied  separately
S.E.Yield  kg DM/ha
12255
12551
13397
12757
469
GROW  MORE  GRASS,  
EASTER,WTTH  
ICI FERTILISERS
The moment  you spread  an ICI Fertiliser  it gets  to work ... 
earning  its keep,  putting  goodness  into  the land,  bringing  more
give  you heavier  cattle  and ICI FERnUSERS-MORE  GRASS
extra  milk —making  extra 
profit  for you.
Pasture  Sward  and 
Cut Sward  are complete  
compound  fertilisers  with
N.P. & K. in every  granule  
so they  grow  more  grass.PASTURE  SWARD I1 CUTSWARD
2 bags  per acre  6 weeks  
before  turnout.
1 '/2 bags  per acre  after  
each  grazing.5 bags  per acre  for 1st cut.
4 bags  per acre  for 2nd cut.
3 bags  per acre  for 3rd cut.
Distributed  by I.A.W  S. DubUn  & Branches
_________
PASTURE  
SWARD  I CUT  
>WARD
@ PASTURE  SWARD
mi
Results  were variable  and while differences  were not statistically  sig­
nificant,  there was a trend towards  increased  yields  of 1000 kg DM/ha  
in the slurry  and seed treated  plots.
Nitrogen
In general,  Italian ryegrass  requires  higher nitrogen  levels than per­
manent  pasture  for two reasons  :
1. Because  of a high yield,  it can respond  to high nitrogen  levels.
2. Italian is generally  a fresh reseed and fresh reseeds  are generally  
nitrogen  deficient  and respond  well to nitrogen.
Table 9
Nitrogen  recommendations  for Italian  ryegrass
1st cut 144- 168 kg/ha
2nd cut 96- 120 kg/ha
3rd cut 72- 96 kg/ha
4th cut 60- 72 kg/ha
5th cut 60- 72 kg/ha
There  is some evidence  to suggest  that if all the nitrogen  is not absorbed  
in a particular  cut, it may be available  to the plant during  the regrowth  
thereby  reducing  the amount  of nitrogen  that needs  to be applied  for the 
next cut.
Grazing
It was considered  useful  if the extra yield obtained  in Italian  ryegrass 
could be maintained  by introducing  some grazing  into the eonservation  
programme.  The following  treatments  were examined  :
1. Graze  every 21 days for the whole  season.
Two grazings  in spring;  silage  cuts for the rest of the year.
Three  cuts of silage;  graze for the rest of the year.
Four cuts of silage;  graze for the rest of the year.
Five cuts of silage only.
At each of the grazing  treatments  there was a lax and a severe  grazing. 
The results  are given in Table 10.
Table 10
Yields  (Kg DM/ba)  and tiller numbers/m “ in Italian  ryegrass
Severe  grazing Lax grazingTiller count
severeTiller count  
lax
1 9398 9680 792 1522
2 12638 13262 1344 1627
3 15804 14906 561 1007
4 14643 15119 844 872
5 17437 1606
The complete  silage cuts gave the highest  yields and the complete  
grazing  gave the lowest yields. The grazing  in spring reduced  yields  
substantially.  It was shown in Table 3 that the first silage cut can be 
substantial;  this cut will be seriously  reduced  in yield by early grazing. 
There was little difference  between  Treatments  3 and 4. The second 
part of Table 10 show the effects  of the treatments  on the survival  of 
tillers. The constant  silage treatments  had the highest  tiller numbers  
while the lowest numbers  resulted  from grazing  severely  after taking  3 
cuts of silage. Severe  grazing  also reduced  tiller numbers  substantially.  
The lax grazing  was not as severe  on tiller numbers.  It is concluded  from  
this trial that grazing  does not favour  Italian  ryegrass  but where  grazing  
is necessary,  it should  be lenient.
The silages  in the 5 and 4 systems  were fed to cattle in a winter  feeding 
trial. All cattle were fed 2 kg pulp nuts and were implanted  with Ralgro  
and Finaplex.  The results  are given in Table 11.
Table 11
Average  animal  performance  (kg)
5 Cut 4 Cut S.E.
Initial live wt. 479.3 481.0 2.90
Final live wt 493.9 556.6 4.86
Live wt. gain/day 1.12 0.74 0.05
Carcase  wt. 321.2 304.8 3.26
Carcase  gain/day 0.59 0.43 0.03
The average  performance  of cattle on the five cut system  was signific ­
antly better  than that on the 4 cut system;  there was a direct  influence  of 
management  on liveweight  gain/head/day.
Variable  Costs  of Italian  Ryegrass  and Perennial  Ryegrass
On the basis of the 1982 Farm Management  Manual  (6) the variable  
costs of conserving  three cuts of Perennial  ryegrass  were compared  with 
five cuts of Italian. The costs  were based  on contractors  prices.  However,  
the contractor ’s price for cutting quoted in the manual  was reduced  
slightly  to allow for the fact that several  cuts are being  taken  in the one 
year. It was assumed  also that each cut is conserved  in a different  pit; 
there is a full charge  for polythene  in each cut. Because  ploughing  and 
reseeding  is an integral  part of growing  Italian  ryegrass,  it is assumed  
that these operations  are required  every 3 years. Thus, the cost of 
reseeding  is divided  by three and added to the variable  cost of the crop. 
Costs are given in Table 12.
Table J2
Variable  costs for Italian  and Perennial  ryegrass
Cut 1 £86.00/acre Cut 1 £81.00/acre
Cut 2 £73.00/acre Cut 2 £67.00
Cut 3 £58.00/acre Cut 3 £67.00
Cut 4 £52.00
Cut 5 £52.00
Reseeding  £27.30
Total £217.00/acre £346.30/acre
The costs/acre  for Italian are substantially  higher than the cost of 
Perennial,  but if the cost/tonne  is examined  more realistic  prices be­
come  evident.  Table 16 outlines  the costs/tonne  at various  yields. If the 
Perennial  yield is 20 tonnes the cost/tonne  is £10.85. If the yield of 
Italian  is 35 tonnes  then the price/tonne  is £9.89; if the yield drops to 
30 tonnes  then cost/tonne  increases  to £11.45.
Table 13
Cost per tonne  of Perennial  and Italian  ryegrass  silage
Perennial Italian
Yield cost/tonne Yield Cost/tonne
20 tonnes £10.85 35 £ 9.89
30 £11.54
25 £13.85
The critical  factor  therefore  is the attainment  of high yields.
References
1. Department  of Agriculture,  Recommended  List of Herbage  Varieties,  1982.
2. Ribeiro,  M., do Valle, A. M. (1978).  Grass and legume  cultivars  to maximise  
production  of high quality  silage. Irish Grassland  & Animal  Production  Asso­
ciation  Journal.  Vol. 13, p. 5-14.
3. Brereton,  A. J. The effect of water on grassland  productivity  in Ireland. In 
Press.
4. Norris,  I. B., Thomas,  H. (1982). Recovery  of ryegrass  species  from drought. 
J. Agric. Res. 98, 623-628.
5. Gleeson,  T. 1980. Pasture  renewal  using seeded  slurry,  AFT Research  Report, 
Soils, p. 10.
6. Farm Management  Manual  1982. Handbook  Series No. 14. Publ. An Foras 
Taluntais.
10
A special  Cheque  Book  
for farmers.
><'...<• t NOW ■n™lOmmev^.7- t
iste 6r/>uusi3^mY  fjots lehiti'OCi
/& eemc£K  €u6-bosmx ...... ^7<?TO'oe'“..........
AMOtfKr  l>AyASlf TOTAl
IR£13^-06
only  from  
Bank  of Ireland.
What  is Agri-Check?
Agri-Check  is a new type of cheque  
book  that provides  an accurate  
duplicate  of every  cheque  you write.
On each carbon  copy  there are spaces  
for further  information  regarding  the 
transaction.  Used properly  it can 
provide  an efficient  and fool-proof  
record  of all your financial  dealings.  
Order  your fi[gjfedlESdl^Cheque  Book nowWhy  every  farmer  
should  have one
Good  money  management  is 
a vital part of successful  farming.
Now with the introduction  of the new 
Income  Tax regulations  an even more  
watertight  method  of day-to-day  
accounting  is essential.  Once again  
Bank of Ireland  fills the bill, 
from your nearest  branch  of Bank of Ireland.
BanKiTlreiana
11
Production  of Young  Beef at 
Hillsborough
R. W. J. STEEN
Agricultural  Research  Institute.  Hillsborough,  Co. Down.
Beef production  in N. Ireland had traditionally  been a fragmented  
industry  with cattle being on 3 or 4 different  farms between  birth and 
slaughter.  However,  it is now well established  that up to 50% of the 
potential  net profit which can be made from a beef animal  during  its 
life is lost as transport  and marketing  costs and loss of performance  when 
it is marketed  three or four times  during  the production  cycle.  Production  
systems  which are based on short term decisions  to purchase  or sell 
cattle to take advantage  of fluctuations  in market  prices may increase 
profitability  immediately  but in this situation  one farmer ’s gain is 
another ’s loss and ultimately  profitability  is reduced  as well as being 
variable.
A more systematic  approach  to beef production  which  provides  a basis  
for forward  planning  and which  reduces  fluctuations  in profitability  and 
permits  a stable and reasonable  income  per animal  and per hectare  is 
therefore  desirable,  particularly  to beef producers  who require  a stable  
family income. The production  of young beef in calf-to-beef  systems  
involving  dairy bred calves  which remain  on the same farm from calf- 
hood until slaughter  is one method  of providing  such a basis. These 
systems  also provide  a basis for setting  and achieving  production  targets  
which are important  if a high level of profitability  is to be consistently  
achieved.
The experimental  programme  on beef production  at Hillsborough  
currently  involves  three calf to beef systems.  These  vary in intensity  from 
a 14-15 month system in which spring-born  calves are housed  contin ­
uously  and given a diet of grass silage and concentrates,  to an 18-month  
system  using autumn-born  calves  and a 22-24 month  grass-based  system  
using calves bom during late winter. A<1 three systems  are currently  
based on Friesian  bull calves which are artificially  reared and weaned 
at six weeks  old. Calves  are fed milk substitute  twice daily,  the quantity  
of milk powder  being restricted  to 400 gms/head  daily giving a total 
intake of 16-18 kg of milk powder  per calf. Higher  levels of milk 
substitute  feeding,  although  improving  performance  during  the milk feed­
ing period,  have not increased  profitability.  The calves  are given silage  
rather than hay from weaning  at six weeks  old. All grassland  used in 
the systems,  both for grazing  and silage making,  receives  350 kg of 
nitrogen  fertilizer  per hectare  (280 units/acre)  and phosphate  and potash  
as required.
14/15  month  indoor  beef
This is a relatively  new system  of beef production  in Northern  Ireland  
in which  cattle  are housed  continuously  and given  grass  silage  supplemen ­
12
ted with concentrates.  The level of concentrate  feeding  depends  on silage  
quality. With high quality silage 2.5 kg (5^ lb) of concentrates/head  
daily is adequate  to produce  a finished  animal  at 14 to 15 months  of age, 
but with low quality  silage 4 to 5 kg (9 to 11 lb)/head  daily is necessary  
during  the finishing  period. With high quality  silage,  made in a 3-cut 
system,  finished  cattle  of 480-510  kg live weight  are produced  at 14 to 15 
months  old with inputs of one tonne of concentrates  and 8 tonnes  of 
silage per animal. With lower  quality  silage made in a more traditional  
2-cut system,  1.45 tonnes  (29 cwts) of concentrates  and 7 tonnes  of silage  
are required  per finished  animal. The use of bulls and implanted  steers  
in this system is currently  being investigated.  Six finished  cattle are 
produced  per hectare  (2.4/ acre) of silage  devoted  to the system.
18 month  beef using  autumn-born  calves
Eighteen-month  beef has traditionally  been produced  from calves  bom  
between  August  and December.  These remain  indoors  until April when  
they are turned out to grass for a six month grazing  period and are 
slaughtered  at 18 months  of age following  an indoor  finishing  period  of 
about  six months.  At Hillsborough  October-born  calves,  mainly  from the 
Institute ’s dairy herd, are used. After  weaning  at six weeks  they are given  
silage supplemented  with 2 kg (4J lb) concentrates  daily. If silage  quality  
is good concentrate  intake is reduced  to 1 kg/day  (2 lb) at the end of 
January  but with poorer  quality  silage  2 kg concentrates/day  are required  
until turnout.
The calves are turned out to grass in mid-April  at 180-190  kg live 
weight  and are set-stocked  at a stocking  rate of 15 calves/hectare  (6/acre)  
until mid-June.  They are then moved  to an area of aftermath  grazing  
which has been cut for silage during late May and are stocked  at 10 
calves/hectare  (4/acre). They remain  on this area until two further  cuts 
of silage  have been taken  by the end of August.  They then graze the total 
area devoted  to this system  at a stocking  rate of 4.2 animals/hectare  
(1.7/acre) which is the overall  stocking  rate of this system. The move 
to aftermath  grazing  in June is of major importance  in maintaining  a 
continuous  supply  of high quality  grass  to the animals  and in controlling  
the build up of parasitic  worm burdens.  Good grassland  management  is 
essential  if a live weight  gain of 1 kg/day  is to be achieved  at grass  
without  concentrate  feeding.  The animals  are housed  in mid-October  at 
about 360 kg liveweight.
During  the winter  the cattle  are given  good quality  silage  supplemented  
with 2.5 kg (5J lb) concentrates/day  and are slaughtered  in April at an 
average  live weight  of 510 kg. With poorer  quality  silage 4 kg (9 lb) 
concentrates/day  are required  during  the finishing  period  to produce  a 
finished  animal  of this weight  at 18 months.  If high quality  silage made  
in a 3-cut system  is used, the total inputs for this system are 700 kg 
(14 cwt) concentrates,  6^ tonnes  silage and 0.1 hectares  (^ acre) for graz­
ing. With lower  quality  silage  made in the more traditional  2-cut system  
the inputs  are 1.05 tonnes  (21 cwt) concentrates  and 5^ tonnes  of silage.
13
The animals  are implanted  when they are put to grass at six months  old 
and again  when they are brought  indoors  for finishing.
22-24  month  beef
Calves  born during  January  and February,  mainly  from the Institute ’s 
dairy herd, are used in the 22-24 month  grass-based  system. They are 
fed to maximise  live weight  gain from weaning  until they are turned  out 
to grass in May. As with the 18 - month  system  the calves are moved 
on to clean aftermath  grazing  at some stage during  the summer.  Again 
this move to clean grass is vitally  important  in maintaining  a high level 
of performance  at grass  with young  calves.  Unless  grassland  management  
is very good it is usually  necessary  to give these small calves  about 1 kg 
(2 lb) concentrates/day  over the summer.  The calves  are housed  at the 
end of October  at 250-260  kg liveweight.  Over the winter  they should 
have a liveweight  gain of 0.5-0.6  kg/day  (1|: lb). This is achieved  from 
high quality  silage without  concentrate  supplementation,  from medium  
quality  silage supplemented  with 1 kg concentrates/day  or from poor  
quality  silage supplemented  with 2-3 kg concentrates/day.  The animals  
are put to grass again in April at 350 kg live weight and with good  
grassland  management  should  reach 500 kg by the time they are housed  
again in late September.  It is important  that these heavy cattle are 
housed  early in the autumn  as they tend to lose condition  rapidly  if kept 
out too long. After  housing,  they are given high quality  silage and 3 kg 
concentrates/day  until slaughter  in early January  at 23 months  of age. 
The finished  cattle are about 580 kg liveweight,  producing  a 300-320  kg 
carcass. The cattle are implanted  when they are put to grass at 15- 
months  and when they are housed  for finishing  at 20 months.  There has 
been no response  to implantation  before 15 months  of age with this type 
of animal.  2.5 finished  cattle are produced  per year per hectare  (1.0/acre)  
of land devoted  to this system.
Failure  to achieve  the production  target  for these calf to beef systems  
is likely  to be due to problems  in one or more  of the following  areas.
* Calf rearing.  Excessive  disease  due to bad calf rearing  accommoda ­
tion often results  in poor performance  as well as high mortality.
* Grassland  management.  If young calves do not have a continuous  
supply  of high quality  grass, performance  can be very severely  affec ­
ted.
* Control  of worms,  fluke and external  parasites.  Inadequate  control  of 
parasites  especially  worms  is often a major contributing  factor to 
poor performance  in calves  and growing  cattle.
* Grass scarcity  in autumn. When the quantity  and quality  of grass 
declines  in autumn  supplementary  concentrates  should be fed and 
cattle should be housed  early to prevent  serious  loss of condition  
which must be regained  during  the winter  by feeding  extra concen ­
trates.
* Silage quality. The production  of poor quality  silage due to late 
cutting  increases  the amount  of concentrates  needed  to achieve  the 
target  levels  of performance  and reduces  profitability.
14
Make the Best Use of Worm  Drugs
N. E. DOWNEY
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.*
Usually  when people consider  the problem  of controlling  worms in 
livestock  they think only in terms of worm drugs or anthelmintics,  the 
main preoccupation  being the merits  of one drug over another.  Such  
thinking  ignores  the fact that many animals  do not require  any dosing  
at all, due either  to their age or to the way they are managed.  This does 
not mean that anthelmintics  are inefficient  in themselves;  quite the con­
trary. The fact is, though,  that an over-emphasis  on dosing  tends to 
obscure  the true nature of parasitism.  This leads to gross overusage  
of drugs  and also to a failure  to recognise  that their value often depends  
more on proper  timing  and on management  factors  rather  than on actual  
drug efficacy.  This paper  outlines  the different  types  of parasites  in cattle  
and the treatment  requirements  of each for prevention  or cure. A clear  
objective  is essential  for efficient  and economical  use of drugs  for parasite  
control.
Before  deciding  on an anthelmintic,  one should  question  the need for 
dosing  in the first place. The answer  will depend  on such factors  as class 
of stock,  time of year and type of management.  For example,  cattle  aged 
2 years or more do not require  routine  treatment  for roundworms  and 
there is no point in giving  a turnout  dose to calves  beginning  their first 
gazing  season. Similarly,  single-suckler  calves  born in spring  will rarely  
if ever  need to be dosed  for stomach  worms.  Spring-born  sucklers,  because  
they do not graze much in early summer,  cause  very little stomach  worm  
contamination  of their pasture  and so are not exposed  to the heavy  
late-season  infection  likely to be experienced  by pail-fed  calves  or even 
autumn-bom  sucklers.
Next, it is essential  to be clear about which type of parasite  it is 
intended  to control  and whether  the aim is prevention  or cure. Other  
considerations  that influence  the choice of anthelmintics  are cost and 
convenience.  To summarise  then, the points  to be considered  in choosing  
an anthelmintic  are :
1. Is a dose needed,  considering  class of stock, time of year, manage ­
ment  ?
2. Which  parasites  are we concerned  with ?
3. What are we trying  to achieve,  prevention  or cure ?
4. Cost.
5. Convenience.
When  planning  parasite  control,  including  the choice  of drugs,  farmers  
should always consult their veterinary  surgeon,  both for his expert  
knowledge  and his experience  of local conditions.
♦ Reprinted  from Farm & Food Research,  13 : 39-42, 1982. Published  by The 
Agricultural  Institute,  Dublin.
15
Which  parasites  ?
The main internal  parasites  that affect cattle are liver ffuke, hoose 
worms  and stomach  worms,  the last two being round worms. Table 1 
shows  that each type has its main effects  in a broadly  definable  class of 
stock and at a fairly definite  season  of the year. It should  be noted that 
the season  at which  stock are affected  is not necessarily  the time at which 
control  measures  should  be taken —more often,  control  must be instituted  
before  the expected  onset of effects.  All of these parasites  have a pasture  
phase and a phase within the animals  and there is continual  interplay  
between  the two. There  are parasites  in animals  only because  there are 
parasites  on pastures.  Similarly,  only parasitised  animals  create  infection  
on pastures.  However,  each of the three worm  types has a unique  form 
of development,  both on pasture  and in the animal,  and animals  react  
differently  to each type.
Liver  fluke
Part of the liver fluke ’s development  takes place in the tiny mud snail 
Lymnaea  truncatula  which is found on wet land. When snails become 
infected  from eggs which  animals  pass out in their droppings  in spring, 
the development  stages  occur  throughout  the summer.  Infection,  in the 
form of cercariae,  passes from the snails onto the herbage  from late 
August  onwards.  The amount  of infection  is greatest  following  wet 
summers  which increase  snail numbers  and also favour  development  in 
the snail and shedding  of cercariae.  After ingestion  by the grazing  
animal,  the flukes  wander  in the liver substance  for about  10 weeks  before  
settling  down as adults  in the bile ducts where  they produce  eggs which 
pass out in the dung, so completing  the life cycle. In contrast  to other  
parasites,  liver fluke commonly  affects  mature  as well as young  animals.
Table 1
Parasites  that affect grazing  cattle
ParasiteType of stock mainly  
affectedTime of year effects  
mainly  seen
Liver flukeUnder  2 year old (can affect  
all ages including  cows) December-February
Hoose First season  calves End of May-October
Stomach  worms  — 
Type I Calves/weanlings Late July-October
Stomach  worms  — 
Type 11 Weanlings  and older stock February/March
Control  of liver fluke is aimed at both the pasture  phase within the 
snail and at the stages  of infection  in the host animal. In most years,
16
Over  £1 million  
spent  every  day  on 
milk  and  dairy  
produets  •
Yes, the Home  Market  is worth  approximately £400  AA^per  year
(Retail).
Obviously  consumers  enjoy  the taste and goodness  of the fine range  of high quality  
products  which  are a credit  to the Irish Dairy  Industry.
Irish people  recognise  the tremendous-nutritional  value  of dairy  products  - nature's 
finest  food which  is the ‘ Fuel of Life
However, despite  its traditional  strength, the “home  market"  must  be maintained,  and 
in certain  categories  expanded,  against  constant  pressure  from the wide range  of 
non-dairy  products  competing  for a place  on the consumers'  shopping  list. Some  of 
these  non-dairy  products  are positioned  and marketed  as direct  alternatives  to 
traditional  dairy  foods.
Promoting  the continued  sales  of natural  dairy  products  is the job of the National  Dairy  
Council.  Through  its wide  range  of activities  the N.D.C.  ensures  that the Irish consumer  
will continue  to be informed  as to the value,  versatility and goodness  of Milk and 
Dairy  Products.
If you or any member  of your  family  would  like more  information  on the many  aspects  
of promotion,  including  the nutritional/cookery  service,  contact  the N.D.C.  at 
Grattan  House,  Lr. Mount  Street,  Dublin  2. Tel; 01-785788.
A successful  home  market  is vital to the Irish Dairy  Farmer  
-The National  Dairy  Council  is committed  to this objective.
Chief  Executive  Jim O'ConnorNational  Dairy  Council
17
drug treatment  will be advisable  in December  or early January  but the 
timing  and number  of treatments  will depend  on the expected  amount  
of infection  in any given year. This information  is supplied  in the fluke  
forecast  issued  annually  by the Department  of Agriculture.  Table  2 gives  
the available  fluke drugs  or flukicides,  and the stage of infection  at which 
they are effective.  The significance  of the latter is that a drug with an 
action  against  the late liver stages  destroys  many  of the parasites  earlier,  
i.e., around  4-6 weeks  after initial  infection,  thus reducing  the amount  of 
fluke damage.  If, on the other hand, the infection  has been present  for 
around  10 weeks  or more,  the choice  of drug becomes  less critical.  Advice 
on this aspect should  be obtained  from a veterinary  surgeon  who may 
decide  to send faeces  samples  to the laboratory  as an aid to diagnosis. 
Users  of these substances  have an obligation  to observe  precautions,  e.g., 
the worning  issued  with most flukicides  that they should  not be given to 
lactating  cows if the milk is for human  consumption.
Several  products  on the market  combine  flukicides  with anthelmintics  
effective  against  hoose  and stomach  worms  (Table  2). Such combinations
Table 2
Liver  fluke anthelmintics  (flukicides),  ‘combination  doses ’ and an index  of
their cost
Trade
nameDosing
methodMain siage(s)  of 
fluke kilted*Efficacy  for 
stomach  worms Price
indext'^l Type 1Type 11
1. Flukicides
Trodax Injection Late liver and adult — — 74
Zanil 'Drench Adult — — 45
Flukanide Drench Late liver and adult — *— 53
Bilevon Injection Adult — — 58
Parax Drench Adult — — 58
2. 'Combination  Doses*
Nilzan Drench Adult — 139
Ranizole Late liver and adult 189
Valbazan Adult ✓ I77l>
Para  fluke .. .. — 106
•Efficiency  around  90^o or greater;
^Based  on doubling  the normal  dose;  one-and-a-half  times  the normal  dose may be effective,  giving  
an index  of 131.
Based on trade prices  for a standard  dose.
are useful in situations  where  cattle are exposed  simultaneously  to fluke  
and stomach  worms, as might happen  for instance  when stock are 
outwintered.  Also, a ‘combination  dose ’ would  certainly  be indicated  if 
stomach  worm control,  say in weanlings,  had been neglected  up to the 
time appropriate  for a fluke dose. In general,  however,  it is advisable  to 
think in terms  of treating  for one type of parasite  at a time. For example,  
the correct  time to dose for fluke will often be the end of Decembser  but 
that is never the right time to dose for hoose and hardly  ever the right  
time for a stomach  worm  dose, especially  in the context  of prevention.
18
Roundworms
Table 3 lists anthelmintics  for use against  roundworms,  together  with 
their ranges  of activity  and a price index. It will at once be apparent  
that there is little to choose  between  most of these compounds  regarding  
their efficacy  for Type I ostertagiasis  (the ordinary  kind of stomach  worm  
infection— see later) and that most of them are highly  effective  for hoose.
Table 3
Anthelmintics  with activity  for hoose  worms  and for stomach  worms  with an
index  of their cost
Trade
nameDosing
mcihodEfficacy  (c.
Hoose80-90®i'o  or grcaicr)
Stomach  wormsEctoparasites  
(Lice,  etc.)Price
index Early Laie Type  1Type 11
Diclol Vaccination Preventive — — — —
Thibcn/ole Diench — ►O' — — 112
Ncmafax — — »0O — — 61
Supcril — — — — 54
Nibcrm ,, ✓ *0* — —lOI
NiKcrm Injcciion »0O — — 129
Panacur Drench ♦O' ►o' — 105
S>nanthic ,, ✓ ►o' — 95
SxMamex ✓ ►0> ►O' 105
Valbazen J J ✓ ►O' *0* 81
Ba\A  erm ✓ ►O' ►O' 95
Pnranil ►o' — 47
Paranil Injcciion ►o' — 54
l\omec ,, *oO ►O' 227
Anlhclpor Pour-on ✓ ►O' — — 98
Anihclpor  Plus .. ►o' — •O' 142
*Ba'>cd  on trade price for a standard  dose. In !he case of Dictol  an index  cannot  be quoted  as dose is 
not related  to bodvweichl.
Anthelpor  Plus and Ivomec  are also active against  ectoparasites  such as 
lice, Ivomec  combining  this effect with activity  for Type II ostertagiasis.  
Considering  the range  of actions  shown  by many  of the compounds,  they,  
like some of the fluke-killing  drugs,  could be regarded  as ‘combination  
doses ’. However,  the advantage  of this in relation  to the round worms  
of the lungs and stomach  is again somewhat  limited  as we shall see when  
dealing  with the differences  between  these two types  of parasites.
Hoose
Table 3 shows  the relative  price of drugs  suitable  for the treatment  of 
hoose worm infection,  or its prevention  in the case of Dictol. Many of 
these compounds  are almost  similar  in their effectiveness  for hoose  worms  
so that, besides  price,  the choice  will be largely  governed  by convenience,  
an aspect  that will be dealt with later. Dictol  is of course  exceptional  in 
being  a vaccine  and as such the only true preventative  for hoose,  a factor  
which  must be balanced  against  its relatively  greater  cost compared  with 
the anthelmintics.  Also, anthelmintics  may have to be given on more  
than one occasion  whereas  Dictol  is a once-off  prophylactic.
19
Hoose affects mainly  calves in their first grazing  season. Typically,  
infection  on pasture  rises and falls unpredictably  between  late May and 
the end of September,  the rate of larval  development  responding  quickly  
to changes  in temperature  and moisture.
When the initial infection  is small,  as is likely if it arises from over­
wintered  larvae or from dung of carrier  animals,  calves  exposed  to it 
may become  resistant.  Whether  or not resistance  develops,  the calves 
soon begin to spread larval contamination  on the sward and, under  
suitable  weather  conditions,  this may produce  a sudden increase  in 
pasture  infection.  If the initial  infection  has failed to stimulate  sufficient  
resistance,  the calves  will then succumb  to clinical  hoose.
Clinical  hoose  commonly  arises  too when infected  calves,  voiding  large  
numbers of larvae  in the dung,  are mixed  with non-infected  calves  that 
have not had previous  exposure  to infection.
Control  of hoose  is best achieved  by Dictol  lungworm  vaccine.  Calves  
must be a minimum  of 8 weeks  old before  receiving  their first dose of 
Dictol,  a second  dose being  given a month  later. It is recommended  that 
calves  be given both doses  before  they are let out and that they be with­
held from pasture  for 2 weeks  after the second  dose. These  recommenda ­
tions are a serious  limitation  to the use of the vaccine.  However,  Institute  
research  showed  some years ago that vaccination  could safely be admin ­
istered  to calves  after turnout,  provided  they get the second  dose by mid- 
May.
If Dictol is not used, it may be necessary  to resort to anthelmintics.  
Most  of these  have similarly  hi^  efficacies,  as already  mentioned.  Monthly  
dosing,  sometimes  recommended  for the control  of hoose,  tends to be 
wasteful  and unreliable.  A better  practice  is to watch  the calves  closely  
after turnout  and make sure they are treated  promptly  as soon as early  
symptoms  are seen. It is advisable  to obtain veterinary  advice since  
hoose symptoms  can often be confused  with other  lung disorders  such as 
those caused  by bacteria  or viruses.
Stomach  worms
Stomach  worms,  in relation  to the condition  known  as Type I oster ­
tagiasis,  also have their most damaging  effects in first season calves.  
Calves,  being highly susceptible,  are likely to cause far more worm 
contamination  on pasture  than older animals.  Infection  on the pasture  
is usually  at a low level in spring  and early summer,  consisting  of larvae  
that have survived  from the previous  summer.  Nevertheless,  as a result  
of acquiring  these larvae calves  turned  out in the spring pass out large 
numbers  of worm eggs in the dung in the early part of the grazing  
season. Larvae  hatched  from these eggs develop  slowly  at first when it 
is cool and then more rapidly  when the weather  gets warmer.  Thus,  the 
bulk of the eggs deposited  on the sward between  May and early June  
reach the infective  stage at around  the same time, resulting  in a fairly  
sudden  increase  in herbage  infection.  Time of onset will depend  on 
weather  conditions  but it will almost  always  occur at some time on calf
20
pasture  from late July onwards.  Thereafter,  the herbage  remains  heavily 
infected  and causes  damaging  infection  in calves.
This predictable  pattern of pasture  infection  with stomach  worms  
contrasts  sharply  with the largely unforeseeable  fluctuations  that have  
already  been referred  to in relation  to hoose. There are other striking  
differences  between  these two types of parasitism  and they are briefly  
summarised  in Table  4. Two such contrasting  kinds  of parasite  obviously  
require  different  approaches  to control,  underlining  the point already  
made  concerning  the limited  value of ‘all-purpose ’ anthelmintics.
Table 4
Important  differences  between  hoose  and stomach  worms
Hoose Stomach  worms
). Overwintered  larvae
2. Carriers
3. Field-to-Field  spread 
{PilohulusY
3. Mixing  infected  with 
non-infected  calves
Late May-early  October
Very erratic  — not 
predictable
“Strong ”
1. Vaccination
2. Vigilance  — early 
treatment
6. Re-infection  after  dosing Not usually  a serious  
on infected  pasture problem1. Source(s)  of infection  
on pasture
2. Season
3. Pattern  of pasture  
infection
4. Host resistance
5. ControlOverwintered  infections 
only
Late July-early  November 
Regular  — predictable
“Weak ”
1. Dose mid-July —move  
to clean pasture
2. Leader/follower
3. Dose  at yarding
4. New  systems  (see 
Table 6)
Always  a problem
^Pilobutus  is a fungus  that grows  on the surface  of dung pats. Hoose  larvae  crawl 
onto a part of the fungus  which then bursts scattering  the larvae,  which may be 
blown  for considerable  distances  by wind.
‘Regular  dosing ’ from July onwards,  a routine  sometimes  advocated,  
will often fail to control  Type 1 ostertagiasis.  Because  of the high level 
of pasture  infection  commonly  occurring  on pasture  at that time, treat ­
ment to remove  one load of worms  will be vitiated  by the arrival of 
another  load. Control  can be effected  by dosing  the calves  in mid-July
21
and then moving  them to ‘clean ’ pasture  such as previously  ungrazed 
aftermath.  Table 2 shows that a large number  of anthelmintics  are 
equally  suitable  for controllnig  Type 1, if used correctly.  A dose at 
housing  in October/November  is also usually  advantageous,  particularly  
as there will then be no chance  of re-infection.  Calves  in a leader/follower  
system  will have less stomach  worm  infection  than calves  grazing  on their  
own. Although  effective,  both this and the ‘dose-and  move ’ system  are 
apt to pose management  problems  and neither,  incidentally,  will control  
hoose. Hence,  there is a need to develop  alternatives  that can be readily  
practised  on farms and that overcome,  for instance,  the difficulty  of 
providing  clean pasture  at a particular  time.
New developments
The concept  of what is readily  applicable  on farms — in a word,  
convenience  — has a bearing  on choice of anthelmintic  as well as on 
the control  system  to be adopted.  Also, inconvenient  chores  are likely 
to be left undone  ! One convenience  factor  is the size of the dose, and 
remarkable  advances  have been made in this respect  (Table  5). These  
advances  reflect the development  in recent times of more potent sub­
stances.  On the other hand,  it will be well to bear in mind that the cost 
factor  (see Table 2) may in some instances  outweigh  the handiness  of a 
small-sized  dose.
Table 5 
Size of dose
AnthelminticSize of dose 
(ml per 100 kg)
Levamisole  drench 50
Thiophanate 33
Oxfendazole 20
Levamisole  injection 10
Ivermectin  injection 2
Some ‘control  systems ’ are given in Table  6 together  with their respec ­
tive advantages.  For instance,  Anthelpor  which  is a pour-on  anthelmintic,  
overcomes  possible  risks associated  with drenching,  such as the fatal 
pneumonia  that can arise from a misdirected  drench.  The Paratect  Bolus  
is given to calves  at turnout  and has the effect of reducing  worm egg 
contamination  of pasture,  thus preventing  the late season increase  in 
stomach  worm infection  which was described  earlier. An innovation  
developed  in the Institute  by the author  in association  with Dr. J. O’Shea,  
is the administration  of ‘continuous  low-level  anthelmintic ’ in calves ’ 
drinking  water. This also suppresses  worm egg output,  thus keeping  
pastures  ‘clean ’ or free of serious  infection  for the whole  grazing  season  
(Farm and Food Research,  April 1980). A fully automated  device  for 
this purpose  has now been developed  and the advantages  of the system  
are briefly  described  in Table  6.
22
Table 6
Systems  and innovations
System Advantages
Vaccination  (Dictol) Prevents  hoose  for whole  grazing  season
Pour-on  preparations Safe; easy application
Paratect  Bolus (Pfizer) One treatment  gives whole-season  protection  against 
stomach  worms
“Continuous  dosing ” 
via the drinking  waterNo handling  of stock for dosing;  keeps pasture  
free of serious  stomach  worm infection  for 
whole season;  may be adaptable  for hoose 
control  and for dosing  with other medicaments 
like minerals  and growth  promoters
Stomach  worms  usually  attain the adult egg producing  stage in the 
animal  between  2 and 3 weeks  after the infective  larvae  are taken  in with 
the herbage.  Larvae  that have remained  on the sward  until autumn  and 
early winter  undergo  an alteration  which affects  the way they develop  
in the host. Thus, larvae taken in from September  onwards  show an 
increasing  tendency  to delay their development,  remaining  for many  
weeks or months  in the membrane  lining the stomach  and intestine.  
Large numbers  of partially  developed  worms  may accumulate  in this 
manner.  If many of them resume  their growth  to adults over a short  
period,  they cause severe disease  changes  in the stomach,  resulting  in 
scour,  loss of condition  and possibly  death. This is the condition  known  
as Type II ostertagiasis,  the symptoms  of which  occur  at some time in a 
period  of several  weeks  beginning  January/February.
Preventing  cattle from grazing  during  autumn/early  winter  in areas  
occupied  earlier by calves will contribute  to the control  of Type II 
ostertagiasis.  In addition,  cattle should be dosed at housing  with an 
anthelmintic  active against  the arrested  worms  that cause this condition  
(see Table 2).
Recent  work at the Institute  has shown  that the anthelmintic  pheno-  
thiazine,  which is not nearly as potent as modem  compounds,  was 
nevertheless  capable,  when  used rationally,  of controlling  stomach  worms  
extremely  effectively,  including  arrested  worms  that are potentially  the 
cause of Type II ostertagiasis.  These  results,  as well as examples  in this 
article of proper  drug use, illustrate  that the way drugs are used is 
considerably  more important  than high drug efficacy,  which is, in any 
case, common  to a great many modem  anthelmintics.  Similarly,  there  
is no point in paying  more for a particular  drug simply  because  it is 
effective  for several  types  of parasite  if, in reality,  control  should  be more  
properly  directed  at only one type. It follows  that a clear objective  is 
the first essential  in efficient  and economical  parasite  control.
23
Ammonia  Treatment  as a Method  of 
Improving  the Feeding  Value of Straw  
and Hay
M. J. DRENNAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
On tillage  farms,  straw which  is a by-product  of the grain crop has a 
low monetary  value. In this context  it is a cheap  feed source  but it is of 
very low feeding  value. The dry matter  digestibilities  (DMD)  of some  
common  feeds are : barley 86%, high quality  silage 70%, average  hay 
58% and good quality  barley  straw 40%. As over half of the conserved 
grass in the country  is in the form of hay there is a considerable  quantity  
of poor to medium  quality  roughage  (hay and straw)  available  for animal  
feeding.  Many  chemicals  have been tested  with a view of increasing  the 
digestibility  of roughage  and those showing  greatest  promise  of commer ­
cial application  were sodium  hydroxide  and ammonia.  As the latter  
treatment  is available  commercially  in Ireland  this paper  will be confined  
to ammonia  treatment.
Method  of treatment  with ammonia
In most studies  anhydrous  ammonia  has been used. There are two 
methods  of application,  a polythene  sealed airtight  stack involving  a 
treatment  period  of up to two months  or an enclosed  oven where less 
than a day is required  for treatment.  The stack method  has been used 
in the experiments  at Grange. The roughage  to be treated  is stacked  
over a ground  sheet of 500 gauge polythene  and then covered  with two 
similar  polythene  sheets The ground  sheet and covering  sheets  are then 
rolled together  (using  laths) at the edges and weighed  down with clay or 
sand. To ensure  that the stack is completely  airtight  any damage  to the 
polythene  is repaired  with adhesive  tape. Anhydrous  ammonia  is then 
pumped  into the stack at 30 kg/tonne  of roughage.
Feeding  Experiments
Treated  and untreated  roughages  have been compared  in two feeding 
experiments.  In Experiment  1, barley straw was collected  in the field 
by forage harvester  and stacked  using bales at the edges  to confine  the 
straw. The stack was sealed  with polythene  and treated  with ammonia.  
Untreated  straw was baled at the same time and stored indoors.  These 
straws  were used for the first 80 days of the experiment  and conventional  
small bales either  treated  with ammonia  or left untreated  were used for 
the remaining  26 days of the feeding  period. In Experiment  2, bales of 
both barley  straw  and poor quality  hay were either  treated  with ammonia  
in a stack or left untreated  and stored in a shed. In both experiments,  
the material  was chopped  before  feeding  in order  to avoid  wastage.
24
Roughage  Digestibility
Digestibility  (in-vivo)  of the untreated  straws differed  considerably  
(Table  1).Table 1
Digestibility  of untreated  and ammonia  treated  roughages
In-vivo  dry matter  digestibility  (%)
Untreated T reated Improvement
Experiment  1
50 15 Straw A (fed for 80 days) 35
Straw B (fed for 26 days) 22 42 20
Experiment  2
12 Straw 39 51
Hay 48 63 15
The Straw (B) which was fed during  the last 26 days of Experiment  1 
had DMD of only 22 per cent and is not really suitable  for feeding. 
Treatment  of straw with ammonia  improved  DMD  by 12 to 20 percent ­
age units. The DMD  of hay was increased  from 48 to 63 per cent as a 
result of ammonia  treatment  which is comparable  to the average  im­
provement  obtained  with straw.
Feed Intakes  and Animal  Performance  : Experiment  1
Forty-eight  Hereford  cross heifers (322 kg initial liveweight)  were 
individually  fed straw to appetite  plus a barley  based concentrate  on the 
following  four treatments  for a period  of 106 days :
1. Untreated  straw + 3 kg concentrates  containing  15% soyabean  meal.
2. Untreated  straw + 3 kg concentrates  containing  30% soyabean  meal.
3. Treated  straw + 3 kg concentrates  containing  15% soyabean  meal.
4. Treated  straw -b 3 kg concentrates  containing  30% soyabean  meal.  
Each concentrate  contained  1.5% minerals/vitamins  and 0.5% salt.
All animals  were slaughtered  at the end of the experiment  and to measure  
carcass  weight  gains  a representative  group  of six animals  was slaughtered  
at the start.
Treatment  of straw with ammonia  increased  intake  from 4.15 to 5.44 
kg per day (Table  2). There was no effect of concentrate  protein  level 
on intake.
Killing-out  percentages  of animals  fed untreated  and ammonia  treated  
straws  were 47.2 and 48.7%  respectively.  Thus,  because  of the consider ­
able difference  in killing-out  percentage  which  was due to differences  in 
gut-fill, liveweight  gain underestimates  the improvement  in animal  
performance  resulting  from ammonia  treatment.  Consequently  carcass  
gains must be used as the basis for assessment  of the effects  of ammon-  
iation. Daily carcass  gains of animals  fed the untreated  straw were 0.20 
kg and there was no difference  between  the two concentrate  protein  levels.
25
Table 2
Straw intakes,  liveweight  and carcass  weights,  killing-out  percentages  and weight  
gains of animals  in Experiment  1
Straw
Untreated Treated
Percent  soyabean 15 30 15 30
.Straw intake (kg/day) 4.13 4.16 5.36 5.51
Initial liveweight  (kg) 322.1 321.1 322.9 322.5
Final liveweight  (kg) 384.8 387.0 414.0 425.7
Cold carcass  weight  (kg) 181.8 181.8 200.5 208.4
Killing-out  percentage 47.3 47.0 48.4 49.0
Daily liveweight  gains (kg) 0.59 0.63 0.86 0.98
Daily carcass  gain (kg) 0.20 0.20 0.37 0.45
Carcass  gains  of animals  fed ammonia  treated  straw with concentrates  
containing  15 and 30% soyabean  meal were 0.37 and 0.45 kg per day 
respectively.  While  these data show the expected  resjxmse  from ammon-  
iation it clearly  indicates  that the increased  crude protein  content  of the 
treated  straw does not allow a reduction  in the need for supplementary  
protein. In fact, the results  suggest  the need for increased  concentrate  
protein  levels  with the treated  straw due to higher  potential  weight  gains.
Experiment  2
Forty  heifers  (314 kg initial  liveweight)  were individually  fed roughage  
to appetite  plus 3 kg of concentrates  (78% barley,  20% soyabean  meal,  
1.5% minerals/vitamins  and 0.5% salt) per head daily. The roughages  
fed with the concentrates  were as follows  :
1. Untreated  hay
2. Ammonia  treated  hay
3. Untreated  straw
4. Ammonia  treated  straw
The feeding  periods  were 79 and 111 days for the hay and straw fed 
groups  respectively  (Table  3). Treatment  of hay with ammonia  increased  
intake by 33% (4.75 to 6.33 kg/day).  The corresponding  increase  in 
straw intake  was 15% (4.33 to 4.96 kg/day).
Killing-out  percentages  were 48.6 and 51.5 per cent for the animals  fed 
untreated  and treated  hay respectively.  The corresjxmding  figures  for 
those fed straw were 46.1 and 48.2 per cent. As in Experiment  1 these 
data show  the need to express  the results  in carcass  rather  than liveweight 
gains. Daily carcass  gains  of animals fed hay were increased  from 0.34 to 
0.54 kg per day as a result of ammonia  treatment.  The corresponding  
improvement  in gain was from 0.22 to 0.37 kg per day when straw was
26
ORBENIN  IN
MASTITIS  OUT!
ORBENIN
Orbenin  Q.R. and L.A. contains  200 mg cloxacillin  per syringe.  
Orbenin  Dry Cow contains  500 mg cloxacillin  per syringe.  
Orbenin  is a Beecham  Group trademark.
27
Table 3
Roughage  intake!!,  killing-out  percentages  and weight  gains of animals  (314 kg)
in Experiment  2
Hay Straw
Untreated Treated Untreated Treated
Intakes  (kg/day) 4.75 6.33 4.33 4.96
Feeding  period (days) 79 79 111 111
Final liveweight  (kg) 378.3 386.3 393.9 411.6
Carcass  weights  (kg) 183.8 199.1 181.4 198.3
Killing-out  percentage 48.6 51.5 46.1 48.2
Daily liveweight  gains (kg) 0.82 0.90 0.72 0.88
Daily carcass  gain (kg) 0.34 0.54 0.22 0.37
fed. The better response  from treating  hay with ammonia  is surprising  
as the lower  the quality  of the roughage  the better  the response  expected  
from treatment.
Economics  of Ammoniation
A number  of approaches  can be used to assess the economics  of 
ammonia  treatment.  The most obvious  is to compare  the additional  feed 
costs of animals  fed ammoniated  roughage  with the value of the extra  
gain obtained.  In the present  experiments  levels  of concentrates  fed were  
purposely  kept low (3 kg/head  daily)  in order  to ensure  that the untreated  
and treated  roughages  provided  a reasonably  high proportion  of the total 
feed. This approach  resulted  in low energy  intakes,  low weight  gains  and 
poor economic  returns. Generally  diets such as these used here would  
not be considered  suitable  for fattening.  It was necessary  to slaughter  
the animals  to overcome  the effects  of gut-fill  variations.  When  3 kg of 
the 15% soyabean  meal concentrate  was fed in Experiment  1 the value  
of the additional  gain from feeding  ammonia  treated  straw exceeded  the 
additional  feed costs by £17 per animal  (Table  4).
Table 4
Value  of gain and feed costs in Experiment  1
Straw Untreated  Treated  Difference  Untreated  Treated  Difference
Percent  soyabean  meal 15 15 30 30
Carcass  gain 21.1 39.5 18.4 21.6 47.5 25.9
Value  of gain (£2.10/kg) 44 83 39 45 100 54
*Feed  costs (106 days) 57 78 22 59 82 23
* Barley = £125/tonne Soyabean  = £180/tonne  
Straw treatment  = £25/tonne
28Straw = £25/tonne
The corresponding  figure when the 30% soyabean  meal concentrate  
was fed amounted  to £32. In Experiment  2, treatment  with ammonia  
resulted  in the value of extra gain exceeding  the extra feed costs by £9 
and £16 per head when hay and straw were fed respectively  (Table  5).
Table 5
Value  of gain and feed costs in Experiment  2
Hay (79 days Straw (111 days)
Untreated  Treated  Difference  Untreated  Treated  Difference
Carcass  gain 26.8 42.4 15.6 24.4 41.1 16.7
Value of gain (£2.10/kg) 56 89 33 51 86 35
*Feed  costs 56 79 23 61 80 19
' Barley = £125/tonne Soyabean  = £180/tonne Straw = £25/tonne  
Hay = £50/tonne Cost of ammoniation  = £25/tonne
Ammonia  treated  straw plus concentrates  can also be compared  with 
grass silage. This comparison  is shown  in Table  6. It is assumed  that the 
cost of producing  1 tonne  of silage  dry matter  is £60 and a charge  of £30 
is allowed  for land rental (£120/ acre producing  4 tonnes  silage dry mat­
ter). The quantity  of treated  straw plus concentrate  DM equivalent  in
Table 6
Ammonia  treated  straw  (55% DMD)  plus concentrates  equivalent  to 1 tonne
of silage  DM
Silage DMD (%) Straw DM (kg) Concentrate  DM (kg) Cost (£)
60 833 167 79
65 666 334 95
70 500 500 112
Cost of 1 tonne of silage DM 
£ 120/acre)£90 (4 t. silage DM/acre —rented  charge  =
feeding  value to 1 tonne of silage DM is shown  in the table as is their  
cost when treated straw is charged  at £50/ tonne and concentrates  at 
£137/tonne.  These figures  show that ammonia  treated  straw diets are 
competitive  with silage except  when the silage is of high digestibility.  
This indicates  that treated  straw has a more obvious  role in diets for 
storing  rather  than fattening  cattle.
Conclusions
1. Treatment  of straw with ammonia  increased  DMD by 12 to 20 per-
29
2.
3.
4.
5.
8.centage  units, intake  by 15 to 30 per cent and weight  gains by 0.15 
to 0.20 kg of carcase  per day.
While  the cost of treatment  and the cost of alternative  feeds  will have 
a large effect on future application  a more important  factor is the 
improvement  in digestibility  actually  obtained  in practise. Results  
from other countries  would suggest  that the improvements  obtained  
in our studies  are greater  than those achieved  in practise.  
Considerable  variation  has been noted in the DMD of straw and to 
achieve  a DMD  of treated  straw of 55% the original  material  should 
be 40%, which is not always  the case.
The process  has greatest  application  on tillage farms where straw is 
available  as a by-product.  Purchasing  expensive  straw for ammon ­
iation is not worth  while.
When  the stack is opened  a proportion  of bales will be actually  wet 
and likely  to contain  a high concentration  of ammonia.  To avoid  any 
danger  of toxicity  these should  be fed with dry bales. Avoid  feeding  
all wet bales at any one time.
The value of the increased  crude protein  resulting  from ammoniation  
is questionable.
Ammonia  treated  straw is suitable  in diets for growing  cattle and dry 
suckler  cows but not for fattening  cattle due to its low feeding  value. 
Although  the improvement  obtained  with hay compared  favourably  
with straw further  studies  are required  using hay.
Cheveley  Johnston  & Company
Agricultural  Consultants  & Land Agents
Farm Reports  and Feasibility  Studies  
Management  Accounts  and Enterprise  Costings  
Farm and Estate  Management  
Staff Selection
Budgetary  Control  and Cash Flow Forecasts  
Land and Stock Valuations —Farm Sales and Purchases
26/27 WELLINGTON  ROAD,  CORK  
(Cork 501109)
30
Policy  and Schemes  in Relation  to the 
Cattle  and Beef Industry
P. POWER
Department  of Agriculture,  Dublin.
The purpose  of this paper is to present  an overview  of the beef cattle  
industry  and to examine  national  implications  rather than the strictly  
farming  aspects.  It may be useful  to take this overview  under  a number  
of different  headings —breeding,  production  and marketing.  The paper  
concludes  with a summary  of ‘ Support  for Cattle and Beef ’ which 
attempts  to systematise  and codify the various  regulations,  conditions  
and schemes  associated  with the cattle and beef industry.
Breeding
Since 3 out of every 4 calves  used in the cattle industry  come from the 
dairy herd the decisions  taken by dairy farmers  have a profound  effect  
on the quality  of the raw material  in the beef sector. The quality  of 
calves  in the dairy sector  and the quality  of cull cows cannot  be ignored  
either in national  breeding  policy considerations  or by the individual  
dairy farmer. While  the price of calves  is high the dairy farmer  is likely 
to be conscious  of this; nevertheless  his prime interest  is in maximising  
milk profit  margins.  The national  policy  of maintaining  the dual purpose  
Friesian  cows is based  on this dependence  of the beef sector  on the dairy  
herd. To improve  dairy merit at the expense  of beef merit would have  
consequences  for the beef industry  which could not be ignored. The 
Holstein  importations  that have influenced  Continental  Europe and 
Great Britain  means  we cannot  rely on English  sales to provide  us with 
suitable  bulls in the future. A more positive  attempt  must be made  
through  planned  matings  to provide  the bulls for testing in the A.I. 
programme.
We will have 400,000  Friesian  steers produced  from the dairy herd if 
we assume  400,000  heifers  for replacement  purposes.  The remainder  of 
the dairy herd is mated  to beef bulls. For this purpose  a range  of breeds  
and bulls is available  from natural  service  and A.I. For the beef bulls  
used in A.I. it is essential  to have as much information  as possible 
available  on calving  difficulties,  growth  rate, conformation  and carcase  
quality.
In the suckler  herd—which provides  only 25% of calves —there was 
some deterioration  in conformation  in recent  years due to :
(a) the  proportion  of cattle from dairy herd has increased  (from 66% to 
75%);
(b) reduction  of shorthorn  breed in the whole  breeding  herd;
(c) reduction  in fat levels  due to factories  penalising  for excess  fat;
(d) in general  more dairy  types occur  in the dairy herd;
(e) more  Friesian  type cattle in the suckler  herd.
M
The technical  breeding  programme  is comprised  of a number  of separate  
schemes.  These  are :
on-farm  recording
central  performance  testing  (TuUy  testing  was redesigned  recently  to 
achieve  greater  labour  efficiency  and to increase  testing  space from 
96 to 200 places)
progeny  testing  for both Friesian  and beef breeds  in A.I. 
judicious  importations.
This latter  programme  is essential.  It reduces  the danger  from inbreeding  
in small pedigree  populations  and provides  access to improved  types 
elsewhere.(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
Production
The important  features  of the Irish production  scene have often been 
described.  These  can be summarised  as follows  :
— multi-stage  systems  with consequential  excessive  trading  in calves 
and cattle
— inadequate  supply  of good quality  winter  feed
— low stocking  rates
— poor technical  efficiency
— demographic  problems  related  to elderly  or unmarried  or part-time  
farmers.  In many cases these are aggravated  by poor land, small 
and/or  fragmented  holdings.
The beef industry  at production  level is not very homogeneous.  Supply 
of calves  is reasonably  static  where  as a buoyant  demand  can often  result  
in very high prices. It can be said we have the highest  calf prices  
accompanied  by the lowest  cattle price in the E.E.C. Given  these factors  
and the general  lack of efficiency  and the high credit costs is it not 
surprising  that returns  are small  ?
It is imperative  to expand  cattle numbers  in the beef sector. There  are 
a number  of schemes  to encourage  and facilitate  this development.  The 
concept  of the producer  group  should  be encouraged  and developed  to 
bring some measure  of efficiency  at producer  level. The long term solu­
tion to the cattle sector  requires  land reform  and land mobility.  Unless  
there is considerable  improvement  in the beef sector  substantial  assets — 
land and human —will  remain  totally  underutilised.
Marketing
Far too much emphasis  is placed  on the price support  mechanism  of 
the CAP. While this is undoubtedly  important  there is ample evidence 
that the major  advantages  of CAP are not fully recognised.  The operation  
of intervention  was important  since access  to the Community  in main ­
taining  producer  prices. It has also helped  meat factories  to modernise.  
The slaughter,  chilling,  freezing,  deboning  and cutting  facilities  have 
greatly  increased.  However,  the greatest  advantage  of CAP is access  to 
the relatively  high priced  beef markets  of the rest of the Community.  This 
has often been lost sight of, while greater  consideration  is given to 
secondary  elements.  Other  elements  of the CAP are frontier  control  and
32
T'a a’S
Cal-Mag  nuts are inexpensive,  easy 
to handle,  easy to store and help 
protect  your animals  against  grass 
tetany because  Cal-Mag  nuts are 
formulated  to give the required  daily 
amount  of calcined  magnesite.Creenvalej  
CAL'MAG  
NUTS
Available  from  all C.SET  branches  and Greenvale  stockists
33
export  refunds.  The Beef Suckler  Scheme  and the Calf Premium  Scheme  
are integral  parts of the CAP.
We have suffered  from poor marketing  in the past. There was a 
tendency  to over rely on intervention.  This was understandable  and 
commercially  logical  for some plants. No bad debts were incurred  and 
the actual marketing  operation  was relatively  simple. We relied on 
intervention  unnecessarily.  This is borne out by the fact that after cow 
intervention  was suspended  in 1975 cow prices  continued  to rise. Good  
commercial  outlets existed while the intervention  option was over­
utilised. This has implications  for commercial  selling  of beef. Also we 
tend to sell too much beef through  the wholesale  ‘circuits ’ like Smithfield  
where  price fluctuations  are greatest.  Regularity  and continuity  of supply 
and quality  control  are essential  if maximum  commercial  returns  are to 
be obtained.
Finally —a brief comment  should be made on the meat/live  cattle  
debate. It would  increase  added  value and employment  if all our cattle  
were marketed  through  plants. This, however,  would concentrate  econ ­
omic power  in one outlet. This would  have repercussions  for producers  
especially  if circumstances  similar  to 1974 returned.  Producers  returns  
could fail with consequences  for the size of the national  breeding  herd. 
In 1974 live exports  failed to increase  in line with the unprecedented  
increase  of 42% in volume  of off-farm  cattle disposals.  This was primar ­
ily due to the absence  of any support  arrangements  in the U.K. Factories  
made considerable  profits. Producers  suffered  badly and the beef herd 
was dramatically  reduced  by 250,000  in the following  3 to 4 years.  Under  
EEC rules it is illegal in any case to prevent  live exports.
SUPPORT  FOR CATTLE  AND BEEF SECTOR
Support  for the beef industry  is covered  by a number  of EEC measures  
which are as follows  ;
I. Beef Intervention  (EEC Regulation  805/68)
(a) Each year the Council  fixes a guide  price for cattle. The Interven ­
tion price is fixed at 90% of the guide price.
(b) In Ireland  a derogation  from this rule applies  whereby  interven ­
tion purchasing  may continue  when  market  prices  for intervention  
categories  are above the intervention  price provided  that the 
average  market  price for all cattle does not exceed  85% of the 
guide price.
(c) Intervention  buying-in  is limited to nominated  categories.  In 
Ireland  Steers  I and II are eligible.
(d) 1981 was the first full year of operation  of the Commission ’s new 
policy of seasonal  restriction  of intervention  purchasing.  The 
policy aims to confine  intervention  support  to that part of the 
market  which  is weakest  at a given time of the year.
34
(e) Intervention  intake  and value is as follows  :
Total Purchased  (Tonnes)
1979 90,000
102,000 1980
1981
198247,000  
52,000  (est.)Value  £(m)
132.4
161.0
82.9
2.Aid for Private  Storage  (EEC Regulation  2826/82)
This was introduced  in the Community  as a supplementary  price 
support  measure.
The present  scheme  is for hindquarters  and is applicable  from 25 
October  to 10 December  1982.
The rate of aid is £400 (approx.)  per tonne for a 5 month  period.  
The following  table outlines  the amount  of aid received  by 
Ireland  (and the tonnages)  under these schemes  in the past.(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Regulation  No. Type of cut Tonnes Aid £
1198/79 Forequarter 2,980 703,000
2061/79 Hindquarter 2,770 979,000
2536/80 Hindquarter 500 194,000
3092/81 Hindquarter 1,275 268,000
(e) Recoupment  from the EEC .... 100 per cent
The U.K, Variable  Premium  (EEC Regulation  1200/82)
(a) Premium  is payable  to U.K. producers  for adult bovine  animals  
other than cows.
(b) The amount  payable  is the difference  between  the market  price  
and the seasonalised  target price (average  target price is equal to 
85% of the guide price).
(c) The following  are the approximate  rates of expenditure  incurred  
under  the scheme  for the export  of Irish beef to the U.K.
1979
1980
1981£m
0.04
2.8
7.5
4.(d) Reeoupment —100 per cent of the above  expenditure  is recovered  
from the U.K. who in turn received  25% recoupment  from  
FEOGA  in the 1981/82  marketing  year, 40% for the 1982/83 
marketing  year.
Export  Refunds  (EEC Regulation  Number  2773/82)
(a) Export  refunds  bridge the gap between  Community  priees and 
prices  prevailing  on export  markets  in third countries  for beef and 
live animals.
35
(b) The following  are the expenditures  on export  refunds.
1979 1980 1981
Quantity  £(m) 
(Tonnes)Quantity  £(m) 
(Tonnes)Quantity
(Tonnes)£(m)
Beef  15,000 9.1
Live Cattle 42,000 17.817,000  17.9
105,000  47.057,000
135,00048.4
66.5
Recoupment  from EEC . . . .. 100 per cent
5. EEC Frontier  Controls  for Beef
Frontier  controls  consist  of Customs  duties  of 16% on live animals  
and 20% on beef. In addition  there is a variable  levy system  related  
to the difference  between  the Community  and World  prices.
Duties  and levies  are reduced  or abolished  in the following  preferen ­
tial agreements
(a) GATT  Quota  for pedigree  breeding  stock of Alpine  breeds
— 5,000 head per annum  at 4% duty; levy free.
(b) GATT  Quota  for mountain  breeds
— 385,000  head per annum  at 4% duty; levy free.
(c) Young  male bovine  animals  for fattening
— 235,000  head per annum at 20% duty with a reduction  of 
60-70%  in the levy.
(d) High Quality  Beef (Hilton  Cuts)
— 29,000  tonnes  beef at 20% duty; levy free.
(e) ACP Quota
— 35,000  tonnes  of beef at 90% reduction  on import  duty.
(f) Yugoslavian  Baby Beef
— 50,000  tonnes  at 20% duty and 50% reduction  in levy.
(g) Frozen  Beef for processing
— Quota A 30,000  tonnes  per annum  | 20%duty  and levy 
— Quota  B 30,000  tonnes  per annum  / reduced  by 55%.
(h) GATT  Quota  for frozen  beef
— 50,000  tonnes  per annum  at 20% duty; levy free.
(i) Canned  Beef
Bound  in GATT  at 26% duty with no quantitative  restrictions  
and levy free.
The quantities  and the levies  are subject  to review. Actual  quantities  
imported  under these agreements  are in practice  less than those 
specified.
6. Scheme  of Premiums  for maintaining  Suckler  Cows  (EEC  
Regulation  1357/80)
(a) Aim of this scheme  is the maintenance  of suckler  cows for meat  
production.
(b) Full time farmers  are eligible  for this scheme.
36
(c) Farmers  must have ceased  commercial  milk production  and agree 
not to engage  in such production  for 12 months  after application.  
Cows  must be recognised  as belonging  to a beef breed.
The applicant  must maintain  for six months the number  of 
suckler  cows approved.
The premium  for 1982/83  is worth 35 ECU (£24.00  approx.)  per 
eligible  animal.
Recoupment  from EEC .... 100 per cent.
Expenditure  on the scheme  for 1981/82  was £9.08  m (approx.)  
while expenditure  for 1982/83  is estimated  at £8.5 m.(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
7. Calf Premium  Scheme  (EEC Regulation  1201/82)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)Calves  born on or after the 20 May 1982 in the marketing  year 
1982/83  are eligible  for the premium.
From the 1st January  1983 farmers  will tag their own calves  and 
will be required  to record  full details  of each calf (particularly  
the date of birth) in a simple calf register. If the calf is sold 
the certificate  of birth is passed  on to the new owner.
Imported  calves  are not eligible  for the premium.
The premium  is worth  32 ECU (£22 approx.)  and is payable  when 
the calf is six months  old.
Total cost of the scheme .......... £37 million.
Recoupment  from the EEC ......... 100 per cent.
Guidance  Premiums  for Beef/Sheepmeat  Production
(EEC  Directive  159)
(a) Guidance  premiums  are available  only to development  farmers  
under  the Farm Modernisation  Scheme.
(b) They are payable  where  the farm development  plan indicates  that 
the planned  gross margins  for the beef/sheepmeat  enterprise  will 
be at least 50% of the total planned  gross margin  by the end of 
the farm plan.
(c) In addition  the farm plan must indicate  that there will be at least 
a 20% increase  in the number  of livestock  units  to be devoted  to 
beef/sheepmeat  production.
(d) The amount  of premium  payable  is related  to the acreage  to be 
devoted  to beef/sheepmeat  production.
(e) Premiums  are payable  where there is evidence  of orientation  
towards  beef/sheepmeat  production.
(f) Guidance  premium  rates  are as follows  (subject  to exchange  rates)
1st year £15.70  per acre subject  to limit  of £3,880 per farm.
2nd year £10.65  per acre subject  to limit  of £2,630 per farm.
3rd year £5.40  per acre subject  to limit  of £1,340 per farm.
(g) Development  farmers  under  the Farm Modernisation  Scheme  are 
also eligible  for the following,  which  assist in the development  of 
beef cattle systems
37
Land improvement
Fixed assets
Initial  purchase  of 
extra stock  
Mobile  equipment50% capital  grant or equivalent  interest  
subsidy  for a period  of up to 15 years  on 
amount  borrowed.
30% capital  grant or equivalent  interest  
subsidy  for a period  of up to 15 years.
10% capital  grant or equivalent  intere.st  
subsidy  for a period  of up to 5 years.
10% capital  grant or equivalent  interest  
subsidy  for a period  of up to 5 years.  
(Development  farmers  are also entitled  to a grant in respect  of 
keeping  farm accounts  and having priority  access to land re­
leased under  the Retirement  Scheme).
(h) Expenditure  under  the Farm Modernisation  Scheme
Reimbursement  from EEC  
£(m)  £(m)
1979 32.0 2.9
1980 52.0 4.3
1981 44.3 9.2
Recoupment  rate : Western  Region 50% on capital  grants  
Recoupment  rate :
Western  Region  50%  ) on capital  grants  paid to
Remainder  of Country 25% ^ Development  Farmers  only.
(i) Expenditure  on Guidance  Premia  (included  in above  figures).
Reimbursement  from EEC  
£(m) £(m)
1979 0.358  0.090
1980 0.455  0.089
1981 0.525  0.154
Recoupment  rate : Western  Region  50%. Remainder  of 
Country  25%.
Calf to Beef Interest  Subsidy  under  the Programme  
for Western  Development  (EEC Regulation  1820/80)
(a) This scheme  is part of a special  programme  for the stimulation  of 
agricultural  development  in the West of Ireland,  is open to all 
farmers  in Western  counties  who are eligible  under  the conditions  
of the scheme.
(b) Farmers  following  improvement  plans orientating  cattle produc ­
tion towards  an integrated  calf to beef system  can qualify  for an 
interest  subsidy  not exceeding  16% on a loan of up to £100 per 
animal  for 2 years on each calf entering  the system in the hrst 
and second  year of the plan and will be additional  to the capital  
grants  available  for buildings  (40%)  and fixed equipment  (30%).  
(For farmers  who undertake  to follow a farm improvement  plan 
with emphasis  on the expansion  of cattle and sheep  numbers  and
38
CBF-A  BRIDGE  TO 
THE WORLD  MEAT MARKETS
li’ish Livestock  aind Meat
Ireland is the largest net exporter  of cattle, beef, sheep  
and lamb in the E.E.C. In 1982 these exports  were worth  
IRE750  million and comprised  13 per cent of all Irish ex­
ports. The industry  represents  a production  input from 
over 150,000  farms and a livelihood  for tens of thousands  
of Irish farm families.
CBF
It is essential  that such a vital industry  should  be served  
by a fully effective  link between  the farmer,  the processor 
and the marketplace.  CBF fulfils that role. It monitors 
the market  potential,  undertakes  market  development  and 
promotes  the image and reputation  of Irish cattle and 
sheep, beef and lamb wherever  there is a realistic  pros­
pect of trade.
CBF is in constant  touch with the industry  at home and 
customers  overseas.  It is well equipped  to serve and ser­
vice Ireland ’s single biggest  industry.
The Marketplace
The produce  of the Irish meat industry  goes mainly to 
Great Britain,  Continental  Europe,  North Africa and The 
Middle  East.
There are great traditional  outlets, like Great Britain, 
which has bought Irish cattle for over 1,000 years; but 
there are also recently  developed  and newly developing 
markets  in many corners  of the world.
In all circumstances,  in all areas, CBF is the solid bridge 
between  the Irish industry  and its marketplace.
CBF — The Irish Livestock  and Meat Board,  
Clanwilliam  Court,  Lower  Mount  St., Dublin  2. 
Telephone:  (01) 685155 Telex:  24440
39
keep simplified  accounts  in a prescribed  form from the start of 
the plan will reeeive  40% grant for farm buildings  and 30% grant  
for fixed equipment.  The amount  of grant  aid towards  investment  
provided  for in the improvement  plan will not apply  to investment  
in excess  of £12,000  per farm).
(c) Recoupement  from the EEC ......... 50%.
(d) No payment  in re.spect  of the Calf to Beef Interest  Subsidy  have  
been made to date.
(e) State expenditure  for the Calf to Beef Interest  Subsidy  is estimated  
at £8 million  (approx.)  over a 10 year period.
10. EEC Programme  for Development  of Beef Cafte Production  
in Ireland  (EEC  Council  Regulation  1054/81  and 
Commission  Regulation  1410/81)
(a) This is a two year programme  for the development  of beef cattle  
production  in Ireland  (forms  part of the Programme  of Special  
Measures  for Ireland).
(b) The element  of this programme  whieh  has an immediate  effect  
on the improvement  of livestock  is a scheme  aimed  at promoting  
an increase  in the use of artificial  insemination  (AI) by reducing  
the cost of the service.
— a subsidy  of £5 (approx.)  is payable  on first inseminations  of 
suitable  breeds.
— provision  in the 1982 estimates  for expenditure  on this seheme 
is £5.9m approx.
(c) Under  this programme  aid is also provided  for genetic  improve ­
ment in breeding  stock (bulls)  by the following
— Extension  of on farm recording  scheme  of pedigree  beef herds  
— Expansion  of performance  testing  
— Expansion  of progeny  testing  
— Meat quality  researeh  project
— Provision  in the 1982 estimates  for expenditure  in this area is 
£1.25 m approx.
(d) Recoupment  from the EEC .... 50%.
11. Scheme  of Assistance  for the Expansion  of the Cattle  
Breeding  Herd  —1982
(a) This is a national  scheme  (funded  entirely  by the State Ex­
chequer)  and approved  by the EEC Commission,  which is 
aimed at assisting  an expansion  of the cattle breeding  herd.
(b) Applications  were accepted  up to July 30th 1982.
(c) All first calved heifers being considered  for grant must be 
pre.sent  at inspection  and be additional  to the number  of cows  
computed  for the basic herd, i.e. in the herd on June 30th 1981 
and still present  at the time of inspection.
(d) Each additional  first calved  heifer  must :
(i) Have calved  in the calendar  year 1982. If a heifer  has not 
calved  by inspection  time, she must ealve by December  31st 
1982.
40
12.(ii) Be of good quality  and type and suited  to the production  of 
good quality  cattle.
(iii) Have been inseminated  by a licenced  or AI bull.
(iv) Have not more than six permanent  incisor  teeth.
(v) Have incurred  an outlay  of £500 to the applicant  (compris ­
ing certified  borrowings  plus inputs)  in order to quality  for 
the grant of £70, subject  to a maximum  of 40 heifers  per 
applicant.
(e) In the 1982 estimates  provision  is made  for expenditure  of £5.5m 
on this scheme.
Headage  Schemes
(A) Cattle  headage  payments  in severely  handicapped  areas  
(EEC Directive  75/268)
This scheme  applies  only in the areas designated  as severely  
handicapped.
Payments  are based on the number  of L.U.S.  declared  to be in 
applicants  ownership  of 30th June 1982 and which are present  
at a subsequent  inspection.
Rates  of payment  
First 8 L.U.  —
9th to 30th L.U. —
i.e. to a maximum  of £872.00.
Recoupement  from the EEC .(a)
(b)
(c)£32/L.U.  
£20/L.U.
(d) 50%.
(B) Beef Cow Scheme
Disadvantaged  areas (EEC Directive  75/268)
(a) This scheme  applies  in less severely  handicapped  regions  within  
the Disadvantaged  Areas,  e.g. East Galway,  South  Roscommon,  
North  Kerry,  etc.
(b) The scheme  is confined  to applicants  who do not engage  wholly 
or partly  in commercial  milk production.
Rates  of payment  
First 10 beef cows —
11th to 28th cow —
i.e. to a maximum  of £824.00.
Recoupment  from the EEC . .(0
(d)£32/cow  
£28/ cow
50%.
13. European  Agricultural  Guidance  and Guarantee  Fund (FEOGA)  
(EEC Regulation  355/77)
Grant  aid received  from FEOGA  (Guidance)  for the improvement  
of processing  and marketing  in the beef sector  is as follows.
£(m)
1980 2.5
1981 2.7
1982 (June)  1.7
14. EEC Interest  Subsidy  Scheme  (EEC  Council  Decision  81/598)
(a) This scheme  was introduced  on 1 September  1981 and allows
41
a two year subsidy  of 5% per annum  on loans taken out to 
finance Development  Plans under the Farm Modernisation  
Scheme.
(b) The Scheme  applies  only to farmers  classified  as Development  
under  the Farm Modernisation  Scheme.
(c) To date almost 10,000 applications  have been received  under  
the scheme  and 7,000 farmers  have been paid subsidies  totalling  
£3.7m.
(d) Recoupment  from the EEC — in Disadvantaged  areas  : 50%
Recoupment  from the EEC — in Other  areas : 25%
15. National  Interest  Subsidy  Scheme
(a) The National  Interest  Subsidy  Scheme  introduced  on 1 December  
1981 allows a two year subsidy  of 5% per annum to non- 
Development  farmers  under the Farm Modernisation  Scheme.
(b) The subsidy  is paid on loans arranged  between  1 January  1976 
to 31 December  1980 to finance  grant-aided  investment.
(c) To date 8,000 applications  have been received  under  the scheme  
and 4,600  of these have been paid subsidies  amounting  to £1.4m.
16. Reduced  Interest  Scheme  for Farmers  in severe  financial  difficulty
(a) This Scheme  was introduced  on 1 April 1982 with the aim of 
aiding  full-time  farmers  who are in financial  difficulty.
(b) The Scheme  allows  a subsidy  up to 8J% for 3 years on loans  
arranged  for general  agricultural  purposes  between  1 January  
1976 and 31 December  1980.
(c) It is expected  that about 7,000 farmers  will benefit under the 
Scheme.
42
A Guide  to Export  Markets  for Steer  Beef
P. J. MOORE
CBF — Irish Liverstock  and Meat Board,  Dublin.
The Irish cattle and beef industry  is unique  in its export  dependence.  
Overall  85% of total production  is exported.  In the case of steer beef, 
there is no domestic  market —our entire  output  is exported.  This year a 
total of about 40 markets  will buy Irish steers in one form or another.  
Many of these markets  are looking  for different  beef types especially 
when it comes  to specifications  on weight  and there is probably  no single  
animal  that is just right for all markets.
Steer Disposals  from Farms
The Irish farmer  has two outlets  open to him for the disposal  of his 
steer production —meat plants  and the live export  trade. Table 1 shows  
the pattern  of steer sales from farms  to both of those marketing  channels.  
As can be seen the meat plants  have gradually  increased  their importance  
during  the 1970 ’s rising from 51% shortly after EEC membership  to 
73% at the end of the decade.  In the opposite  direction  the proportion  of 
live exports  declined.  A reversal  has taken place since 1980 with the 
upsurge  in the live trade to newer  Third Country  markets.
Table 1
Distribution  of steer sales to meat plants  and for live exports
Meat plants Live exports
1973 51% 49%
1974 60% 40%
1975 59% 41%
1976 68% 32%
1977 68% 32%
1978 67% 33%
1979 73% 27%
1980 67% 33%
1981 56% 44%
Live Exports
The distribution  of live steer exports  as sold to each of the four 
principal  destinations  is shown  in Table 2. The most striking  feature  of 
this trade is the decline  in the importance  of Great Britain  and to a 
lesser extent Northern  Ireland alongside  the development  in trade to 
Third Countries.  The number  of steers exported  to Third Countries  in 
1981 probably  reached  their peak at 278,000  head. In 1982 exports  to 
Third Countries  have decreased  by almost  20%. The two main factors  
which have led to the growth  in this trade are the increased  demand
43
from the North  Africa/Middle  East countries  coupled  with the changed  
emphasis  in EEC policy  whereby  disposal  of cattle  and beef directly  onto 
Third Country  markets  was seen as a more cost-effective  budgetary  
measure  to the use of the Intervention  system. The current  refunds  on 
live steers to North Africa,  at IR£55.28/100  kg, amount  to about half 
the cost of the cattle at auction  marts.
Table 2
Destination  of live steer exports  (%) ;: proportion  exported  to
Northern Great Continental Third
Ireland Britain EEC Countries
1973 29% 52% 16% J /O
1974 35% 56% 3% 6%
1975 42% 48% 5% 5%
1976 32% 41% 8% 19%
1977 36% 44% 7% 13%
1978 41% 39% 7% 13%
1979 24% 34% 6% 36%
1980 21% 22% 4% 53%
1981 20% 12% 2% 66%
Slaughterings  at Meat  Export  Plants
Animals  sold to meat plants  have two ultimate  destinations,  namely  
commercial  export  markets  and Intervention  (Table  3). Since the com­
mencement  of Intervention  buying  in late 1973, the proportion  of steer  
throughput  sold commercially  for export  has ranged  from a low of 50% 
in 1974 up to the present  position  of about 68%,. Correspondingly,  the 
proportion  sold into Intervention  has tended downwards  and now 
accounts  for about one-third  of throughput.
Table 3
Distribution  of steer slaughterings  sold for commercial  exports  and into 
Intervention  (%)
Year Commercial  markets Intervention
1973 100%—
1974 51% 49%
1975 55% 45%
1976 62% 38%
1977 63% 37%
1978 59% 41%
1979 57% 43%
1980 56% 44%
1981 68% 32%
44
Where  
there ’s growth  
—there ’s 
Grcissland  
fertilizers
Greissland  
covers  Ireland.
Grasslani
Grassland  Fertilizers  Ltd. The Pound Road, Slane Tel. (041) 24124 & 24160
45
Export  Markets  for Beef
More than half of beef exports  are to Great  Britain  and this has been 
a consistent  pattern  since 1973 (Table  4). Prior to EEC entry the share 
of beef exports  consigned  to Great  Britain  was of the order  of 70%. The 
overall importance  of Continental  EEC markets  has tended to decline 
from about  44% in the early years of EEC membership  down to about  
33% in 1982. The principal  market  for Irish beef on the Continent  is 
France,  followed  by West Germany,  Belgium  and the Netherlands.  Only  
small quantities  of Irish beef are exported  to Italy and Greece.  A num ­
ber of explanations  can be put forward  as to why exports  to the 
Continent  have not developed  but part of the reason must lie in the 
fact that we have not made the required  transition  to the type of beef 
demanded  by the Continental  trade. A further reason is increased  
attractiveness  of Third Country  markets,  particularly  in the past year 
brought  about  by increased  demand  from countries  of the North  African/  
Middle  East region coupled  with the increased  importance  of export  
refunds.
Table 4
Export  markets  for chilled  beef (%)
Period U.K. Continental  EEC Third  Countries
1973 42% 52% 6%
1974 69% 30% 1%
1975 45% 51% 4%
1976 51% 37% 12%
1977 50% 43% 7%
1978 58% 39% 3%
1979 61% 36% 3%
1980 57% 36% 7%
1981 55% 35% 10%
Great  Britain
The total volume of beef imported  into Great Britain has been 
declining  but the tonnage  from Ireland  has been on a general  upward  
trend (Table  5). Since the entry of the UK into the Community,  tradit ­
ional suppliers  like Argentina,  Australia  and New Zealand  have been 
replaced  by EEC suppliers.  Ireland ’s share of total imports  is currently  
55%. Domestic  beef production  in the UK has been increasing  and this is 
illustrated  in the fact that the degree  of self-sufficiency  has grown from 
60% in the mid-1960s  to 85% in 1981 with a forecast  of a slight fall to 
83% by 1985. Given this outlook,  it is likely that Great Britain  will 
continue  to be an important  market  for Ireland.
46
Table 5
UK beef imports
Year Total imports
000 tonnesIreland ’s share
1965 286 10%
1970 265 39%
1975 198 49%
1980 233 68%
1981 195 55%
The British market  for steer beef can be divided into three main  
segments :
— Wholesale  markets
— Depot  type markets
— Supermarkets
Supermarkets  pay the highest  prices  for beef. It has been shown  that 
the level of premium  paid by supermarkets  over wholesale  outlets  was of 
the order of 4p/lb carcase  weight  in 1979/80.  That differential  is still 
broadly  the same. Data collected  by CBF ’s London  Office  on exports  to 
date in 1982 shows  supermarkets have paid 2p/lb  on average  over returns  
from sales to depots  and 4p/lb  over the returns  from Smithfield.
Supermarkets  pay these higher prices for a specified  quality,  consist ­
ently supplied.  In practice  their first priority  is for quality  coupled  with 
uniformity  from one order to the next. They mostly  buy to formal  and 
fairly strict specifications.  Their requirements  are for relatively  light 
carcases,  weighing  between  270 and 325 kgs, having  a good conformation  
and with a medium  covering  of fat. On the new EUROP  Classification  
system,  supplies  would  be selected  from carcases  having  an R conforma ­
tion score and with fatness  scores  of 3 and low 4. The approximate  live 
equilavent  is for an animal  weighing  between  500 kg and 600 kg.
About 15% of Irish steer beef exports  to Great Britain  are currently  
sold to supermarkets.  This compares  with about 8% in 1981 and is a 
very desirable  development.
Continental  EEC
Total beef imports  into Continental  EEC countries  amount  to about  
800,000  tonnes  annually.  Ireland ’s share of this import  volume  is less 
than 10%. The Continental  EEC markets  for steers can be broadly  
divided  into two segments  :
1) Retail  Butchers
2) Large  Supermarkets
The requirements  of the Butcher  trade are best illustrated  in the buying  
patterns  on the Rungis  Wholesale  market  in Paris. Conformation  is a 
characteristic  highly  valued  in this market.  Over and above its effect  on
47
yield of meat, conformation  is sought  as a measure  of the thickness  of 
muscle. On the Continent  muscles  are dissected  individually  and com­
pletely  defatted  before  being sectioned  for sale as steaks. Good confor ­
mation  effectively  increases  the yield of high priced  cuts. Muscles  which 
in a less well fleshed  carcase  would not be thick enough,  but in a well 
conformed  carcase  they can be dissected  individually,  sectioned  and sold 
as steaks.
At the present  time, the differential  on steer carcases  on the Rungis  
market  ranges  between  5 and 7 IRP  / LB for each change  in conformation  
score.
Carcae  weight  and low fat levels  are equally  important  for this market.  
Carcases  in excess  of 350 kg with low fat levels  are ideal. Large  overfat  
carcase  with good conformation  can only be supplied  following  trimming  
of excess  fat. On the new EUROP  scale, carcases  with a conformation  
score of U are very suitable.
As far as Ireland  is eoncerned  the supermarket  trade to the Continent  
mainly applies  to West Germany.  Supermarkets  in Germany  almost  
exclusively  buy vacuum-packed  beef which has been de-boned  from 
carcases  weighing  between  320 kg and 340 kg with light covering  of fat. 
Selection  for this trade is made from the careases  having  an R3 score on 
the new EUROP  scale.
Carcase  Quality  in Ireland
Operation  of the Beef Classification  Scheme  has given an opportunity  
to collect  data not only on levels of fatness  and conformation  but also 
on breed type. The following  data was prepared  by the Carcase  Classi ­
fication  Unit in the Department  of Agriculture  based on a sainple  of 
10,000 steer carcases  slaughtered  in 1981. The study was carried out 
during  the operation  of the IRELAND  system and to avoid confusion  
I have assumed  that the new EUROP  system compares  with the 
IRELAND  system  as outlined  in Table  6.
Table 6
Distribution  of breeds  by conformation  class
Conformation  Classes  %
r
ER
UE
RL
OAND
P% of Total  
slaughterings
Friesians 0 1 37 55 7 54
Hereford  X’s 0 2 61 33 3 34
Charolais 0 24 61 14 1 9
Overall  average 0 3 47 44 6 97
Source  : D. Coleman  and P. O. Ryan, Department  of Agriculture.
48
Table  6 shows  the classification  by conformation  class of the three main  
breed types. Friesians  have the worst conformation  with 55% in class  
‘O’ and only 37% in ‘R’ category  on the new EUROP  system. The 
reverse  is pue for Hereford  Crosses —61%  graded  ‘R’ or better  and 33% 
graded  ‘O’. There  are more Friesian  carcases  also in the very poor class, 
7% graded ‘P’. Charolais  graded superior  to the other breeds,  most  
noticeably  in the number  of ‘U’s — 24% of all Charolais  graded  ‘U’. 
Similar  type results  could  be expected  from Simmental,  Limousin  and the 
Blond d’Aquitaine  had sufficient  members  being available  for identifica ­
tion in the survey  by the Department  of Agriculture.
The influence  of Friesians  on the breed structure  of steers  is apparent  
in the “Overall  Average ’’ data. Charolais  and Hereford  Crosses  graded  
reasonably  well for conformation  but because  Friesians  constitute  more  
than 50% of the steer kill the overall  average  conformation  scores  were 
low. The introduction  of the Holstein  strain into the dairy cow herd 
will further  militate  against  improved  conformation  of Friesians.
Summary
The premium  priced  market  segment  in Great  Britain  is for a carcase  
weighing  from 270 to 300 kgs with good conformation  and a light to 
medium  fat cover. In terms  of a live animal  this is a steer weighing  from 
500 to 550 kgs with good conformation  and with no excess  fat.
The premium  Continental  market  is for large excellently  conformed  
carcases  with very low fat eovering  weighing  upwards  of 350 kgs which 
in liveweight  terms  is upwards  of 650 kgs.
Continental  supermarkets,  especially  in West Germany,  demand  meat  
from carcases  of good conformation  weighing  from 320 to 340 kgs (590-  
630 kgs liveweight).
49
Silage  for Dairy Cows  — Conservation  
and Method  of Feeding
J. J. MURPHY
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark.  Fennoy,  Co. Cork.
IntroductionIt is now widely accepted  that silage is the most reliable  method  ot 
conserving  winter  forage  on a dairy  farm. Especially  in our climate  where 
weather  is unpredictable,  silage conservation  is far less at risk than hay 
making.  A total of 2.59 million  acres were conserved  as silage and hay 
in 1980 (Farm Management  Department,  An Foras Taluntais)  and the 
area devoted  to hay has been declining  with a corresponding  increase  in 
the area and quantity  of grass silage.
Thomas  (1981)  in this Journal  covered  a number  of factors  m relation  
to quality  silage and milk production.  This paper will deal with four 
aspects  of silage  for dairy cows  : (a) the importance  of silage digestibility  
and preservation  quality,  (b) the influence  of wilting  on silage  intake  and 
cow performance,  (c) the use of sulphuric  acid as a silage additive  and 
(d) self and easy feeding  of silages.
Silage  digestibility  and preservation  quality
The stage of growth  at which  herbage  is cut is the prime determinent  
of its digestibility  and for a well preserved  silage, digestibility  is the 
major factor influencing  its feed value. With dairy cows the effect of 
digestibility  on silage intake  and milk yield has l^en well illustrated  in 
a number  of experiments  (Table  1). Delaying  cutting  from 42 to 63 days
Table 1
The effect  of silage  digestibility  on silage  intake  and cow performance
Cutting In-vitro Silage  DMI Milk yield
time DMD(%) (% Lw) (kg/d)
Butler 1972 42 days 76.0 1.64 14.3
63 days 63.0 1.55 11.7
84 days 59.0 1.30 11.2
Butler 1977 May 25 75.2 1.91 19.5
June 14 68.0 1.54 16.7
Steen and Gordon  1980 Cutting In-vitro Silage Milk yield
time DMD(%) (kg) (kg)
Supplement  of 7.6 kg 36 days 72.1 726 1942
concentrates  per day 65 days 68.3 651 1731
Supplement  of 11.2 kg 36 days 72.1 614 1979
concentrates  per day 65 days 68.3 553 1830
50
reduced  DMD by 13 units, silage dry matter  intake by 5.5% and milk 
yield by 18% when 3.6 kg of concentrates  were fed per cow per day and 
performance  was further  reduced  when silage  cut after 84 days of growth  
was fed (Butler  1972). In a later experiment  (Butler  1977) where  5.5 kg 
of concentrates  per cow per day was fed a 68 DMD silage gave a 19% 
lower  intake  and 14.3%  less milk compared  to a 75.2 DMD  silage. Steen  
and Gordon  (1980) fed two silages of different  digestibility  to spring  
calving  cows with a moderate  and high level of concentrate  during  the 
indoor  feeding  period  (approximately  70 days). Even with the high level 
of concentrate  supplementation  (11.2 kg/cow/day)  earlier  cut material  
(73.6 DMD produced  12% more milk compared  to a later cut silage  
(68.3 DMD).
As well as obtaining  high digestibility  it is also important  that the 
silage be well preserved.  Poor preservation  results  in high pH values  
and ammonia  levels with subsequent  reduction  in intake. A number  of 
experiments  have been carried  out at Moorepark  which  clearly  illustrate  
the negative  effects of poor preservation  on silage intake and milk  
production.  Two of these are summarised  in Table 2 and in both 
experiments  the well preserved  silages  were treated  with 85% formic  
acid. In experiment  1, the poor preservation  resulted  in a 15.6% reduc ­
tion in intake and an 11.4% decrease  in milk yield compared  to a well 
preserved  silage. Intake  and milk yield were decreased  by 4.4 and 6.5% 
respectively  as a result of poor preservation  in experiment  2. In both 
experiments  the DMD  was lower  in the poorly  preserved  silages.
Table 2
The effects  of poor preservation  on silage  dry matter  intake  and milk production
Quality  of Preservation
Poor Good
Experiment  1
DM % 19.20 20.60
pH 4.71 3.98
In-vitro  DMD% 65.60 73.20
Silage DM intake (% Lw) 1.51 1.79
Milk yield (kg/d) 17.10 19.30
Experiment  2
DM% 19.30 22.40
pH 4.76 3.91
VN —% TN 24.70 9.70
In-vitro  DMD% 68.00 69.00
Silage DM intake (% Lw) 1.72 1.80
Milk yield (kg/d) 17.30 18.50
per day.
51
Field wilting  of grass  for silage
Good preservation  can be achieved  without  using an additive  by 
raising  the dry matter  content  of the grass  before  ensiling  by field wilting. 
This concentrates  the soluble  carbohydrates  in the grass thereby  improv ­
ing the growth  conditions  for Lactobacilli  and inhibiting  the undesirable  
clostridial  bacteria  due to increased  osmotic  pressure.  Experiments  on 
wilting have shown that it consistently  gives good preservation  and 
increase  silage dry matter intake but does not always  improve  cow 
performance  (Butler,  Gleeson  and Murphy,  1979). Seven experiments  
on wilting  carried  out in Moorepark  are summarised  in Table 3. In five 
experiments  unwilted  silage without  additive  was compared  with silage  
made from similar grass wilted for 24 to 36 hours before ensiling.  
Silage dry matter intake increased  by approximately  26% due to 
wilting  but milk yield increased  by less than 2%. Where  wilted silage  
was compared  to an unwilted  silage  treated  with 85% formic  acid, intake  
was increased  by 20% but milk yield was slightly  less. No consistent  
differences  in milk composition  between  cows on unwilted  and wilted 
silages were evident  in these experiments.  Similar  results have been  
obtained  with dairy cows in Northern  Ireland  and England  in compari ­
sons of unwilted  and wilted  silage  (Gordon  1980, Thomas  1981).  Overall,  
the results  suggest  that wilted  sillage  has no nutritional  advantage  over a 
well preserved  unwilted  silage.
Table 3
The effect of wilting  on silage intake and milk yield when compared  with (a) 
unwilted  silage without  additive  (5 expts.) and (h) unwilted  silage treated  with  
85% formic  acid (2 expts.)
Unwilted WiltedPercentage  effect  
due to wilting
(a)
DM% 18.50 27.80
pH 4.38 4.53
Intake  (% Lw) 1.55 1.95 + 25.80
Milk yield (kg/d) 18.00 18.30 -1- 1.70
(b)
DM% 20.60 29.00
pH 3.85 4.33
Intake (% Lw) 1.72 2.07 -1- 20.30
Milk yield (kg/d) 18.60 18.30 - 1.60
Sulphiuic  acid as a silage  additive
The most frequently  used silage additives  in Ireltnd  have been 85% 
formic  acid and molasses  and both have been shown to be effective  in 
a number  of trials. Within  the last few years  40-45%  sulphuric  acid has
52
All  you  ever  
wanted  in a
shBanksbetter  future
53
been made commercially  available  as a silage additive  and this has been 
compared  with 85% formic  acid in a trial in Moorepark.  Three  portions  
of primary  growth  herbage  (approximately  2 ha. each) were mown  and 
harvested  with a precision  chop harvester  with the following  treatments  ;
1. Unwilted  plus 85% formic  acid (approx.  2.3 1/t)
2. Unwilted  plus Sulphuric  acid A (approx.  2.3 1/t)
3. Unwilted  plus Sulphuric  acid B (approx.  2.3 1/t)
Both Sulphuric  acid A and B are commercially  available  silage ad­
ditives. The silages  were evaluated  in a 52 day randomised  block  feeding  
experiment  with spring calving  cows in early lactation  (ten cows per 
treatment)  The silages  were fed ad-libitum  and were supplemented  with 
5.0 kg per day of barley-soyabean  meal concentrate.  Six cows on each 
treatment  were housed  in a metabolism  house for 10 day periods  where 
diet digestibility  and mineral  intake  and excretion  were measured.  Blood 
samples  were taken in the 6th and 7th week of the trial and analysed  for 
calcium,  magnesium,  phosphorus  and copper.
The chemical  composition  of the 3 silages  is shown in Table 4. All 
were well preserved  and highly  digestible.  The use of the sulphuric  acid 
additives  increased  the sulphur  content  to 0.40 and 0.34% from 0.24% 
on the 85% formic  acid treated  silage. Animal  performance  and diet 
digestibilities  on the silages  are shown in Table 5. Yields  of milk and 
milk constituents  were not significantly  different  between  treatments.  
Silage  dry matter  intake  was significantly  lower  on the sulphuric  acid A 
treatment  compared  to the 85% formic  acid treatment.  Other intake  
differences  were not significant  and the level of silage  intake  at over 2.0% 
of liveweight  was high on all treatments.  The digestibility  of dietary  dry 
matter  and organic  matter  was higher  on both sulphuric  acid treatments
Table 4
The chemical  composition  of the different  additive  treated  silages
Silage  Additive
85% Formic  acid Sulphuric  acid ASulphuric  acid B
Dry matter % 23.30 22.20 23.60
pH 4.02 4.02 4.02
Crude protein  (% DM) 15.40 16.00 15.60
NPN —% TN 44.40 43.20 44.40
VN % TN 7.20 7.30 10.60
MADF  (% DM) 38.10 38.20 37.90
Ash (% DM) 8.60 8.40 7.70
Sulphur  (% DM) 0.24 0.40 0.34
In-vitro  DMD (%) 69.50 70.20 70.80
Acetic  acid (% DM) 1.71 3.21 1.82
Propionic  acid (% DM) 0.08 0.35 0.14
Butyric  acid (% DM) 0.15 0.22 0.16
54
compared  to the formic  acid treatment.  There were no significant  dif­
ferences  between  treatments  in calcium  and magnesium  excretion  or in 
the blood levels of calcium,  magnesium,  phosphorus  and copper  (Table  
6). Overall  these results  indicate  that 40-45%  sulphuric  acid at levels  
of approximately  2.3 1/t is a suitable  additive  for use on silage for 
dairy cows.
Table 5
Cow performance  on the different  additive  treated  silages
Silage additive
85% Formic  acid Sulphuric  acid ASulphuric  acid B
Milk yield (kg/d) 20.5 21.0 20.9
Fat yield (kg/d) 0.702 0.695 0.705
Protein  yield (kg/d) 0.592 0.576 0.585
Lactose  yield (kg/d) 0.925 0.931 0.939
Silage DM intake (% Lw) 2.20 2.00 2.06
(kg/d) 11.09 9.93 10.49
Liveweight  change  (kg/d) —0.33 —0.54 —0.28
In-vivo  digestibility  of dietary:
Dry matter 71.3 73.0 74.3
Organic  matter 72.6 74.3 75.2
Table 6
Levels  of calcium  and magnesium  excretion  (as a % of intake)  and blood  levels  of
calcium,  magnesium,  phosphorus  and copper  on the different  silages
Silage additive
85 % Formic  acid Sulphuric  acid A Sulphuric  acid B
Mineral  excretion
Calcium 108.1 99.8 94.8
Magnesium 72.4 80.7 73.9
Blood  levels
1st Sampling
Calcium  (mg/ 100 ml) 10.50 10.60 11.10
Magnesium  (mg/100  ml) 2.13 2.18 2.16
Phosphorus  (mg/ 100 ml) 2.01 1.73 1.75
Copper  (^g/ml) 1.40 0.99 1.42
2nd Sampling
Calcium  (mg/100  ml) 12.10 13.50 12.70
Magnesium  (mg/ 100 ml) 2.11 2.17 2.19
Phosphorus  (mg/100  ml) 1.65 1.48 1.45
Copper  (Mg/ml) 1.43 1.61 1.56
55
IMethod  of feeding  silage
Self feeding  of silage has been the practice  on many dairy farms  for a 
number  of years but recently  more farmers  are considering  changing  
over to an easy feeding  system. The debate  as to which  feeding  system  
is superior  often hinges  on nutritional  aspects. There is a possibility  of 
an interaction  between  method  of feeding  and silage chop length and 
from data reported  in the literature  the position  is not clear. For this 
reason a number  of experiments  were undertaken  comparing  forage  
wagon  and precision  chop silage both self and easy fed.
Two experiments  were carried  out where  the silages  were fed both pre- 
and post-calving.  The treatments  were as follows  :
1. Forage  wagon  silage self-fed
2. Forage  wagon  silage easy-fed
3. Precision  chop silage self-fed
4. Precision  chop silage easy fed.
There were 15 and 34 cows per treatment  in experiments  1 and 2 re­
spectively.  Pre-calving  only heifers  and second  calvers  were supplemented  
with 1.8 kg of concentrates  per day; post-calving,  all animals  received 
7.25 kg of concentrates  per day. On the easy feeding  treatments  there  
was a feeding  space of 24" per cow and on the self feeding  treatments  
feeding  spaces  of 12 and 1" per cow in experiments  1 and 2 respectively. 
In a third experiment  forage  wagon  and precision  chop silages  were self- 
fed in a post-calving  period only, with a feed space of 13" f>er cow 
teing  allowed.  From a preliminary  investigation  the results  suggest  that 
the following  average chop lengths were achieved  by the different  
harvesters:  precision  chop 5.2 cm, forage  wagon  23.1 cm, and courier  
wagon  (expt. 3) 21.3 cm. The cow performance  on the three experiments  
is shown  in Table  7. In experiment  1, the silages  were poorly  preserved 
with the wagon silage having a slightly higher pH (4.88) than the 
precision  chop (4.51). The pre-calving  period was short and although  
cow liveweight  before calving  was not significantly  different  between 
treatments  the lowest  liveweight  was recorded  in the wagon  silage self- 
fed. This group  also had the lowest  milk yields  pxDst-calving  being 7.4, 
5.9 and 4.4% lower  than the yield of the cows on wagon  silage  easy-fed,  
precision  chop silage self-fed  and precision  chop silage easy-fed.
In experiment  2, both the wagon  and precision  chop silages  were well 
preserved  and of good digestibility  (wagon  silage  —pH 4.19, DMD%  
72.3 : precision  chop silage  — pH 3.86, DMD%  70.7). Pre-calving  live- 
weight  gains on the wagon silage self-fed  were significantly  lower than 
on the other 3 treatments.  Silage  dry matter  intake  which  was measured  
on 10 cows from each treatment  using the chromic  oxide dosing  tech­
nique was also low on the treatment.  Post-calving  the wagon,  silage  
self-fed  group had the lowest  liveweight  loss and the lowest  milk yield  
(10.8, 12.9 and 9.6% lower  than the wagon  silage  easy-fed,  precision  chop  
silage self-fed  and the precision  chop silage easy-fed  groups  respectively).
In the third experiment  courier  wagon  and precision  chop silage were 
self-fed  to autumn  calving  cows for 56 days. Cows  were introduced  to
56
Table 7
Performance  of cows on forage  wagon  and precision  chop silage  both self and
easy-fed
Experiment  1 Forage  Wagon Precision  Chop
Self-fed Easy-fed Self-fed Easy-fed
Pre-calving
Period (days) 24.0 22.0 22.0 32.0
Weight  before calving  (kg) 524.6 551.1 541.1 535.1
Post-calving
Period (days) 51.0 49.0 53.0 46.0
Milk yield (kg) 17.5 18.9 18.6 18.3
Experiment  2 Forage  Wagon Precision  Chop
Self-fed Easy-fed Self-fed Easy-fed
Pre-calving
Period (days) 78.0 78.0 77.0 76.0
Weight  gain (kg/d) 0,29 0.61 0.62 0.70
.Silage DM intake (% Lw) 1.20 1.74 1.86 1.73
(kg/d) 6.6 9.8 10.8 9.8
Post-calving
Period (days) 24.0 24.0 24.0 24 0
Weight  loss (kg/d) 0.30 0.82 0.62 0.70
Milk yield (kg/d) 18.9 21.2 21.7 20.9
Experiment  3 Courier  Wagon Precision  Chop
Self-fed Self-fed
Milk yield (kg/d) 16.5 16.9
Liveweight  in final week (kg) 517.8 524.3
the silages approximately  113 days after calving. Both silages were  
poorly  preserved  and were of poor to moderate  digestibility  (wagon  silage  
—pH5.04,  DMD%  62.5 : precision  chop silage  — pH4.62,  DMD%  64.5).  
Milk yields  were similar  on both silages. In all three experiments  there  
were no significant  differences  in milk composition  between  treatments.
The results  of these experiments  show that there is no difference  in 
performance  between  cows on precision  chop silage either self or easy 
fed or on wagon silage easy-fed.  The cows on wagon silage self-fed
57
tended  to perform  poorly  and their intakes  of silage  were low pre-calving.  
Their milk yields post-calving  were also low which was probably  a 
reflection  on the poor liveweight  gain achieved  pre-calving.  When  cows  
of similar  condition  were put on self or easy feeding  wagon  silage post­
calving  only (receiving  7.25 kg of concentrates  per day), the type of 
silage had little effect  on their performance  (experiment  3).
References
Butler,  T. M. (1972).  Feeding  concentrates  to dairy cattle.  Dairying  and Pig. Confr.  
An Foras Taluntais.  p. 53-55.
Butler,  T. M. (1977).  Effect of formic  acid treatment,  wilting  and stage of growth 
on silage quality.  An Foras  Taluntais,  Anim.  Prod. Res. Rep. p. 108-109.
Butler,  T. M., Gleeson,  P. A. and Murphy,  J. J. (1979).  The effect of wilting  and 
formic  acid treatment  on silage  dry matter  intakes  and milk production  by dairy 
cows. 30th Ann. EAAP  meeting,  Harrogate,  England,  paper N 1.4.
Gordon,  F. J. (1980).  The effect of interval  between  harvests  and wilting  on silage  
for milk production.  Anim. Prod. 31, 35-41.
Steen, R. W. J. and Gordon,  F. J. (1980).  The effect of type of silage and level of 
concentrate  supplementation  offered during early lactation  on total lactation  
performance  of January/February  calving  cows. Anim.  Prod. 30, 341-345.  
Thomas,  C. (1981).  Silage  quality  and milk production.  Ir. Grassland  Anim.  Prod. 
Ass. J. 16, 52-58.
58
Ireland's  dairy  industry  
has  come  a long  way  since.
The days of dairymaids  and horse-drawn  creameries  
have passed.  In tneir  place has emerged  one of fhe world's 
most  modern  and dynamic  dairy  industries.  Today  Ireland  turns 
the greenest  grass in Europe  into a diverse  range  of the best- 
known  dairy  products  in the world.
From Honduras  to Hong  Kong,  from Trinidad  to 
Tokyo  you will find Irish cream,  milk powder,  chocolate  crumb,  
cheese,  casein  and a great  variety  ot other  products,  many  ot 
them sold under  the Kerrygold  brand  name.
Irish dairy  exports  this year are expected  to be 
worth  well over  £600m.  Which  gives  you some idea just how  far 
the industry has come  since  the days ot the dairymaid.
Trace Element  Deficiencies  in 
the Dairy Herd
D. B. R. POOLE
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.
In an earlier  paper  (Irish Grassland  and Animal  Production  Journal,  17: 
21-25, 1982) the importance  of the mineral  components  af the animal ’s 
diet was outlined  both in relation  to physical  structure  of the animal  and 
the physiological  function.  The usual requirements  for the important  
essential  elements  and the amounts  which Irish pasture  grass could be 
expected  to supply  were also detailed.  The present  paper  deals therefore  
with the abnormal,  as it arises in trace mineral  deficiencies  or toxicity. 
It includes  calves,  yearling  cattle as dairy replacements  and the dairy  
cow. Despite  the importance  of the dairy cow in the Irish farming  
economy,  the amount  of good research-based  information  on trace  
element  problems  is small. The reasons  for this include  the absence  of 
milk recording  on farms and the multiplicity  of factors  affecting  milk 
yield and reproductive  performance.  Considerable  efforts  have been made  
to study trace element  problems  on dairy farms and while we have 
obtained  some information,  it is not fully adequate.  This paper is 
divided  into two broad sections,  firstly,  the factors  which lead to trace  
element  problems  and secondly  the clinical manifestations  and the 
prevention  of these problems.  It will be confined  to four trace elements,  
copper,  cobalt,  selenium  and icdine,  because  I have no evidence  that 
other trace elements,  albeit  essential  for animals,  are actually  limiting  in 
any circumstances  in Ireland.
Background  to the problem
Copper  is essential  for animal  health and production,  being involved  
in a wide variety  of enzyme  and biochemical  functions  throughout  the 
body. The amount  of copper  normally  absorbed  from the food by the 
ruminant  is small — certainly  less than 10%. It appears  to be lower 
from fresh grass or silage than from hay or from concentrates..  More ­
over, its absorption  is subject to interference  by a number  of other  
dietary  components.  The most important  of these are molybdenum  and 
sulphur,  which appear  to be partly interdependent  but also to be able 
to function  separately.  Other  minerals  which  depress  copper  absorption  
are zinc, iron and cadmium;  there is no evidence  as to whether  these 
operate  under  Irish farm conditions.  Another  important  factor  which  can 
be involved  is dietary  soil. It is known  that grazing  animals  can ingest 
soil up to 10% of the dry matter  intake,  even higher  at times, and this 
can reduce copper availability  by 50% or more. This may be an 
explanation  for the adverse  effects of higher stocking  rates on animal  
copper  status.
60
Molybdenum  occurs  in anomalous  levels in some Irish soils, largely  
restricted  to certain shale soils. These occur in various  parts of the 
country,  sometimes  extensively  and in other parts quite restricted  in area.  
Many cut-over  peat soils are also high in molybdenum  and the over- 
generous  use of lime on any of these soils (but particularly  on the peat 
soils) releases  more molybdenum  for plant uptake. These shale-derived  
soils tend to be heavy and to offer satisfactory  supplies  of sulphur  for 
pasture  growth  and thus to have relatively  high pasture  sulphur  levels.
Recent  research  findings  from Johnstown  Castle identifying  sulphur  
deficiency  affecting  pastures  on certain  soils indicate  the value  of sulphur  
fertilisation  in such cases. Fortunately,  these are the free-draining  light 
texture  soils which  are generally  low in molybdenum,  so the increase  in 
pasture sulphur  resulting  from the proper use of sulphur-containing  
fertilizers  should be confined  to the low molybdenum  situations.  It is 
not fully known  what the effect of this will be on bovine  copper  status;  
but research  findings  so far do not indicate  any serious  problems.  It is 
recommended,  however,  that sulphur-eontaining  fertilizers  should only 
be used where there is a need for them and not on a generalised  basis. 
In a similar  way the use of sulphuric  acid as a silage additive  increases  
the sulphur  content  of the feed. In this case we have considerable  
research  experience,  particularly  with beef cattle and the results  show a 
definite  but small depressing  effect on copper  status. This effect is not 
serious but on a farm where copper  deficiency  is known  to occur, a 
suitable  increase  in the level of copper  supplementation  should  be made  
if sulphuric  acid is being used as a silage additive.
The results  of surveys  undertaken  on blood copper  levels in cows in 
various  parts of Ireland  suggest  that a high proportion  of cows are at a 
sub-optimal  copper  status. The nutritional  or economic  significance  of 
this is still under  study but at present  we believe  that in many areas,  the 
finding  is not of immediate  importance  and no measurable  improvement  
in health or production  will result from copper supplementation.  On 
the other hand, in a considerable  number  of farms  where blood copper  
levels are especially  low, clinical symptoms  or depressed  growth or 
yields do occur and will respond  satisfactority  to adequate  supplemen ­
tation. The assessment  therefore  of the presence  of “copper  deficiency ” 
must be based primarily  on the clinical  examination  of the herd and its 
health  and production  data, supported  by blood  or liver copper  analyses.
These  low status  herds  obviously  predominated  in areas of high moly ­
bdenum.  However,  for a variety  of reasons,  pasture  copper  levels in 
Ireland  appear  to be falling  in recent  years.  More  and more,  the combined  
effect of a sub-optimal  or even low pasture copper aggravated  by 
marginally  elevated  molybdenum  and/or  sulphur  levels  results  in copper  
deficiency.  In many  cases,  the factors  involved  here are plant physiologi ­
cal factors  such as, pasture  species,  stage and rate of growth,  effect of 
fertilizers,  etc., rather  than an inherently  low soil copper. It is therefore  
unlikely  that responses  to soil application  of copper  will be observed  
under  these conditions.
61
Let us now consider  two other trace elements —cobalt  and selenium — 
which may be of considerable  importance.  Both appear  to be uncom ­
plicated  deficiencies  in animals,  although  interactions  with other trace  
elements  may occur.
Cobalt  deficiency  occurs  under  two types of soil conditions.  The first 
occurs  where soil cobalt  levels are very low (soils derived  from granite,  
from sandstones  and from calcareous  sands and peat soils). In these'  
cases, pasture  values  may be very low, particularly  in shallow  rooting  
swards  and under conditions  of high soil pH. In such cases there is 
usually  a good response  to the use of cobalt  as a soil dressing.  Secondly, 
on soils where elevated  inanganese  levels restrict  the uptake  of cobalt  
to the extent that levels in the sward will be inadequate  for ruminant  
livestock.  In these cases soil dressings  are of little value.
It is clear, therefore,  that the mapping  of cobalt  deficiency  on a soil 
basis ought to be possible  and this has been done. One must, however,  
make due allowance  for local variations  in soil type and animal  man­
agement.
Selenium  in Ireland  has long been regarded  as a toxic element,  from 
Its occurrence  in very high levels in certain  glacial  lake bed soils in Co. 
Limerick.  It also occurs  in an area in Co. Tipperary  and in parts of Co. 
Meath and Co. Dublin. The classical  symptoms  of selenium  toxicity — 
lameness,  shedding  of hooves  and the hair of main and tail—can still be 
seen in certain  cases. However,  with the availability  of a reliable  and 
rapid blood enzyme  test (glutathione  peroxidase)  to assess selenium 
status,  it has become  possible  to survey  animal  blood selenium  status  in 
many  parts of Ireland.  This has shown  that, in varying  degrees,  many  of 
our herds  are low, or even very low, in selenium  and the toxic areas are 
indeed  very localised.  This finding  is amply  supported  by Dr. Fleming ’s 
work in Johnstown  Castle  on soil and geological  rock selenium  levels.
Clinical  manifestations  and prevention
In the case of copper  deficiency,  the most commonly  seen clinical  signs  
occur  in the young  animal  during  its first grazing  season,  with the suckler 
calf being somewhat  more sensitive  than the bucket-fed  animal. The 
early signs are dry, unhealthy  coats and a tendency  to stiffness.  These 
progress  to more pronounced  bone lesions  causing  swelling  above the 
fetlocks  (front and rear), stiffness  of gait and unnaturally  straight  stance 
probably  resulting  from lesions in the tendons. Coat colour changes  
(black  to grey, red to dun) are less clear-cut  and obvious  in the Friesians  
than they are in the Aberdeen  Angus  or the Dairy  Shorthorn.  Diarrhoea  
or scouring  may occur, at times profusely,  but it is not a consistent  
feature. The effect on performance  is about  40 kg liveweight  during  the 
first grazing  season.
In the second  year the animal  is more resistant,  although  the effects  of 
the first year ’s problem  may well persist. Otherwise,  poor coat texture,
62
scouring  and reduced  weight  gain (in the order of 25 kg of liveweight) 
may occur. In heifers,  anoestrus  (failure  to come in heat), sometimes  in 
animals  in apparently  first-class  condition,  may be associated  with 
copper  deficiency  and will respond  rapidly  to treatment.
In adult cows, the situation  is less clear. Herds  have been observed  
where scouring  and poor condition  in cows have been associated  with 
reduced  milk yields  (particularly  in the latter  part of the season)  and have  
responded  in controlled  trials  to copper  supplementation.  In many  other  
trials, no productive  response  has been seen despite  low or very low 
copper  status and despite  very clear increases  in blood and liver copper  
values  following  treatment.
On the other  hand,  clinical  (but uncontrolled)  evidence  from veterinary  
surgeons,  agriculturalists  and farmers  supports  the view that some prob ­
lems of infertility  (reduced  conceptions)  and even some abortion  out­
breaks  do respond  to copper  and therefore  may be a manifestation  of 
copper  deficiency.  Our advice in such cases is that where the obvious  
alternative  causes do not obtain or have been eliminated  and where 
copper status is very low, treatment  should be implemented  in the 
knowledge  that its value is subject  to question.  Similarly,  neonatal  
vitality  with mortality  may be affected  in calves bom from copper-  
deficient  mothers.  This has been seen in lambs  and we believe,  although  
without  conclusive  research  evidence,  that this holds for calves  also.
As has already  been indicated,  most of the serious  copper  deficiency 
is induced  by molybdenum  and sulphur.  Therefore,  any copper  given as 
a feed supplement  or in some other  oral form will be similarly  antagon ­
ised and its value reduced. For this reason particularly,  the use of 
copper  injections  have been considered  desirable  and our research  — 
supported  by international  evidence  — has generally  confirmed  this view.  
Particularly  in the young  calf, up to about  eight months  of age, I would  
recommend  no other route. Again,  on the farm where the problem  is 
under  investigation,  I would always  start with parenteral  treatment.  In 
this way, one can with confidence  assess  the response  to treatment  or the 
lack of it and thereby  confirm  the diagnosis.  Thereafter,  if the herd 
owner  wishes  to use oral copper  in some form,  i.e. feed additive,  mineral  
block  or water  medication,  it may  be found  to be of supportive  assistance  
or indeed to be adequate  treatment.  This will largely  depend  on the 
severity  and the cause of the problem.  My personal  preference  is to 
avoid any dubiety  and to give each animal  its precise  dose by subcut ­
aneous  injection.  My routine  for the problem  farm would be to treat  
the calves,  first in May, to re-treat  them in July and possibly  again in 
October,  using 100 mg of copper  as the standard  dose. The yearlings  
would be treated  at turnout  in the spring  and in severe situations,  and 
especially  for dairy replacements,  again  in July or August.  I would  treat  
cows about  6 to 8 weeks  before  calving,  this being largely  aimed at the 
calf, and I would  repeat  this as soon as possible  after calving.  In cases  
where the deficiency  is severe,  the dose for cows could be increased  to
63
200 mg. I would not re-treat  cows during  the summer  unless I saw a 
clinical  need for doing  so.
We are carrying  out research  on a new method  of copper  supplemen ­
tation in which a largely  insoluble  crystaline  form of copper  is given by 
mouth  and is retained  in the rumen  to be absorbed  over a long period  
of time. This could be very useful and could reduce  the treatment  of 
copper  deficiency  to one oral capsule  per year.
Cattle are much less sensitive  to cobalt deficiency  than sheep,  so on 
many  farms  where  lambs  may pine severely  due to cobalt  shortage,  cattle  
may remain healthy. The clinical  signs of cobalt deficiency  are very 
similar  to those of under-feeding.  Calves  during  the summer  at pasture  
may show poor growth  rate, unhealthy  coats and even some loss of coat 
colour. Much  of this is the result  of inappetence;  one of the most  regular  
and early features  of cobalt depletion  is a reduced  appetite.  As the 
condition  progresses,  severe  muscular  wasting  leads on to emaciation  and 
while this is unlikely  to occur  in Irish dairy  cows,  it could  occur  in calves 
at pasture.
Cobalt  is required  as a component  of vitamin  B,.. In the ruminant,  the 
microflora  of the rumen synthesises  vitamin  Bu so that, unlike the 
monogastric  animal,  the ruminant  can utilise elemental  cobalt in the 
synthesis  of the vitamin.  Vitamin  B12 is a necessary  component  of the 
metabolic  pathway  for prcprionate;  this is one of the principle  energy 
sources  of the ruminant.  This may be the explanation  for the relationship  
between  low cobalt  status  and acetonaemia  in cows  which  has sometimes 
been described.  Vitamin,  B12 is also involved  in methionine  metabolism  
and in this way affects  wool and hair growth. In addition,  vitamin  Bia 
is important  in the prevention  of anaemia  and therefore  the cobalt-  
deficient  animal  is often very anaemic.
Apart  from its effects  on appetite  and liveweight,  it has been suggested  
that cobalt  deficiency  may affect  fertility.  I believe  this to be a secondary  
effect and it is unlikely  except as a sequel to the other effects as 
described.
The prevention  of cobalt deficiency  depends  on increasing  dietary  
cobalt  intake. The use of cobalt  by injection  is of no value;  the injection  
of vitamin  B.^ gives  an obvious  but transient  response  and is not of long­
term practical  value. Cobalt  as a soil dressing,  on the low cobalt/low  
manganese  soils, can be very satisfactory  but costs must be considered  
and this method  may not be economical.  The usual dressing  is about 2 
kg cobalt  sulphate  per hectare  applied  every  third or fourth  year. Cobalt  
can obviously  be given in concentrate  feeds but at pasture  (apart  from  
regular  drenching  which  is seldom  of a practical  proposition),  the supple ­
ment can be given in drinking  water,  in mineral  mixes  or blocks  or as 
cobalt  bullets. These  latter  remain  in the rumen  and release  cobalt  over 
extended  periods.  They appear  to be more liable  to regurgation  in cattle,  
especially  cows,  than in sheep  but they still offer a satisfactory  remedy  in 
some cases.
64
Research  on selenium  deficiency  is in progress  and no firm conclusions  
can yet be made. From research  and field experience  in other countries,  
it is known that selenium  is required  as a component  of the enzyme 
glutathione  peroxidase  and that this enzyme  is crucial  in the protective  
removal  of peroxides  which  form in the tissues  during  normal  metabolic  
oxidation.  Complementary  to this function  is the role of vitamin  E 
which  is that of an anti-oxident.  The failure  of these processes  results  in 
tissue damage  in the bovine  leading  to muscular  dystrophy  which can 
affect  skeletal  muscle  resulting  in lameness  and muscular  wasting.  It also 
affects  cardiac  muscle  resulting  in heart failure. Neither  of these con­
ditions  occurs  widely  in Ireland,  although  muscular  dystrophy  is reported  
in Northern  Ireland. Selenium  and vitamin  E shortage  are also asso­
ciated with some outbreaks  of retained  placenta  and this has been 
observed  as a response  to treatment  in a number  of outbreaks  in this 
country
There have also been reports  from New Zealand  and Australia  of 
ill-thrift  in both beef and dairy cattle responding  to selenium  therapy.  1 
only know of one such case seen as a field observation  in Ireland.  
Selenium  deficiency  is associated  with reproduction  disorders  in both 
sexes and in a number  of species. Poor hatchability  and high chick  
mortality  in poultry  and quail,  poor conception  in pigs, embryonic  mor­
tality in ewes all have been reported.  Again,  however,  there is little 
convincing  research  information  in the case of the cow. However,  treat ­
ment of cows in some problem  farms  appears  to have given satisfactory  
responses  in improving  fertility.  Problems  of calf neonatal  mortality  and 
poor vitality  associated  with selenium  deficiency  have been reported  in 
other countries.
With this background  information,  the fact that so many Irish herds  
are very low in selenium  makes  one wonder  why we have not had many  
more problems.  The true value of supplementary  selenium  requires  
further  study.
At present,  most selenium  deficiency  cases are treated by injection  
and we are at present  assessing  the value of a long-acting  injection  which 
could have a protective  effect for up to a year. On the other hand,  
selenium  supplementation,  as in cobalt  deficiency,  may be given in the 
drinking water,  in mineral  blocks  or mixes  or as a soil dressing.
Iodine
Lastly,  I want to refer to iodine  deficiency  about  which  we have little 
background  data. It is clear, both from the work in Moorepark  under ­
taken by Dr. H. Greene  and also from observations  made by colleagues  
in Regional  Veterinary  Laboratories  that quite a high proportion  of 
still-born  calves  or neonatal  mortalities  and at least some late abortion  
foetuses  have enlarged  hyperplastic  thyroid  glands. This would  indicate  
either a shortage  of dietary  iodine or the presence  of a goitrogenic  
substance  in the feed. Where  this has occurred  in outbreaks,  the use of
65
supplementary  iodine  given to the cow during  late pregnancy  appears  to 
control  the condition.  We are hoping  to undertake  further  research  on 
this as it appears  to be an increasing  problem.
Conclusioii
In conclusion,  one must offer some words  of caution.  Firstly,  all these  
trace elements  are poisons  if given in excess. The safety margins  and 
the nature  of the toxic processes  vary but all have to be treated  with 
respect.  A correct  supplementation  can give great benefit;  wrongly  used 
treatments  can cause disaster.
Secondly,  the factors influencing  deficiencies  vary considerably  between  
soil types,  animal  types  and farmer  types.  It is difficult  to give generalised  
answers  to specific  situations  and each farm represents  a specific  situation.  
So the assistance  and advice  from a veterinary  surgeon  and an agricul ­
tural adviser  should  be sought  in relation  to any particular  farm  situation.
Lastly,  although  trace elements  are most important  and can be the 
cause  of serious  loss, some farmers  are, aided and abeted  by commercial  
and advertising  interests,  resorting  to trace elements  as substitutes  for 
good stock,  good feeding  and good management.
66
-yThis  country  makes  all kinds  of  money  on 
the side.
The foreign  exchange  earned  by Irish pork  and bacon  looms  large  in 
Ireland's  trade  figures.  And it shows  up year in, year  out. And mall 
kinds  of currencies.  From Sterling  and Francs  to Marks  and Yen.
Flowever,  there  are no soft options  when  it 
comes  to winning  hard currencies.  Many  
other  countries  also seek  a bigger  slice  ot 
the same  markets.  So it demands  a lot of 
teamwork  at home  plus marketing  
know-how  abroad.  And that’s where  the 
PBC comes  in.
Firstly,  we bring  the full team  together —the pig breeders,fatteners,  curers  
and processors.  We advise  on pig production  programmes,  health,  
hygiene  and quality  control.  We flag for offside  it the highest  standards 
aren’ t met. And by pointing  out the benefits  of a planned  
national  pigherd,  we help keep  the side up to 
strength.
Secondly,  we make  sure  all that effort  
isn’t wasted.  We use the most  modern 
marketing  and sales  techniques  overseas.  
Result?  Not only  are existing  markets  maintained  and expanded.  But new 
ones  are also gained.  We’re rather  proud  of the team.  Not to mention  the side.
PIGS  AND BACON  COMMISSION  LTD.
AN COIMISIUN  MUC AGUS  BAGUIN  TEO. 
Ferry House,  Lower  Mount Street,  Dublin 2.
Tel: (01) 764521.  Telex:  25130.
67
Grassland  and Dairy Farming  in 
the Netherlands
P. F. J. VAN BURG
Agricultural  Bureau  of the Netherlands  Fertiliser  Industry,  
Thorbeckelaan  360, 2564 BZ ’s-Gravenhage,  The Netherlands.
Forage  production  in the Netherlands  is based mainly on grassland.  
Almost  85% of the total roughage  comes  from the 3 million  acres of 
grassland,  most of it permanent.
The only important  fodder  crop is silage maize,  which occupies  an 
area of 360,000  acres,  being  the second  largest  crop in the country.
The Dutch climate  is temperate  and maritime  with an average  pre­
cipitation  of 31 inches.
It is interesting  to compare  some data for Ireland  and the Netherlands  
(Table  1). There  is considerable  contrast  between  the two countries  when 
comparing  the prices  of inputs  and output ; Nitrogen  and concentrates  
are more expensive  in Ireland,  while the Irish farmer  gets less for his 
milk. Labour  costs are much higher  in the Netherlands  than they are in 
Ireland.  To meet the labour  costs for a year the Dutch  farmer  has to 
produce  25,000  gallons  of milk, whereas  it requires  only 12,000  gallons  
in Ireland.
Table 1
General  data
IRL NL
Agricultural  area, million  acres 14.1 5.0
% grassland 92 66
Dairy cows, million 1.45 2.37
Dairy cows/herd 15 36
Milk, gal/cow 710 1120
Milk, % BF 3.5 4.0
N in CAN, p/lb 20 16
Concentrates,  £/cwt 8.7 7.3
Milk, 3.7 BF, 3.4 Prot. p/lb BF 176 221
During  the past 20 years farmers  were confronted  with sharp rises in 
costs of wages and other costs while the rise in prices of agricultural  
products  was much smaller.  In order to maintain  their income  farmers  
had to intensify  and increase  labour  productivity.  In 1965 2J gallons  
milk paid for 1 hour labour,  while in 1982 9 gallons  milk paid for 1 
hour labour.
Intensification  means more cows per man and per acre and conse ­
quently  more production  is required  per acre and therefore  more nitrogen
68
is necessary  (Table 2). This table clearly shows how nitrogen  usage  
increased  in the Netherlands.
Table 2
Nitrogen  usage in the Netherlands  in Ib/acre  grassland
1950
1960
1970
198145
85
180
250
Herbage  production
Nitrogen  is the key to increased  grassland  production.  The Dutch  
philosophy  is: Nitrogen  accelerates  the growth  of grass, thus less days 
are required  for a set yield (Figure  1) It is not yield per cut that is
Q IQ Ip
A/- a^^ccoiiioTi
Fig. 1—Growth  curves  for low and high nitrogen.  Grazing  stage grass equals  14 
cwt DM per acre. Silage  stage grass equals  32 cwt DM per acre.
69
important,  but number  of cuts per year. Nitrogen  increases  the scale of 
operation  and decreases  the dependency  on outside feed resources. 
Herbage  production  is roughly  proportional  to the input of fertilizer  
nitrogen  up to rates of 300-350  lb N per acre.
It is obvious  that the response  to nitrogen  is variable  because  of 
variations  in environmental  factors  such as weather  conditions,  soil type,  
legumes,  time of application,  type of nitrogen  fertilizer.
Nitrogen  fertilizer
The common  fertilizer  in the Netherlands is calcium  ammonium  nitrate  
26% N. This fertilizer  has an acidifying  effect on the soil. However,  
this acidifying  effect is much smaller  than in the case of ammonium  
nitrate and urea. Under acid conditicns  the better grasses  may be 
replaced  by poorer  species,  while an increase  in soil acidity  may ultim ­
ately lead to lower responses  to nitrogen  and to lower  herbage  yields.
In Dutch experiments  the response  to N at pH 3.8 was some 20% 
lower than at pH values  ranging  from 4.5 to 5.4 The grassland  farmer  
should  be concerned  about the dangers  of allowing  the pH to drop too 
low.
The results  obtained  in grassland  studies  have led in the Netherlands  
to general  recommendations  for nitrogen  (Table  3). The recommended  
annual  rate of nitrogen  using these amounts  are 360-400  lb N per acre 
for sandy and clay soils and 250 lb N on peaty soils.
Table 3
ADAS  advise  in the Netherlands  for sand,  clay and peat soils*  : N, Ib/acre
per “cut”
“cut” Grazing Mowing
1 55-70 70-110
2, 3 70 90
4,5 55 70
later 35 —
'On well-drained  peat soils 15 units/acre  less after cut 1
Grassland  utilization
Grazing
Between  60 to 70% of the total grass yield is used as fresh grass, 
mainly  by grazing  (95%). Grazing  is the cheapest  way of harvesting  
grass and feeding  cattle. Moreover  the feeding  value of fresh grass is 
much higher  than that of conserved  products,  while the average  daily  
intake  of dry matter  is also much higher. Therefore  top priority  in the 
total utilization  of grassland  should be given to providing  the grazing  
cow with high quality  grass.
70
In the Netherlands  there is a strong  integration  tetween  grazing  and 
forage conservation.  Conservation  must serve grazing;  in other words  
the time of mowing  depends  more on the time at which regrowth  is 
again required  for grazing  than on yield as such.
Most fertilizer  studies  have been primarily  concerned  with herbage  
production  but as the ultimate  use of herbage  is animal production,  
fertilizer  experiments  should  involve  animal  performance.  Only a small 
number  of such experiments  have been carried  out in Western  Europe,  
mainly  in the UK and Ireland. The data on responses  are shown in 
Table 4. In general,  they indicate  a high potential  for increased  milk  
production  from nitrogen  fertilization.
Table 4
Nitrogen  responses
N-range Milk
Ib/acre gallon/lb  N
0-135 2.0
180-360 1.4
270 - 630 0.5 -1.0
Grazing  methods  have been much  improved  since the early fifties. At 
that time the traditional  extensive,  low stocking  rate set-stocking  system  
was the usual practice  and in the case of rotational  grazing,  a grazing  
time of 10-14 days per plot was common.
Rotational  grazing  is still the most common  system. However,  the 
grazing  period  has been reduced  to 5 or less days per plot. Paddock  
grazing  is mainly  a system  of day and night grazing.  In the Netherlands  
a modified  paddock  system  is in operation  as a result  of the introduction  
of cubicle  housing  namely,  day grazing  and night housing.  This system, 
particularly  popular  on intensive  farms,  reduces  the problem  of fouling  
and thus enables  a better utilization  of grass. Treading  and poaching  
can be kept to acceptable  levels. The disadvantage  is that to make up 
for the shorter  grazing  time, fresh grass, silage or concentrates  must be 
fed at night.
In the Netherlands  zero-grazing  and the modern  intensive  set-stocking  
(continuous  grazing)  system  are only practised  on a very limited  scale.
Concentraites  at pasture
Obviously,  grass has potential  as a production  feed but too many  
farmers  seem to regard  it as maintenance  feed. In recent  years  the trend  
on many  modem  dairy farms throughout  Western  Europe  is to use liberal  
amounts  of concentrates  at pasture. The Netherlands  is no exception  
(Table  5).
71
Table 5
Use of concentrates,  cwt/dairy  cow
1965 1980
Total 13.8 35.0
At pasture 2.0 16.7
This widespread  practice  of supplying  too much supplementary  feed to 
grazing  cows at pasture  is surprising,  alarming  and difficult  to justify  on 
nutritional  grounds  since good quality herbage  can provide  enough  
energy  to produce  5 gallons  milk in May, June, July, dropping  to 3.5 
gallons  in September.  To the grassland  enthusiasist  this appears  to be 
self evident.  However  the provision  of supplementary  feed may simplify 
farm operations,  give a sense of security  in periods  of poor growth  and 
increase  the size of the herd.
On highly  stocked  farms  one sees rather  often that extra concentrates  
are fed to save grass for conservation.  With ensiling,  losses (during  
wilting  and storage)  will be higher  than with grazing. Moreover  there  
seems  to be no point in taking  a product  capable  of maintaining  a cow 
plus 5 gallons  milk and converting  it into silage which will give only 
maintenance  + 2-2.5 gallons.
Conservation
Conservation  of forage  is vital in livestock  farming  not only for pro­
viding  winter  feed but also as a tool in grassland  management;  mowing  
must serve grazing.
Farmers  in the Netherlands  have changed  from hay to silage. Of the 
total mown  area in the country  at present  85% is for silage  and only 15% 
for hay. The larger  and modem  farms  produce  almost  exclusively  silage, 
while the smaller,  more traditional  farms  still produce  hay.
The main feature  of silage making  in the Netherlands  is the commit ­
ment to heavy wilting;  90% of all silage made is wilted to above at 
least 35% dry matter (Table 6). Forage harvesters  are almost non­
existent,  the crop is cut by a drum mower  in most cases. For wilting  3-4 
days dry weather  are necessary,  as well as frequent  tedding.  If weather
Table 6
Silage  survey  in the Netherlands  1975-1980
% dry matter 51.5
% DCP 12.0
% crude fibre 25.4
ME, MJ/kg DM 9.5
72
conditions  are unfavourable  it takes more days and losses during the 
field period  may become  rather  high. One should  aim for a maximum  
field period  of 5 days.
Why is high dry matter  silage so popular  in the Netherlands ? Firstly,  
there is strong integration  between  grazing  and fodder conservation,  
cutting  starts rather early in May, 7 to 8 days after grazing  has com­
menced,  and regrowth  is available  at the end of May. Therefore  yields 
per cut are rather  low; they are hardly  higher  than 25-30 cwt dry matter  
per acre. On the so called nitrogen  pilot farms  the silage cuts average  
only 22 cwt dry matter  per acre. Furthermore,  silage cuts are taken  
throughout  the season. Secondly,  our grass is fertilized  heavily  with 
nitrogen,  cut when young and leafy, and rich in protein  and low in 
sugars. Ensiling  such a crop directly  is difficult;  even if fermented  well 
it would result in a rather sticky product  without  much texture  and 
animals  would not like it. Generally  a higher  dry matter  content  will 
make the silage  more palatable,  which  means  faster and higher  intake.
Other  advantages  of high dry matter  silage are : no effluent  problems;  
no additives  needed;  easy to handle,  less weight;  lower fermentation  
losses;  no bad smell even if fermentation  is not quite good.
Naturally  there are disadvantages : weather  during  field period  is very 
important;  the field period  means  a delay in regrowth.  A wilted  crop is 
more difficult  to ensile. The key to success  is airtight  sealing.  One could 
almost  say that the best silage additive  is polythene  sheeting.
Finally,  let us consider  the quality  - quantity  controversy.  Animal  
performance  depends  to a large extent  on the quality  of the fodder  which 
is particularly  important  when cutting  grass  for winter  feed. A cow given  
high quality  silage will consume  more of that silage than of a lower  
quality  product.  A higher  intake  together  with a higher  nutritional  value 
results  in a much higher  milk or meat production  potential  from forage  
and therefore  less dependency  on supplementary  feeding  stuffs (Table  7).
Table 7
Silage  quality  and milk output  (after  Fred Gordon)
Item Silage  quality
Medium Medium High
Concentrates,  Ib/day 12.5 8.4 8.4
Total DM intake
cwt concentrates 7.0 4.7 4.7
cwt silage 13.6 14.2 16.4
Milk, gallons 353 333 360
73
A common  criticism  against  early cut, high quality  silage is that it 
will lead to lower forage production  per acre, and would thus require  
more forage  acres. Without  doubt  early and more frequent  cutting  for 
better  nutritive  value reduces  the yield per cut. However,  too often it is 
forgotten  that an increase  in rate of nitrogen,  and consequently  in number  
of cuts, can more than compensate  for the lower  yield per cut.
To obtain  the same total dry matter  yield per acre more nitrogen  is 
required  as the cutting frequency  increases  (Table 8). Even in the 
present economic  climate fertilizer  nitrogen  application  makes good 
sense and it would be false economy  to reduce  fertilizer  use. However,  
an increase  in nitrogen  should  go hand in hand with an increase  in 
stocking  rate and with an improvement  in management.
Table 8
Cutting  frequency  : N necessary  for 120 cwt dry matter  per acre
Number  of 
cutsN
Ib/acreME
MJ/kg  DM
3 215 9.2
4 290 9.7
6 400 10.3
8 470 11.0
74
Gas  to Crass
:i>isconverting  
Natural  Gas 
into
Ammonia  
tomanufacture  
fertlTisersto  
service  agricultural  Ireland  
to benefit  the
Nation's  economy]
NETy
NirmCIN  EIREANN  TB3IIAN1A
75
ABSTRACTS
THE YEAR  AVERAGE  OF WEATHER  AT GRANGE  
R. K. WILSON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dimsinea,  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.
A. V. FLYNN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
To establish  a baseline  for weather  at Grange  10 years  daily recordings  
for air temperature  (max. min and mean),  soil temperature  (at 50, 100 
and 200 mm),  rainfall  (mm day”’ and sunshine  (hr day”’) were assembled  
in a Hewlett-Packard  1000/45  computer.  Using  specifically  written  pro­
grammes  the data were sorted,  the average  for each day for 10 years  
calculated  and the data smoothened  by taking  a 5 day running  average.  
All temperature  showed  a bell-shaped  distribution,  soil temperature  at 
100 mm rose above 7°C about  mid-April  and returned  below it in early  
November.  Rainfall  was fairly uniformly  spread throughout  the year 
but April, May and June were slightly  drier than other months. Only  
about 27.2% of the potential  sunshine  was received  due to cloud cover 
which  was uniform  throughout  the year.
THE MEASUREMENT  OF DRY MATTER  PRODUCTION  IN 
GRAZING  TRIALS
A. J. BRERETON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
In grazing  trials it is conventional  practice  to measure  dry matter  
production  as the change  in yield cut to ground  level between  the end 
of each grazing  and the beginning  of the following  grazing.  This practice  
will include any changes  that occur in the ungrazed  stubble in the 
estimate  of production.  This paper  presents  data on the seasonal  changes  
in yield in the ungrazed  stubble  and makes  a comparison  between  total 
dry matter  production  measured  from ground  level cuts and the produc ­
tion of available  herbage  above the stubble height. Stubble  yields 
increased  substantially  (at constant  stubble  height)  from April to July 
and then decreased.  As a result the production  measured  from ground  
level-sampling  was significantly  greater than the level of production  
of available  herbage  in the April-July  period  and was significantly  less 
than available  herbage  in the July-October  period.
76
AN ATTEMPT  TO MAXIMISE  GRASS  YIELDS  IN THE  
FIELD  IN N. IRELAND
S. N. ADAMS
Agriculture  and Food  Chemistry  Dept., The Queen ’s University
Belfast.
Four 0.25 ha swards  of Barlenna  perennial  and three 0.25 ha swards  
of RvP Italian ryegrass  were grown for five years at four centres  in 
Northern  Ireland.  An attempt  was made  to maximise  yield by providing  
non-limiting  amounts  of nutrients  and preventing  weeds, pests and 
diseases.  Up to 22.9 t D.M. ha“' was obtained  and at one site perennial  
ryegrass  produced  an average  yield of 19.0 t ha“' year"^ over 5 years. 
Such yields  compared  well with those  obtainable  in experiments.
At two sites, yields  were much  lower  than in the other sites. Differences 
in yield could not be attributed  to climate,  pests, diseases,  ingress  of 
weeds  or lack of nutrients.  They are thought  to be due to soil physical  
problems.
Italian ryegrass  outyielded  perennial  in the first year after seeding, 
but its yield declined  markedly  in subsequent  years and it gave less total 
yield over 5 years even though  it had been reseeded  after 2 years. The 
digestibility  of its herbage  was also lower.
THE BALANCE  BETWEEN  GROWTH  AND SENESCENCE  IN 
A GRAZED  SWARD
O. CARTON
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
One of the main characteristics  of a grass sward is its rapid turnover  
of tissue. Throughout  the year leaf growth  and leaf senescence  occur  
simultaneously  so that at any given time the average  ryegrass  tiller will 
have a more or less constant  number  (± 3) of green leaves per tiller.  
There is a net accumulation  of green material  in the sward when the 
average  length of the leaves appearing  is longer than the older leaves 
senescing.  Management  exerts  its influence  on the productivity  of swards  
by determining  the amount  of senescence  in so far as green leaf removed  
by grazing  or cutting  will not be lost to death  and decay.  It also influences 
the amount  of growth  through  its effects on what is left on the tiller  
post-grazing  or cutting  which  will determine  regrowth.  Management  also 
has an effect on tiller numbers.  In rotational  cattle grazing  systems  tiller  
numbers  are approximately  10,000/m^  whereas  in continuous  grazing  
systems  numbers  of up to 25,000/m'^  have been reported.
Data from Johnstown  Castle have shown that as grazing  severity  is 
increased,  total DM production  will be reduced  but total leaf DM will 
be increased  by virtue of greater  tiller numbers  in the severe grazed  
sward.  The implications  for the grazing  manager  are not yet clear  because  
as grazing  severity  is increased  the tillers become  smaller  and the extra  
leaf production  may be so near the ground  that they are inaccessible  to 
grazing  cattle. Reports  in the literature  also suggest  that forcing  cattle  
to graze below  5 cm results  in significant  reductions  in performance.
77
EVALUATION  OF PICK-UP-WAGON  SILAGE
P. O’KIELY  and V. FLYNN  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
In 1979 and 1980 respectively  three and four cuts of silage  were made,  
each comparing  the pick-up-wagon  and double-chop  harvester.  All silage  
was unwilted  and treated  with 2.3 1/t of 85% formic  acid. Mean  DM%,  
pH, NH3-N,  % N and DMD%  values  of 18.2 and 19.3, 4.40 and 4.22,  
11.1 and 9.6 and 72.5 and 72.2 were obtained  for six paired  comparisons  
of silages made using the pick-up-wagon  and double-chop  harvesters  
respectively.  Three animal  production  trials were conducted  with these  
silages. In trial I sixteen  Friesian  steers (initial  liveweight  297 kg) were  
allocated  to each silage  type which  was fed ad libitum  for 221 days. All 
cattle were offered  1.84 kg concentrates/day.  Final carcase  weights  for 
the animals  on the wagon  and double-chop  silages  were 269.9 and 278.7  
kg respectively.  In trial II sixteen  Friesian  bulls (initial  liveweight  102.7  
kg) were fed on each silage for 413 days. All cattle were offered an 
average  of 2.06 kg concentrates/day.  Final carcase  weights  were 283.6  
and 280.7 kg for the animals  on the wagon and double-chop  silages  
respectively.  Trial III was the same as trial II except  that initial live- 
weight  was 124.6 kg, the trial duration  was 409 days, concentrate  input  
was 2.2 kg/day  and final carcase  weights  were 276.5 kg and 272.8 kg for 
the wagon and double chop silages respectively.  The carcase  weight  
averages  of the three trials  for the animals  on the wagon  and double-chop  
silages  were 276.7 and 277.4 kg respectively.
Grass was harvested  for trial IV without  wilting  on May 28-30, 1981 
using either a double-chop  harvester,  a precision  chop harvester  or a 
pick-up-wagon.  Each was treated  with 2.3 1/t of 85% formic  acid at 
ensiling.  Eight Hereford  x steers (initial  weight  461 kg) were allocated  
to each of the silages  and a further  group  of eight was given the silage  
ensiled  using the pick-up-wagon  but passed  through  the precision  chop  
harvester  immediately  prior to feeding.  2 kg concentrates  per day was 
fed to all groups. After adjusting  the growth  rates for some badly pre­
served silage which was fed during  the first month  of the feeding  trial,  
the daily liveweight  gains for the steers on the wagon,  wagon/precision,  
precision  and double-chop  silages  were 1.22, 1.29, 1.17 and 1.24 kg/day  
respectively  over a period  of 64 days.
Three successive  cuts of unwilted  silage were harvested  for trial V on 
22 May, July 1 and August  27, 1981. Within  each cut grass  was ensiled  
using the pick-up-wagon,  set to give a theoretical  chop length of either  
5 cm or 10 cm. Mean DM%,  pH, NH3-N,  % N and DMD%  values  
were similar  for both silages. Sixteen  Hereford  x heifers  were allocated  
to each treatment  and within each of these first, second  and third cut 
silages  were fed in sequence.  Silage was the sole feed and was offered
78
id libitum  for 135 days. Final carcase  weights  were similar  for both 
silages.
Grass  for trial VI was mown  with a rotary  mower  on 30 September,  
1982 and harvested  using a double  chop harvester  or a pick-up-wagon.  
Within  each of these harvester  treatments  approximately  4.5 tonnes  of 
grass was ensiled either without  preservative  treatment  or after the 
addition  of 2.3 1/t of 85% formic  acid. Mean  DM%,  pH, NHg-N,  %N 
and DMD%  values  for the wagon  silage,  without  and with preservative  
and the double-chop  without  and with preservative  were 13.8, 15.4, 14.0 
and 15.0; 4.20, 3.96, 4.16 and 3.76; 10.1, 5.8, 12.8 and 6.0 and 73.8, 74.0,  
71.6 and 74.8 respectively.  Five Friesian  steers (approximately  283 kg) 
were allocated  to each silage type and offered silage ad libitum  and 
unsupplemented  for 10 days. Mean DM intakes  for the four silages 
were 2.23, 2.35, 2.01 and 2.27%  of body weight  respectively.
It is concluded  that the pick-up-wagon  can be used to consistently  
produce  silage similar  in feed value to silage made using conventional  
harvesters.  It is essential  to achieve  anaerobiosis  quickly  and maintain  
it. It is essential  to avoid contamination  and to use effective  preservative  
treatment  when necessary.
79
EVALUATION  OF A FORMIC  ACID/FORMALDEHYDE  
MIXTURE  AS A SILAGE  PRESERVATIVE
P. O’KIELY  and V. FLYNN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Formaldehyde  has been included  in some silage preservatives  on the 
assumption  that its inclusion  in silage  will protect  the forage  protein  from  
excessive  microbial  degradation  in the rumen. In the three experiments  
reported  here, one such preservative  (Silaform  : 55% formic  acid + 14% 
formaldehyde)  was evaluated  as a silage preservative  and its ‘protein  
sparing ’ effect determined  in terms  of carcase  production  by intensively 
reared  beef cattle.
Between  1980 and 1982 eight cuts of silage were taken. Each cut was 
treated  at harvesting  with either  2.3 1/t of 85% formic  acid or 2.8 1/t of 
the formic  acid/formaldehyde  mixture  preservative.  Male Friesian  cattle  
were offered  either silage type ad libitum  and within each silage type 
eight animals  were supplemented  with a low crude protein  (10% CP) 
concentrate  and eight with a high crude protein  (16% CP) concentrate.  
Animals  were group  penned  on slatted  floor accommodation.
The chemical  composition  of both silage types from each of the eight  
cuts was similar. Mean DM %, pH, CP % and DMD % values  of 18.9 
and 19.4, 4.01 and 3.99, 15.6 and 15.6 and 70.1 and 70.4 were obtained  
for seven paired comparisons  of formic/formaldehyde  and formic  acid 
treated  silage respectively.
In Experiment  1 steers (mean  initial  liveweight  439 kg) were fed silage  
for 105 days, supplemented  with 3.0 kg concentrates/head/day.  Final  
mean hot carcase  weights  of 298.5 and 304.0 kg were obtained  for the 
steers fed the silages  preserved  with and without  formaldehyde  respect ­
ively. No carcase  weight  response  was obtained  to increasing  the crude  
protein  content  of the supplement  fed with either  silage  type.
Experiment  2 involved  the production  of beef using bulls, which were 
reared  on the appropriate  treatments  from 125 kg initial liveweight  for 
411 days. The mean daily input  of concentrates  was 2.41 kg/day.  Final  
hot carcase  weights  averaged  at 276.4 and 276.8 kg respectively  for 
animals  reared  on the silages  preserved  using the formic  + formaldehyde  
mixture  and the formic  acid. Intake of both silage types was similar. 
Increasing  the protein  content  of the concentrates  tended  to increase  the 
hot carcase  weight  (+ 7.9 kg) but this response  was not significant  (P< 
0.05).
Experiment  3 differed  from 2 above in that steers with an initial  
liveweight  of 135.4 kg were used and that the trial lasted for 373 days. 
The silages  treated  with the mixture  and with the straight  acid resulted
80
in mean final carcase  weights  of 256.5 and 264.4 kg respectively.  Increas ­
ing the protein  content  of the supplement  increased  the mean carcase  
weight  from 254.1 to 266.7 kg.
The formic  acid -t- formaldehyde  mixture  being evaluated  (Silaform)  
when applied  at 2.8 1/t was as effective  a silage preservative  as 85% 
formic  acid applied  at 2.3 1/t. No positive  response  to the presence  of 
formaldehyde  was noted in terms of carcase production,  or in the 
efficiency  of its production.  With finishing  steers no response  to increas ­
ing the CP content  of the supplement  from 10% to 16% was obtained  
but a 7.9 and 12.6 kg carcase  response  was noted with weanling  to beef 
produced  bulls and steers  respectively.  No significant  interaction  between  
silage  preservative  type and concentrate  protein  content  was found.
EVALUATION  OF ACID INSOLUBLE  ASH (AIA) AS AN 
INDICATOR  OF IN VIVO DIGESTIBILITY  WITH  RUMINANTS
K. A. WINTER*,  R. K. WILSON  and A. V. FLYNN  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
The scientific  literature  shows that acid insoluble  ash (A.I.A.)  (SiO,) 
is widely  distributed  in plant material  and passes  through  the digestive 
tract essentially  unchanged.  The ratio of the relative  concentrations  of 
A.I.A. in the feed and faeces  can be used to estimate  digestibility  with 
various  species  including  cattle,  sheep,  pigs, horses  and poultry.
A preliminary  study was conducted  to determine  the size of feed 
sample  to be analysed  to minimize  variability  in the results. It was found 
that a 10 g sample was adequate  with little or no reduction  in the 
coefficient  of variation  when larger  samples  were used.
Feeds  and faeces  samples  from a digestion  trial conducted  at Grange  
(8 feeds x 4 replications,  steers)  and from a Canadian  digestion  trial (15 
feeds X 4 replications,  sheep)  were the basis of this study. A.I.A.  was 
determined  by the 2N HCl method.
Digestibility  estimated  by A.I.A.  correlated  well with total collection  
method  when the means  of 3 or 4 animals  were used for each feed, and 
gave r values of 0.93 and 0.96 for the Grange and Canadian  data 
respectively.  The A.I.A. values  were superior  to those estimated  from  
MADF  (r = 0.74) but slightly  inferior  to in vitro DMD (r = 0.98) in 
the Grange  data.
♦Canada  Department  of Agriculture,  Charlottetown,  Prince  Edward  Island,  Canada
81
COMPUDOSE  365 AS A GROWTH  PROMOTER  FOR BEEF
CATTLE
M. G. KEANE
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany,  Co. Meath.
Compudose  365 is an ear implant  which  contains  45 mg oestradiol  17 /3 
for growth  promotion  in beef cattle.  It consists  of an inert silicone  rubber  
core surrounded  by a silicone  rubber  matrix  containing  the oestradiol  
17 /3. The implant  which is large (3 cms x 4.8 mm) cannot  be crushed  
and retains  its original  size and shape after insertion.  Consequently  it 
can be readily  seen and felt under the skin on the back of the ear. 
Treatment  with Compudose  365 causes a negligible  increase  in tissue 
oestrogen  levels and oestradiol  17/3 is a naturally  occurring  oestrogen  
which  is present  in the tissues  of all animals  and man.
The animal  production  response  to Compudose  365 was measured  in 
a number  of trials. For a period  up up to 6 months  after implantation  
the resf)onses  to Compudose  365 and repeated  Ralgro  implantation  were 
similar. Afterwards  the response  to Compudose  365 tended  to decline 
relative  to the repeated  Ralgro  response.  There was an additional  re­
sponse  from the use of Finaplix  with Compudose  365 and Compudose  
365 + Finaplix  gave similar  performance  to Ralgro + Finaplix  and 
Synovex-S  -I- Finaplix.  There was no response  to Compudose  365 in 
young  bulls  implanted  at about  11 months of age but there  was a response 
in calves  which  was similar  to that for Ralgro.  The duration  of effective ­
ness of Compudose  365 could not be clearly  determined  from the data.  
In one trial there was a response  of 37 kg liveweight  and 23 kg carcass  
weight  over 414 days and in another  the response  was 38 kg liveweight 
and 19 kg carcass  weight  over 346 days. The corresponding  response  to 
4 Ralgro  implants  over the same period  was 49 kg liveweight  and 26 kg 
carcass  weight.
There  were a number  of instances  of temporary  sexual  behaviour  and 
9% of implants  were lost shortly  after implantation.
82
RESULTS  OF TWENTY  YEARS  SELECTION  FOR INCREASED  
LITTER  SIZE IN IRISH  SHEEP
J. P. HANRAHAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
The number  of lambs  reared per ewe joined  with the ram is a major  
component  of variation  in income  per ewe. Results  from breed com­
parison  trials  indicate  that the low level of lamb output  for Irish lowland  
flocks  is largely  attributable  to an inherently  low litter size.
In 1963 two experimental  programmes  were initiated  to select for 
increased  litter size. The first involved  selection  within  the Galway  breed  
and the other involved  the purchase  of ewes which had extremely  high 
litter size records.  There were no breed restrictions  and both purebred  
and crossbred  ewes were purchased.  This flock, called High Fertility,  
was closed in 1965 with subsequent  within-flock  selection  for high litter  
size.
Selection  within  the Galway  breed has yielded  an annual  improvement  
of 0.019 ± 0.0049  in litter size averaged  for 2, 3 and 4-year  old ewes and 
measured  as a deviation  from an unselected  control  population.  Analysis  
of the response  at each age shows  a greater  apparent  total response  at 
two years of age (0.35 +0.09) than at four years old (0.19 ± 0.08). In 
recent years selection  line ewes were about 2 kg heavier  than control  
ewes. Data on ovulation  rate at 18 months  of age shows  that the litter  
size response  could  be attributed  to increased  ovulation  rate.
The litter size of foundation  ewes (prior  to their purchase)  for the High  
Fertility  flock averaged  3.17 and the post-purchase  records  on these ewes  
showed  a mean litter size of 2.14. For ewes born in this flock between  
1977 and 1980 the average  litter sizes were 1.59, 2.03, 2.37 and 2.21 at 
1, 2, 3 and 4 years of age, respectively.  Analysis  of the breed  composition  
of this flock showed  the following  percentage  contributions ; Galway  
22%, Cheviot  20%, Suffolk  14%, Border  Leicester  8%, Finn 6% and 
30% could not be determined.  Ovluation  rate of mature  High Fertility  
ewes average 2.84 which indicates  that the high litter size can be 
attributed  to ovulation  rate with no evidence  for increased  embryo  
survival  in this population.
83
INTAKE  AND DIGESTIBILITY  OF HERBAGE  BY DAIRY
COWS
G. STAKELUM  and D. MORGAN'
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moore  park, Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
A series of experiments  were conducted  in Moorepark  in 81 / 82 to 
investigate  the effects of the following  parameters  on the intake char­
acteristics  and digestibility  of herbage  by stall-tied  cows; season,  cow 
physiological  status,  supplementary  feeding,  level of intake and cutting  
strategy.  Advancing  season  had a small but significant  (P<0.0U1)  enect  
on digestibility.  Intakes  of lactating  cows increased  as season  progressed  
reaching  a maximum  in August  while dry pregnant  cows increased  m 
intake up to June and subsequently  declined.  Level of herbage  intake  
did not effect digestibility.
Concentrate  supplementation  (3.7 kgs OMI/day)  reduced  herb^e  
intake (P<0.01)  but did not significantly  increase  total OMI intake.  
Digestibility  of herbage  only was 80.4% OMD  and herbage  plus supple ­
ment 81.1% OMD. They were not significantly  different.
A growth  interval  of 4 weeks  versus  6 weeks  over the whole  growing 
season  showed  that the younger  grass had a 2 unit advantage  aver the 
older grass  (81% OMD  vs 79.3%  OMD)  (P<0.001).  In April  this differ ­
ence (pre-cut)  was 83.5 vs 79.7 while in July it was 82.9 vs 79.1. In 
August  the difference  was 78.7 vs 78.6.
' Dept, of Agric.  Chem.  & Soil Science,  Agric.  Building,  U.C.D.,  Belfield,  Dublin  4.
84
BODY  CONDITION  SCORE  AT CALVING  AND  
REPRODUCTIVE  PERFORMANCE  OF DAIRY  COWS
O. H. LANGLEY
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Energy  intake  has been found  to affect  reproductive  performance  in beef 
and dairy cows. Research  showing  this relationship  has depended  upon  
the use of body weight  measurements  and analysis  of food and blood.  
This study investigated  the relationship  between  body condition  score  
at calving  and the subsequent  reproductive  performance  of 110 spring  
calving  dairy  cows. The resumption  of oestrous  cycles  was determined  by 
measuring  milk progesterone  levels in milk samples  taken three days 
each week and oestrus  detection  was carried  out twice daily with the aid 
of tail paint. Service  commenced  in April so that some early calving  
cows  would  not have been served  for up to 90 days post-calving.
The intervals  to first ovulation,  oestrus  and service  for cows which  
calved  in poor body condition  (body score 1.5 or less) were 36.0, 65.1 
and 86.8 days. Cows  with a body score of 2 at calving  had intervals  of 
25.3, 45.5 and 93.4 days and those with a higher  body score at calving  
had intervals  of 23.1, 45.5 and 78.3 days respectively.  The effects  of 
body condition  score at calving  on the interval  to first ovulation,  and 
first observed  oestrus  were significant.  The effect of body condition  on 
the interval  to service  was not significant,  probably  because  service  was 
delayed  until April in all early calving  cows.
The implications  of these results  are that the level of feeding  prior to 
calving,  and hence  the body condition  score at calving,  affects  the inter ­
val from calving  to the resumption  of oestrous  cycles. This is most  
important  in late calving  cows in order to serve them and get them  
pregnant  as soon as possible,  and so advance  their calving  date the 
following  year. Body condition  scoring  is easily carried  out, requires  
no equipment  and is a valuable  aid to good herd management.
85
THE DEVELOPMENT  AND IMPLEMENTATION  OF A
COMPUTERISED  MANAGEMENT  INFORMATION  SYSTEM  
FOR DAIRY  FARMERS  (DAIRYMIS  II)
S. CROSSE
The Agricultural  Institute.  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
For cost effective  dairy farming  optimisation  of inputs  and outputs  is 
essential.  On intensive  dairy farms strategic  decisions  require  accurate  
and current  information  on farm events. The physical  volume  of farm  
events  makes  manual  processing  of data difficult.  Computerised  systems 
can process  data efficiently  and fulfill a vital role in farm management.
Detailed  management  and production  data are being collected  from  
35 dairy farmers  in the Fermoy  area for the purpose  of developing  a 
computerised  management  information  system. Dairymis  II is an in­
tegrated  recording  scheme which provides  essential  information  for 
establishing  and maintaining  a productive  and profitable  dairy farm.  
The system is recorder  based. The recorder  visits each farm on a 
monthly  basis in order to collect stock and production  data. The 
recorder  then codes the data for computer  input. Each month the 
farmer  receives  a number  of reports  which relate to his own farm and 
reports  from which he can compare  his own herd performance  with 
other members  of his group. The reports  which the farmer  receives 
contain  information  on milk yield per cow and per acre, concentrate  
use, fertiliser  use, grassland  management,  silage quantity  and quality,  
stocking  rate, calvings,  fertility  control,  stock control,  culling  and mor­
tality rates. Economic  measures  of efficiency  per cow and per acre are 
also included.
86
IN VITRO  FERTILIZATION  OF THE MAMMALIAN  EGG
M. P. BOLAND,  W. J. ENRIGHT  and 1. GORDON  
Department  oj Agriculure,  U.C.D.,  Lyons  Estate,  Newcastle,  Co. Dublin.
Although  in vitro fertilization  has been reported  for at least 14 
mammalian  species,  live births have been recorded  in only the rabbit,  
mouse,  rat, human  and the cow. The process  of sperm capacitation,  
which normally  occurs  in the female  reproductive  tract and which can 
take frcm 2- to 12-hours  has been a major technological  barrier. The 
process  of in vitro fertilization  would  render the whole  process  of embryo  
transfer  more feasible,  because  it would  ensure  a reliable  and predictable  
supply  of embryos  for transfer.
In the present  experiment  oocytes  were provided  following  the hor­
monal  induction  of superovulation  following  PMSG  and prostaglandin.  
At the time of first detection  of heat, donors  received  2,000 i.u. hCG  
and oocytes  were recovered  25 hours later. Sperm capacitation  was 
attempted  in vitro using a high ionic strength  (H.I.S.)  medium  with an 
osmolality  of 380 m Osm/kg.  Oocytes  were recovered  using HAM ’S 
F-10 medium  supplemented  with 5% heat treated steer serum and 
antibiotics.  Oocytes  and sperm  were incubated  in microdrops  under  oil 
with a gas phase of 5% CO^; 8% Oj, and 87% N2. After 24 hour  
culture,  oocytes  were fixed and stained for evidence  of fertilization.  
Overall  24% (5/21) of tubal oocytes  were fertilized,  but none of the 
follicular  oocytes  were fertilized  on staining.
87
A REVIEW  OF ANTIBIOTIC  RESIDUES  AND THEIR  SOURCES  
IN IRISH MILK  SUPPLIES
J. EGAN
Veterinary  Research  Laboratory,  Abbotstown,  Castleknock.  Co. Dublin.
The incidence  of antibiotic  residues  in some Irish milk supplies  has 
varied considerably  during  the last 15 years. In most cases, however,  
only trace amounts  of antibiotic  were detected  and these were most 
unlikely  to be harmful  to consumers  or cause problems  in the manufac ­
ture of dairy products.
The primary  source  of residues  results  from the use of intramammary  
antibiotics  in the treatment  and prophylaxis  of mastitis. Failure  to 
withhold  the milk from a treated  cow could contaminate  over 20,000  
gallons  of milk. Low levels of antibiotic  are transferred  to untreated  
quarters  for up to two milkings  after treatment.  Residues  can be 
detected  on the milking  equipment  used to milk treated  cows and this 
could  contaminate  several  hundred  gallons  of milk. Treated  cows should 
be clearly  identified  and milked  last. Natural  inhibitors  present  in milk 
are unlikely  to interfere  with the microbiological  test methods  used to 
detect  residues.
EFFECT  OF PEIXET  SIZE AND PELLET  QUALITY  ON 
PIG PERFORMANCE
T. J. HANRAHAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
An experiment  involving  1360 growing  finishing  pigs was undertaken  
to examine  the effect of pellet size and pellet  quality  as measured  by the 
Holmen  pellet durability  test on pig performance.  A barley-soyabean  
meal diet was used and pellets  were of 2 diameter  sizes 5 mm and 10 mm 
X 2 qualities.  Pellet quality was varied by steam conditioning  and 
screening  procedure  during  the pelleting  process. The mean difference 
obtained  in pellet durability  was 11%.
Pig performance  was not affected  either  by pellet size or pellet quality  
(P>0.05).  There were small non-significant  trends in favour of the 
smaller  pellets  and the low quality  pellets. These  trends  of the order  of 
1% or less followed  the same pattern  as the dry matter  content  of the 
diets fed. The smaller  diameter  pellets  were more efficiently  dried in the 
cooling  process  and the low durability  pellets had less steam added  
during the manufacturing  process  which  was reflected  in the finished  diets.
88
THE RESPONSE  OF PIGLETS  WEANED  AT 21 DAYS  TO MILK  
PRODUCT  CONTENT  OF THE POST-WEANING  DIET GIVEN
AD LIBITUM
D. C. PATTERSON
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of N. Ireland,  Hillsborough,  Co. Down.
In three experiments  alternative  starter  diets containing  graded  levels  
of skimmed  milk powder  (SMP)  were each formulated  to contain  the 
same amount  of energy and lysine as the control,  while in a fourth  
experiment  the energy content  of the diet increased  with increasing  
content  of SMP and the lysine  ; energy ratio was maintained  as a 
constant.  The experimental  animals  were penned  individually  in experi ­
ments 1 and 2 while in experiments  3 and 4 they were penned  in groups  
of six.
In the first experiment  when SMP was included  in the post-weaning  
diet at from zero to 300 g kg“' (replacing  soya bean meal and tallow)  
the rates of growth  over the first seven days post-weaning  and from  
weaning  to 30 kg liveweight  both increased  linearly  with increasing  
dietary  inclusions  of SMP. In the second  experiment,  when SMP was 
included  at 100, 300 or 500 g kg“ ^ in diets given from weaning  to 10 k^ 
liveweight  the rates of liveweight  gain were 210, 246 and 260 + 8.9 g d ^ 
respectively  and in the same order  the feed : gain ratios  were 1.11, 0.97 
and 0.98 + 0.026.
In the third experiment  groups  of animals  were given starter diets  
which  included  zero, 62.5, 125, 187.5 or 250 g SMP per kg of diet. The 
SMP replaced  fish meal and soya bean meal and the ratio between  these  
last two ingredients  was kept constant.  There was a significant  linear  
(P<0.001)  positive  response  to SMP in growth  rate and in the efficiency  
of feed use. In the fourth  experimtnt  (pigs weaned  at 15 d)^ when pigs 
were given pelleted  diets containing  SMP at high (360 g kg ^), medium  
(250 g kg'O or low (0 g kg-') rates of inclusion  from weaning  to 9 kg 
liveweight,  rates of liveweight  gain were 240, 233 and 183 ± 4.4 g d ' 
respectively  while the corresponding  conversions  of digestible  energy  to 
liveweight  were 18.2, 18.4 and 22.4 MJ kg-'.
It is concluded  that a dietary  content  of SMP of around  250 g kg-' is 
likely to maximise  the rate of growth,  but that the selection  of an 
optimum  dietary  content  of SMP will depend  u{X)n the economic  criteria  
used in the assessment.
89
CASSAVA  (TAPIOCA)  IN FINISHING  PIG DIETS  
N. WALKER
Agricultural  Research  Institute  of N. Ireland.  Hillsborough.  Co. Down.
A series of experiments  has been carried  out using cassava  which  had 
originated  in Thailand  and which had been transported  to U.K. in the 
pelleted  form. The pellets  were then ground  before being included  in 
meal diets based upon barley  and dehulled  soya bean meals. The diets  
were fed wet from troughs.  Pigs of about 35 kg initial  liveweight  housed  
m groups  of 10 were used throughout  and slaughtered  at around  85 kg 
liveweight.
The first experiment  was a factorial  design combining  4 levels of 
dietary  cassava  (from 0 to 450 kg/tonne)  with 3 levels  of tallow  (from 0 
to 100 kg/tonne).  There  was a significant  interaction  on growth  rate with 
tallow preventing  the decline  in growth  rate of about 60 g^ay  which 
occurred  at the high levels  of inclusion  of cassava.  The second  experiment  
compared  four levels  of cassava  (from 0 to 715 kg/tonne).  The diet with 
the highest  level of cassava  contained  no barley.  As in the first experiment  
^owth  rate significantly  declined  with increasing  cassava  content  but 
there was no effect on feed conversion  ratio. In both experiments  a 
digestible  energy (DE) value of 14.2 MJ/kg has been assumed  for 
cassava  and, on this assumption,  diets were restricted  in order  to produce  
isocaloric  daily intakes.  The results  suggested  that a lower  DE value for 
cassava  would  be more appropriate.
Diets in both of these experiments  were supplemented  with synthetic  
methionine  so that the sulphur  amino  acids content  in each case was the 
same as that in the control  diet. In the third exjjeriment  graded  levels  of 
supplementary  methionine  were compared  using the diet containing  715 
kg cassava/tonne.  Growth  rate, feed conversion  and backfat  thickness  
all deteriorated  as the total content  of methionine  plus cystine  fell below 
5.4 g/kg.
These and other experimental  data support  the conclusions  that the 
appropriate  DE value to use in diet formulation  for this type of cassava  
IS about  12.5 MJ/kg,  and that supplementary  methionine  may be required  
in diets containing  moderate  to high inclusions  of cassava.
90
THE USE OF A WATER  TABLE  IN THE VISUALIZATION  OF 
AIR FLOW  PATTERNS  IN NATURALLY  VENTILATED  
LIVESTOCK  HOUSES  
T. G. KELLY  and V. A. DODD  
Department  of Agricultural  Engineering.  U.C.D.
D. RUANE
Department  oj Farm Management,  U.C.D.
The need for high ventilation  rates for housed  cattle and sheep has 
been established.  In naturally  ventilated  livestock  houses  wind is the 
predominant  ventilating  force. At low wind speeds a good air flow 
pattern  ensures  efficient  ventilation  while at high wind speeds  a good 
air flow pattern  ensures  the absence  of draughts.  Draughts  may cause  
discomfort  to man and animals  and may result in chilling  of susceptible  
livestock.  The water table is a means of studying  the effect of the 
design, location  and orientation  of a livestock  building  on air flow 
patterns.
The water  table consists  of a table Im wide with 0.2m high sides  along  
which a mass of water 0.07 -0.17m  deep flows slowly. This water is 
used to simulate  wind movement  over open countryside.  Scale models  
of naturally  ventilated  animal  houses  are submersed  in the water and 
the pattern  of movement  of the water is visualised  using soluble  dyes.  
The flow patterns  seen may be recorded  using still photography,  video 
film or by manual  sketching.  Models  of houses  are made from perspex  
or plastic  card and are easily assembled.
Air flowing  within  and around  buildings  behaves  as an incompressible  
fluid and therefore  may be accurately  simulated  using water. While  the 
sp)eed of air flow within  a naturally  ventilated  house varies directly  in 
proportion  to the external  wind speed  the air flow pattern  does not change  
for sharp edged buildings.  The water table may be used to predict  air 
flow patterns  due to wind only; no account  is taken of air flow patterns  
arising  from the stack effect.
Applications  of the water  table to date by the authors  include  : (a) the 
study of airflow  in design variations  of Patterson  and Monopitch  type 
houses,  (b) a programme  for optimising  the use of gable end doors  in a 
Kennel  type calf house has been established  from airflow  studies  in the 
water table —this programme  maximises  ventilation  rate while reducing  
the risk of draughts  under variable  conditions  of wind speeds and 
directions,  (c) the effect  of roof slope on air flow pattern  in Pitched  Roof  
houses  has been studied,  (d) the effect of wind barriers,  solid and semi 
solid,  has been studied  on air flow patterns  in sheep  houses  in relation  to 
the distance  which must separate  the house and barrier  so that normal  
air flow patterns  occur and (e) models  of complete  sites and farm yards  
have been used to study the interaction  of buildings  and trees on flow 
pattern —this has been useful in the study of ventilation  problems  in 
climatic  calf houses.
It is concluded  that the water table is a useful  means  of studying  the 
air flow patterns  created  by wind within  and around  climatic  houses  and 
has applications  in the improvement  of climatic  house  design  and in the 
solution  of complex  ventilation  problems  in climatic  houses.
91
FACTORS  ASSOCIATED  WITH  VARIATION  IN BIRTH  
WEIGHT  OF PIGS
P. B. LYNCH.  P. A. KEARNEY  and J. F. O’GRADY
Records  from 2730 sows farrowed  at Moorepark  over a 5 year period  
were analysed.  Pigs in 1066 litters were weighed  individually  and for 
these within litter variation  is expressed  by the within litter coefficient  
of variation  (CV%).  Average  weight  at birth (gm) was expressed  by the 
following  equations :
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)Y — 1231 — 24Xj + 3X2 (r = 0.33) for gilts and
±148  +4
Y = 1544 — 45Xi + 7X2 — 15X3 (r = 0.57 for older  sows
+ 13 +2 ±3 ±3
CV% was expressed  by the equations
Y = 22.7 + 0.16X1 — 0.12X2 (r = 0.31) for gilts and
+0.2 +0.16 +0.03
Y = 5.51 + 0.95X1 - 0.007X2 + 0.41X3 (r 
+0.2 +0.07 +0.013 ±0.130.47) for older sows
In all equations  Xi = no. in litter, Xj = service  wt. Kg, X3 = parity.  
The effect of pregnancy  weight  gain and gestation  length  was negligible.
92
THE INDUCTION  OF PREMATURE  PARTURITION  IN THE  
COW  USING  LONG  AND  SHORT-ACTING  CORTICOSTEROIDS
M. G. DISKIN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare.  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
A practical  method  of inducing  premature  parturition  in cows thereby  
restricting  calf growth  rate in utero would allow for greater  use of the 
larger beef breeds  as terminal  crossing  sires both in the dairy and beef 
herds.
Two groups  of cows (total 44) were presented  for induction.  Both  
groups were bred to continental  sire breeds and a high incidence  of 
dystocia  would  be expected  following  a normal  term. The objective  was 
to induce  parturition  5-7 days prior to the normal  expected  calving  date.  
The induction  regime  consisted  of a primary  treatment  with a long-acting  
glucocorticoid;  20 mg betamethasone  alcohol  s.c. 10-14 days prior to 
expected  calving  date. This was followed  5 days later, if parturition  had 
not occurred,  by a secondary  treatment  consisting  of a short acting  gluco ­
corticoid;  30 mg betamethasone  phosphate  s.c. Results  for both groups  
were similar  and a summary  for both groups  combined  is presented.
Calving  responses  following  the primary  and secondary  treatment  were 
16% and 77% respectively.  Seven percent  of the cows failed to respond  
within  72 hours  of the secondary  treatment  and they calved  at full term.  
Mean ± S.D. interval  from the secondary  treatment  to calving  was 43 ± 
6.6 hours. Mean ± S.D. ease of calving  score was 1.25 ± 0.30. Twenty-  
five percent  of the cows retained  the placenta  for more than 48 hours  and 
these cows had a longer  interval  (P < 0.01) from the secondary  treatment  
to parturition  than the cows that expelled  their membranes  within 48 
hours  of parturition.  This longer  interval  suggests  that these cows were 
relatively  more premature  at time of parturition.  Calf birth weight  was 
strongly  correlated  with gestation  day at parturition  (r=0.59).  Regression  
analysis  gave an estimate  of calf growth  rate in utero of b ± S.E. = 0.78 
+ 0.23 kg per day (P < 0.05). This induction  regime  resulted  in good 
relaxation  and dilatation  of the birth canal in 43 of 44 cows. Udder  
development  was assessed  to be normal  in 42 of 44 cows; calf survival  
and vigour  were not adversely  affected.
This combination  of a primary  treatment  with a long-acting  glucocor ­
ticoid which seems to prepare  the dam for parturition,  followed  by 
secondary  treatment  consisting  of a short-acting  glucocorticoid  which 
triggers  the onset of parturition,  would seem to mimic  quite closely  the 
events  of normal  parturition.
93
THE USE OF ENZYME  IMMUNOASSAY  PROCEDURES  FOR  
THE MEASUREMENT  OF PROGESTERONE  IN MILK OR
BLOOD
D. MORRIS  and J. M. SREENAN  
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
Because  of its role in the maintenance  of cyclicity  and in the establish ­
ment and maintenance  of pregnancy,  progesterone  is an important  
reproductive  hormone.  Progesterone  level can be used to monitor  corpus  
luteum  function  and, therefore,  reproductive  status  in various  situations.  
Until recently,  progesterone  determination  was carried  out by radioim ­
munoassay  (RIA). But the use of this technique  has been confined  to 
specialised  laboratories,  due to high costs and the problems  associated  
with the use and disposal  of radioisotopes.  Enzyme  immunoassay  now, 
however,  provides  an alternative  method.  The use of an enzyme  label 
allows the assay to be colorimetrically  based and hence dramatically  
reduces  the capital  cost of this assay. As there are no specialised  require ­
ments,  the running  costs of the assay are also reduced.
The progesterone  assay (EIA) described  is that developed  by Cleere,  
W. and reported  in J. Reprod.  Fert. 62, 173-180.  The performance  of the 
assay at Belclare  showed  that the extraction  efficiency  was high (98.9%)  
and the standard  deviation  was low (± 1.9%)  thus indicating  a consistent  
procedure.  The high correlation  (r = 0.94) between  the RIA and EIA 
methods  was established  over the complete  oestrous  cycle and therefore  
over a range of progesterone  values. ITie co-efficients  of variation  both 
within and between  assay runs were low and well within the ranges  
reported  in the literature.
Using  microtitration  plates  (8 x 12 matrix)  instead  of tubes,  the optical  
density  of the solution  in the wells can be read in situ and commercially  
available  plate readers  now allow 96 well plates  to be read in less than 
one minute. The output  from the microtitre  plate reader  can be inter ­
faced with a microcomputer  and the results  printed  in terms  of proges ­
terone  per ml of plasma  or milk —thus allowing  assay completion  within  
one day.
94
I
J
