Irish Grassland 
& Animal  Production  
Association  Journal  
1984
iRtSH
FARMERS
JOURNAL
THE VOICE  OF IRELANDS  BIGGEST  INDUSTRY
The Irish Farmers ’ Journal  is now read by almost  350.000  
readers  every week. They find it full of up-to-the-minute  
facts, features,  prices and market  trends. It employs  the 
finest feature  writers,  leading  farming  experts,  skilled vets 
and legal and income  tax brains to give Irish farmers  a 
first-class  Newspaper.
Nowadays,  no wise farmer  would be without  it . . . that’s 
why more and more you’ll hear the 
Journal  quoted  in farming  circles. If 
you are not a reader  you’re missing  a 
lot.Take  out 
a subscription  
with the 
Irish Farmers ’ 
Journal  
NOWYearly  rate Ireland  and U.K.
IRE31 including  postage  
12 months  □ 6 months  □
I enclose  herewith  IRE...............
Name ...........................................Phone
Address
Post to; Irish Farmers ’ Journal,  Irish Farm Centre,  
Bluebell,  Dublin  12. Telephone:  (0001)  501166.
J
Irish Grassland  and 
Animal  Production  Association
JOURNAL
Vol. 18 1984
Printed  by Lithographic  Universal.  Dargle  Vale, Bray
C O N T EN T SPage
J. P. Hanrahan Choice  of ewe and ram breed for the 
lowland  flock 4
S. Flanagan Mid-season  lamb production 14
S. Flanagan Sheep  farming  in England Report  on 
Sheep Tour 26
M, Drennan Winter  fattening  of cattle 34
M. G. Keane Use of implants  for beef cattle 44
D. G. O’Neill Money  from grass through  a beef breeding  
herd54
G. J. More  O'Ferrall Breeding  strategy  in high producing  dairy  
herds64
K. J. O’Farrell Advances  in semen  technology  in Ireland 74
J. Walshe Dairying  where now? 82
J, McKeon The I.D.A.  policy  for the dairy industry — 
A programme  for diversification 96
M. O’Sullivan Tenth  Edward  Richards-Orpen  Memorial  
Lecture
Some Aspects  of Pasture  Utilisation  by 
the Grazing  Animal104
COUNCIL  1984/1984
President:  J. Flood (Deceased)
Vice-President : A. Conway
Council  Members:
D. Booth,  D. Browne,  D. Cashman,  J. Dardis,  M. Drennan,  D. Fay, 
V Flynn P Gleeson,  J. Leeson,  P. MacCanna,  D. MacCarthy,  P. 
McFeely  ’ O Manley.  K. L. Mathews,  M. Murphy,  W. Murphy,  
P. O’Keeffe,  T. Power,  P. Tighe.
Hon. Secretary  / Treasurer :
Dr. S. Flanagan
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuain.  Co. Galway.
JOHN FLOOD  
AN APPRECIATION
The untimely  death of our President,  John Flood,  leaves a big void not 
only in the direction  of the Association ’s activities  but also in the drive  
for progress  in Irish farming.
Until 1976 he was closely  associated  with the development  of Premier  
Meat Packers,  Sallins,  after which he specialised  in intensive  beef pro­
duction  and winter cereals  on his farm at Newhall,  Co. Kildare. By 
quickly adopting  new methods  and technology  he soon became an 
outstanding  farmer  with total commitment  to development  and progress.
He was a trend setter  and always  willing  to share his deep knowledge  of 
farming  business  with others. He spoke at several meetings  of the 
Association  and members  benefited  significantly  from his analyses  of 
farming  problems  and on how to overcome  them. His advice,  which he 
freely  gave, was highly  valued  by all.
He was unanimously  elected  President  of the Association  at the Annual  
General  Meeting  at the Spring  Show on May 1st, 1984.
John was a man of outstanding  sincerity  with a warm and kindly  per­
sonality.  As a sportsman  he was very interested  in rugby  and was deeply  
involved  in the training  and development  of the youth  in his locality.
The Association  extends  its sympathy  to his wife Maura,  sons Fintan,  
Tadgh  and Shane,  to his parents  and the other members  of his family. 
May he rest in peace.
Aidan  Conway,  Vice-President
Choice  of Ewe and Ram Breed  for 
Lowland  Flock
J. P. HANRAHAN
The Agricultural  Institute.  Belclare.  Tuam.  Co. Galway.
Lowland  sheep farming  in Ireland  is concerned  primarily  with meat  
production  and is a complex  process involving  the combination  ot 
animals,  land and managerial  skills to produce  lamb for a variety  of 
market  outlets  and make a profit. When  considering  the choice  of breeds  
attention  is focussed  on the animal  factors  which influence  profitability.  
Research  does not usually  attempt  to measure  profitability  in animal  
experiments  but argues  that animal  productivity  differences  are basic to 
long term differences  in profitability.  Accordingly,  research  has concen ­
trated on the main components  of variation  in animal  productivity  and 
with information  on these and their relative  importance  producers  can 
make informed  decisions  about  choice  of breed.
In this paper discussion  is confined  to traits which are likely to 
influence  animal  productivity  and to the evidence  on breed differences.  
In the light of these differences  present  breeding  policies  and future  
prospects  are examined  in the context  of how iricreased  productivity  can 
be achieved  by rational  breed choice  and effective  use of national  breed 
resources.
EFFICIENCY
The efficiency  of meat production  can be considered  as the fundamen ­
tal component  influencing  choice of breed. It may be defined  for an 
individual  ewe or flock as
Total carcass  weight  produced
Food consumed  by ewe(s)  + food consumed  by lamb(s)
Consideration  of this definition  shows  that about  60% of the food input  
is required  to maintain  the ewe for twelve  months.  It is also evident  that 
the more lambs produced  per ewe per year the better the efficiency.  
Likewise  lambs which grow faster will have a lower feed requirement  
and hence yield improved  efficiency  and, since heavier  ewes have higher  
maintenance  requirements,  the size of the ewe also has an influence  on 
the efficiency  of production.
Litter  size and efficiency.  A summary  of the relative  efficiency  for ewes  
of a given size that rear 1, 2, or 3 lambs  is given in Table 1 and shows  
that prolificacy  (litter size at birth) has a major impact  on efficiency  
provided  that the extra lambs  are reared.
Table 1
Effect  of number  of lambs  on relative  efficiency  of meat production
Ewes  suckling Relative  efficiency
Singles 100
Twins 131
Triplets 156
Adapted  from Large (1970)
Lamb growth rate and efficiency.  Experimental  evidence  on the 
influence  of growth  rate on efficiency  has shown a very small positive 
effect. Likewise  the effect of carcass  weight  is quite small for a given  
carcass  quality.  Lamb  growth  weight  is influenced  by the milking  ability  
of the dam as well as the growth  potential  of the off-spring.  Breed  differ ­
ences in maternal  ability  may be summarised  by saying  that crossbred  
ewes from hill breeds  are generally  better  than other  types.
Ewe size and efficiency.  The influence  of ewe size on efficiency  high­
lights the interaction  between  animal  performance  and other inputs  and 
leads to the conclusion  that ewe size per se is not a fundamental  issue.  
Thus,  research  results  in Britain  have shown  that matching  ewe size and 
stocking  rate gives similar gross margins  per acre for small Welsh  
Mountain  ewes producing  one lamb and much larger Greyface  ewes 
producing  two lambs. However,  when compared  at the same litter size 
the smaller  ewe type will give a higher  efficiency.  Experimental  results  
are summarized  in Table 2 and show that a ewe breed with a high 
bodyweight  producing  mostly  single  lambs  represents  the wrong  choice.
Table 2
Effect of ewe size and number  of lambs  on relative  efficiency  of meat production
Ewe sizeNo. of lambs
(kg)Singles Twins
58 124 158
78 100 138
Adapted  from Large (1970)
Lambs  reared per ewe joined. The foregoing  discussion  has shown 
that the number  of lambs  per ewe has a major  impact  on efficiency.  What  
evidence  can be produced  to show that such experimental  differences  in 
efficiency  can affect the profitability  of the sheep enterprise  ? There is 
now a considerable  amount  of data to answer  this question.  The evidence  
from one source is shown in Table 3 which summarises  gross margins  
from The Agricultural  Institute ’s Blindwell  farm. Between  1977 and
1980 the ewe flock at Blindwell  consisted  of different  ewe types  of similar  
bodyweight  but with different genetic potential  for prolificacy.  The results 
show that ewes with the highest  prolificacy  gave the highest  gross  margin  
per ewe. The average  effect was that gross margin  per ewe increased  by 
approximately  13% for each increase  of 0.1 in the number  of lambs  
reared per ewe joined with the ram. Farm survey data from lowland 
flocks  in Ireland  have showu the same increase  of 13% in gross margin  
for each increase  of 0.1 in lambs reared  per ewe (Fingleton,  1978).  Results  
from recorded  flocks  in Britain  yielded  values  between  11 and 13% for 
the increase  in gross  margin  per ewe for each change  of 0.1 in the number  
of lambs  reared  per ewe joined  (MLC,  1975).
Thus,  it is clear that increasing  the number  of lambs  reared  per ewe is 
a major  source  of increased  profitability.
Table 3
Effect  of lifter size on the number  of lambs  reared  and gross margin  per ewe
Year of 
comparisonBreed of
eweEwe weight  
(kg)Litter
sizeLambs  reared  
per ewe joined
1977 and Galway 68 1.33 1.05
1978 Improved  Galway 63 1.68 1.37
Extra Gross Margin  earned  by Improved  Galway = 42%
1979 and Suffolk  X Galway 72 1.66 1.30
1980 Improved  Galway 67 1.87 1.59
Extra Gross Margin  earned  by Improved  Galway = 40%
Factors  determining  number  of Iambs  reared  per ewe
The number  of lambs  reared  is expressed  per ewe joined  with the ram 
because  it is the number  of ewes joined  which represents  the investment  
in the flock for the years production  and also accounts  for most of the 
food costs. The number  of lambs  reared  per ewe joined  with the ram is 
determined  by three components :
(a) the proportion  of ewes which lamb
(b) litter size
(c) lamb survival
Proportion  lambing.  Ewes fail to lamb  either  because  they are barren  
or they died between  joining  and lambing.  While  breed  differences  in the 
rate of ewe deaths  have not been carefully  studied  the incidence  is low 
and consequently  there is little room for improvement  by choice  of breed. 
The rate of barrenness  varies  a little with breed but these differences  are 
often negatively  associated  with breed differences  in prolificacy.  The 
breed of ram used for mating  dees not have a significant  effect on the 
incidence  of barrenness  except  possibly  in out-of-season  matings.  As a 
general  rule 95% of ewes should be pregnant  after a joining  period  of
A complete  financial  
management  kit 
for farmers.
• Agri-Check  Cheque  Book
• Agri-Check  Cash Flow Sheet
• Agri-Check  Farm Diary
Why  every  farmer needs  Agri-Check:
Careful  planning  and cost control  are 
critical  to the success  of modern  farm  
business.  For that reason,  it is vital for 
farmers  to have an efficient  method  of 
recording  financial  transactions.Bank  of Ireland  provides  this with the 
Agri-Check  service.
Call into your local Bank  of Ireland  
branch  today  for further  details.
BanKiTlreiancL
six weeks. Prolific  breeds  usually  give higher  lambing  proportions  than 
less prolific  breeds  under  the same conditions.
Litter size. There is plenty of evidence  for breed differences  in this 
trait and hence full attention  should  be devoted  to these when choosing  
a ewe breed.
Lamb survival. The proportion  of lambs which survive depends  
largely  on management  factors,  litter size and ewe age. Breed  differences 
in lamb survival  are small when comparisons  are made at the same litter  
size and age. Two experiments  in the Institute,  one conducted  between 
1961 and 1965 and the second from 1966 to 1972, used a variety  of 
purebred  and crossbred  ewes and no significant  differences  in lamb  
survival  were found. The average  rate of survival  to weaning  for single,  
twin and triplet born lambs in the Institute ’s Blindwell  flock between 
1977 and 1982 were : singles  93%,  twins  88%,  triplets  78%. (In all cases 
lamb survival  is expressed  relative  to the total number  of lambs born,  
whether  live or dead). From these figures  it is evident  that as flock aver­
age litter size increases  the rate of lamb survival  will decline  somewhat.
BREED  DIEFERENCES
Ewe breeds. Data from various  breed comparisons  in the Institute  
under lowland  conditions,  during  the past 25 years are summarised  in 
Table 4. This table shows average  litter size and number  of lambs  
reared  per ewe joined  with the ram. The breeds  listed were not all in a 
single trial but litter size differences  between  breeds  were assembled  from 
various  trials and used to construct  the breed averages  shown. The 
resulting  mean litter sizes were then used to predict  the number  of lambs  
weaned  per ewe joined. This was calculated  by using information  on 
litter size distribution  as a function  of average  litter size and applying  
the average  lamb survival  data quoted  earlier  from the Blindwell  flock.  
A value of 0.94 was assumed  for the proportion  of ewes lambing.  It 
should  be borne in mind that, for any given breed,  litter size depends  on 
ewe age, bodyweight  and other management  factors. (The means for 
Cheviot  and Scottish  Blackface  ewes in Table  4 refer  to flecks  maintained  
under  lowland  conditions).
The data in Table  4 show that when the objective  is 1.5 lambs  reared  
per ewe joined  then this requires  a ewe breed with a genetic  capacity  to 
achieve  an average  litter size of at least 1.8 under  average  conditions.
Sire breeds.  The term sire breed refers  to the use of rams in a produc ­
tion system  in which  all lambs  are destined  for slaughter.  The important  
criteria  in making  choices  among  breeds  for this purpose  include  lamb  
survival,  growth  rate and the ability to produce  carcases  of a quality  
which  is most suitable  for the intended  market.  Carcass  weight  is also a 
consideration  since it is generally  more efficient  to produce  meat from 
heavy  earcasses  provided  quality  is not affected  and other  factors  are also 
unchanged.  The relative  importance  of these various  criteria  will depend 
on the production  system. Thus,  a farmer  aiming  to have all lambs  sold 
for slaughter  by the end of August  and not in early lamb production
8
Table 4
Average  litter size and number  of lambs  reared  for different  ewe breeds
and crosses
Ewe breed type Litter sizeLambs  reared per 
ewe joined
Galway 1.45 1.21
Cheviot 1.60 1.31
Scottish  Blackface 1.75 1.42
Belclare  Improver 2.00 1.59
Suffolk  x Galway 1.58 1.30
Suffolk  x Cheviot 1.68 1.37
B. Leicester  x Cheviot 1.70 1.39
B. Leicester  x S. Blackface 1.70 1.39
Galway  x Cheviot 1.56 1.29
Galway  x S. Blackface 1.56 1.29
Improved  Galway 1.80 1.45
Improved  Cheviot 1.90 1.52
might  need to use a sire breed whose  progeny  reach the appropriate  level 
of finish at a light carcass  weight. Regardless  of the production  system  
carcass  quality  is very important  and must be judged  with reference  to 
export market  requirements.  In this context  quality  means a light to 
medium  fat cover  on a carcass  with good conformation.
As a general  rule breeds  of small mature  size (like the Southdown)  
reach a given level of carcass  fatness  at lower carcass  weight  than large 
breeds  like the Suffolk  or Oxford  Down. However,  breeds  differ little in 
fatness  if killed when they reach the same proportion  of mature  weight.  
Thus,  given a particular  breed the optimum  carcass  weight  is determined.
Results  from sire breed  comparison  on growth  rate, carcass  fatness  and 
conformation  will be summarized  and the differences  can be used in 
conjunction  with individual  production  requirements  in making  breed  
choices.
From a number  of studies  in Ireland  and Britain  it is clear that the 
Suffolk  and Oxford  Down sired lambs  grow faster than lambs  sired by 
Texel rams and reach a fixed slaughter  weight  1 to 2 weeks  earlier. The 
differences  among  these breeds  in carcass  weight for a given level of 
fatness  are rather small. These studies  have also shown that Oxford  
Down  cross carcasses  have a poorer  conformation  than either  Suffolk  or 
Texel crosses  with little difference  between  the latter breeds  although  the 
Texel is better  than the Suffolk. Table 5 contains  a summary  cf breed 
differences  in growth  rate and carcass  traits. The major  difference  is the 
low fat content  of Texel cross carcasses  at a given carcass  weight. This 
difference  translates  into an advantage  of about 1 kg in favour  of the 
Texel for carcass  weight  at a given level of fatness.
The difference  between  the Suffolk  and Texel breeds  for lamb growth  
rate may depend  on the type of ewe with which rams from these breeds
Table 5
Relative  performance  of various  breeds  used as terminal  sires
Relative  performance  for
Breed Growth Carcass Carcass  weight
rate fat at fixed fatnes
Suffolk iOO 115 95
Texel 96 100 100
Oxford Down 100 115 94
Dorset Horn 98 115 —
Galway 96 113 —
are mated. Thus,  at Blindwell  we have compared  Suffolk  and Texel rams 
on Galway  type and Suffolk-cross  ewes. The differences  in lamb growth 
rate are summarized  in Table  6 and show that for the progeny  of Suffolk-  
cross ewes Texel sired lambs grew faster than lambs sired by Suffolk  
rams. In the case of Galway  type ewes the Suffolk  sired progeny  grew  
significantly  faster than those sired by Texel rams.
Table 6
Interaction  between  breed of sire and breed  of dam for Iamb growth  rate
Sire breed Dam breed
Suffolk  cross Galway  type
Suffolk 100 100
Texel 101 95
In production  systems  where the objective  is to finish all lambs off 
pasture,  breed differences  between  the date at which lambs  are suitable  
for slaughter  may be the most important  consideration.  Results  are 
shown in Table 7 which are taken from the study conducted  in Britain
Table 7
Effect  of ram breed on lamb marketing  pattern  f
Ram breed Percent  lambs sold by end of
June July August September
Southdown 12 44 72 92
Suffolk 6 17 42 67
Texel 4 18 44 66
Oxford 2 10 26 54
t These data refer to twin lambs sold at the same subcutaneous  fat grade from  
March  lambing  flocks (MLC,  1983)
10
by the Meat and Livestock  Commission.  The Southdown  sires produced  
lambs which reached  the appropriate  level of finish at a carcass  weight  
of 16 kg and were sold much earlier  in the season than other breeds  
which produce  carcasses  weighing  between  19 and 20 kg. The Oxford  
Down crosses  produced  the highest  carcass  weights  and were the latest  
to reach slaughter  condition.  The differences  between  Texel and Suffolk  
were small.
No significant  differences  have been found between  sire breeds  for the 
survival  rate of their crossbred  offspring.
Table 8
Preliminary  survey  results  on ewe and ram breeds  in lowland  flocks
Breed 1981 1982
Ewe replacements  (%)
Suffolk-cross 61 66
Galway 28 24
Other 11 10
Rams used (%)
Suffolk 70
Galway 9
Oxford 5
Texel 3
Other 13
DISCUSSION
The foregoing  results  summarise  the major differences  in breed per­
formance  which influence  productivity  in the lowland  sheep flock and 
indicate  the choices  which  are available  to producers.  It is easy to change  
the sire breed used but changing  the breed of ewe usually  involves  a 
planned  programme  over a number  of years. This implies  the need for 
planned  production  of ewe replacements  since the range of ewe types  
listed in Table  4 is not readily  available  in the market  place.
It ha.l been shown  earlier  that ewe prolificacy  has a major  impact  on 
flock productivity.  However,  the present  structure  of our sheep  industry  
places very little emphasis  on the production  of ewe types with the 
necessary  genetic  capacity  for high prolificacy.  This is revealed  by an 
examination  of the breed composition  of the lowland  flock. Preliminary  
results  of a survey  of lowland  sheep  flocks  are given in Table  8 and show  
that Suffolk  crosses  predominate  in the ewe replacements  presently  being 
introduced  into lowland  flocks. TTiere is little contribution  from hill 
cross-breeds  which are among the most prolific  ewe breeds available  
(Table 4). This breed pattern  differed  only slightly  when home bred 
hoggets  (60% of total) were compared  with purchased  hoggets.  Likewise,
an examination  of the survey results  shows  that 78% of all rams in use 
on lowland  farms are either Suffolk,  Oxford  or Texel with the major  
fraction  being Suffolk.
This breeding  pattern  means  the terminal  sire breeds  are dominating  
sheep production  and implies  that very little planning  is involved  in the 
production  of ewe replacements.  Unless this process  is changed  our 
lowland  sheep industry  is destined  to remain  at an output  level less than 
1.3 lambs  reared  per ewe joined  with the ram while our main competitor  
on the export  market  (Britain)  is producing  in excess  of 1.4 lambs  per 
ewe to the ram. The breed composition  of our lowland  flock needs to 
be changed  by choosing  ewe replacements  with the genetic  capacity  to 
produce  a litter size at birth of 1.8 under  average  conditions.
The execution  of such a change  requires  planned  allocation  of flock  
resources  since it can only be effected  over a number  of years. At 
individual  farm level, replacement  ewes can be homebred.  With a ewe 
replacement  rate for lowland  flock of about 22% and at current  levels  
of output,  this requires  mating  of about  40% of the ewe flock to produce  
the necessary  replacements.  On a national  scale cast hill ewes should  be 
used to produce  replacements  for lowland  flocks. Given  current  levels  of 
lamb output  and stock  mortality  in hill flocks  and assuming  that hill ewes  
can produce  two lamb crops  after being culled from the hill, then about  
40% of the lowland  ewe replacements could be crossbreds  out of Scottish 
Blackface  and Cheviot  dams. With this level of contribution  from hill 
ewes only 25% of lowland  ewes  need to be used to produce  replacements,  
thus allowing  the remainder  to be mated with terminal  sire breeds  for 
prime lamb production.  With a more prolific  lowland  ewe population  
an even smaller  fraction  would suffice. Increased  productivity  in hill 
flocks (lower mortality  of ewes and lambs and better fertility)  would  
enable  cast hill ewes to provide  a greater  proportion  of ewe replacements.
If the planning  implied  by these figures  combined  with the choice of 
ewe breeds  discussed  earlier  were implemented  then lamb output  from 
lowland  flocks  could be rapidly  increased  to the target of 1.5 lambs  per 
ewe.
References
Fingleton,  W. A. (1978). Performance  and prospects  in Irish sheep production.  
Proc. Anim.  Conf. Economics  and Rural Welfare  Centre,  An Foras Taluntais.
Large,  R. V. (1970).  The biological  efficiency  of meat production  in sheep. Anim.  
Prod. 12: 393-401.
Meat and Livestock  Commission  (1975). Sheep Improvement  Services.  Records  
Report  No. 8.
Meat and Livestock  Commission  (1983).  Sheep Breeds  for Meat Needs.
12
I
• Three-quarters  of your 
calcium  needs
• One-third  of your protein  
requirements
• Many  vitamins
• Several  minerals
• A major  contribution  to 
daily energy  and vitality
• An important  part of a 
balanced  diet
• A cool refreshing  drink
ndc1WATER  • PROTEIN  • 
FAT*  CARBOHYDRATE*  
CHOLESTEROL  * 
SODIUM  * 
POTASSIUM  * 
MAGNESIUM  IRON * 
ZINC * CALCIUM  * 
PHOSPHOROUS  * 
THIAMIN  * 
RIBOFLAVIN  * 
FOLIC  ACID * 
VITAMIN  B,2 * 
VITAMIN  A * 
VITAMIN  D
national  Dairy Council  Information  Centre  on Nutrition  & Health. 
Grattan  House,  Lower  Mount  Street,  Dublin  2.
13
Mid-Season  Lamb  Production
S. FLANAGAN
The Agriculfiiral  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
The size of our national  ewe flock reached  1.80 million  in December  
1983, the highest  since 1974 (C.S.O.  Dublin).  Sheep incomes  in recent  
years have been very attractive  (AFT Farm Management  Survey 1981-  
1983) and the best incentive  of all to encourage  production  is a good  
income  per ewe and per hectare.
It is in the last three years or so that ewe numbers  have increased. 
This strong  revival  of interest  in sheep has occurred  at a time of general  
recession  all round and at a time when the financing  of other livestock 
systems  has become  increasingly  difficult.  But there is enormous  scope  
for further  expansion  as proven  by the continuing  difficulties  of export  
factories  to procure  adequate  supplies  of quality lambs and by the 
continuing  deficit  in the EEC.
Re-Appraisal  of the Role of Sheep Production
For a number  of special  reasons,  therefore,  it is now time for a national  
re-assessment  of the role of sheep  production  in the agricultural  economy,  
particularly  on lowland  farms.
1. In response  to difficulties  regarding  CAP, it is necessary  that we 
expand  into products  that are not in surplus.  Sheep meat is such a 
case and in fact the EEC is only 74% self-sufficient  in lamb - - the 
present  deficit  is equivalent  to 260,000  tonnes  of sheep  meat.
2. Lamb production  enterprises  are financially  attractive  and the top 
one-third  of lowland  sheep producers earned  about  £640 gross  margin  
per ha (£260 per acre) in both 1982 and 1983 (AFT Farm Manage ­
ment Survey). These producers  have shown that there is a way 
forward  and clearly  indicate  that a landowner  free to choose  must  
consider  sheep for high income  from his farm.
3. Sheep farm development  costs are moderate  compared  with other  
types  of livestock.  Most farms  already  have some buildings  or a yard 
which  can be converted  for in-wintering  a flock of ewes,
4. Sheep  research  information  is now available  to show how to produce  
22 lambs  sold per ha from 15 ewes stocked  per ha.
Although  these levels of productivity  have been proven over many 
years at Creagh,  Belclare  and Blindwell,  there appears  to be a lack of 
conviction  at farm level that high stocking  rates are practicable  in the 
case of sheep. While intensive  lowland  sheep  units are common  practice  
in Britain  and New Zealand,  sheep  enterprises  in this country  have been 
very much  subordinate to a predominantly  cattle  economy.  This  traditional  
role of sheep  farming  has resulted  in tack of organisation  and in lack of 
good management  in many flocks.
14
We must, therefore,  confront  these issues  by applying  available  infor ­
mation to develop  specialised  sheep enterprises  and to achieve real 
growth in the industry. Such an approach  must be based on the 
principles  of intensification  established  by research.  The purpose  of this 
paper is to illustrate  how sheep farm productivity  can be significantly 
increased  by translating  research  results into farm practice  for spring  
lambing  flocks.
Let us examine  present  levels  of flock productivity  and compare  them 
with a sheep  unit where  the principles  of intensification  have been applied.  
Table 1 shows  the average  performance  of lowland  flocks  in the Institute ’s 
Farm Management  Survey  and the performance  of Improved  Galway  
ewes at the Institute ’s farm at Blindwell.  (This unit is used fcr the 
application  of research  results  under  commercial  conditions).  The survey 
shows that in lowland  flocks  both output  per ewe and per ha are much  
lower than those achievable  by using research  information  on ewe 
productivity  and stocking  rates. Methods  of bridging  this gap in produc ­
tivity will now be discussed.
Table 1
IVIid-.season  lamb production  systems  
(Farm  Management  Survey,  The Agricultural  Institute)
No. lambs No. ewes
No. flocks reared/ewe  joined /ha
South Leinster
1978-1982 109 1.30 7.9
Galway/Roscommon/
So. Mayo 1978-1982 205 1.24 6.2
No. ewes
Blindwell  1977-1982  
Improved  Galway Flock 611 1.49 15.0
Output  per ewe
The number  of lambs  reared  per ewe joined  with the ram is the main  
determinant  of flock productivity.  The immediate  target in lowland  fat 
lamb flocks  is 1.5 lambs  reared  per ewe joined  with the ram. To achieve 
this, an average  litter size of 1.8 is required  in order to allow for barren ­
ness and mortality.  The genetic resources  available  for improving  
average  litter size are discussed  elsewhere  in this Journal.
Output  per ha
Research  results  at Belclare  clearly  show that an annual  stocking  rate 
of 15 ewes per ha (6 ewes per acre) can be carried  on dry land using 
suitable  N fertiliser  applications.
15
Nitrogen  for grazing
The optimum  amount  of N for sheep grazing  depends  on the stocking 
rate and clover  content  of the sward. Dates of lambing  and of turnout  
to grass in spring  are also important  in so far as they affect the demand  
for early grass.
Responses  in sheep  production  to varying  levels  of N applications  have 
been measured  at Belclare.  Table 2 shows  the effect of N and stocking 
rate on average  weaning  weight  of lambs  in flocks  with 1.4 lambs  reared 
per ewe grazing.  Duration  of grazing  was from April 1 to September  5 
and lambs  were weaned  in early July.
Table 2
Effect  of stocking  rate and nitrogen  on average  weaning  weight  of lambs  (kg) 
(Grennan,  Belclare  1979-1981)
Ewes/ha 12 17 21
(Ewes/acre) (5) (7) (8.5)
Nitrogen  kg/ha
67 31.5 30.5
134 32.0 29.0
201 31.325
(10)
29.0
The main conclusion  from Table  2 is that increased  use of N fertiliser 
allows  higher  stocking  rates to be carried.  Similar  lamb weaning  weights  
were obtained  in 12 ewes/ha  with low N, at 17 ewes/ha  with medium  N 
and at 21 ewes/ha  with high N. At a fixed level of N, increases  in 
stocking  rate depressed  average  weaning  weight.
The results  in Table 2 relate to grazing  only. Annual  stocking  rates  
will be lower because  part of the grazing  area must be closed for silage  
conservation  in summer.  Recommended  annual  stocking  rates and the 
appropriate  N dressings  for free draining  land are given in Table 3. 
These  recommendations  are based on farmlet  system  trials conducted  by 
E. Grennan  at Belclare.
Table 3
Nitrogen  dressings  for mid-season  lamb production
Annual  stocking  rate ewes/ha
Kg N/ha10 12 15
February  1 33 50 33
April (1st grazing) — 30 33
May (2nd grazing) — — —
August
Silage aftermaths  reserved for grazing  : 33 kg N/ha33
16
Silage
Silage is the most reliable  and efficient  form of grass conservation  on 
highly  stocked  farms. Although  hay continues  to be an important  winter  
feed cn many sheep farms, it is difficult  to make good quality  hay 
consistently  in our climate. Moreover,  as stocking  rates increase  to 12 
ewes per ha or higher,  sufficient  areas  of pasture  cannot  be closed  for hay 
without  increasing  the grazing  pressure  excessively.  A two-cut  system  
must be adopted  and this necessitates  making  silage.
For a silage feeding period of about 100 days, requirements  are 
estimated  at 1 kg silage DM/ewe/day,  equivalent  to 0.6 tonnes  per ewe 
of silage freshweight  at 17% DM.
MANAGEMENT  CALENDAR
Let us consider  a grassland  management  programme  which incorpor ­
ates silage making  at 15 ewes per ha. General  guidelines  for a 20 ha 
(50 acres) farm are given in Table 4 and these should  be interpreted  to
Table 4
Grassland  Management  Calendar  for 300 ewes on 20 ha
1.5 lambs reared/ewe  joined
450 lambs reared
15 ewes/ha
0.6 tonnes  silage/ewe
December  to March  ; Pasture  rested
March  15-April  15 
Flock turnout
15 ewes/ha
20 ha grazedApril 15-June  21
17 ewes/ha
16 ha grazed
4 ha silage (20%)
Cut silage June 1 
Wean June 21
Draft lambs for 
saleJune 21-Sept. 1
42 lambs/ha
Draft lambs for 
sale
44 ewes/ha
4 ha silage (20%)Sept. 1-Dec.  1 
Remaining  lambs  
sold or removed  
Breeding  season
15 ewes/ha
20 ha grazed
suit individual  farm conditions.  For example,  in tillage areas, stubble  
grazing,  beet tops, etc. from late November  to early January  reduce  the 
silage feeding  period  to about  70 days or 0.4 tonnes  silage per ewe. The 
mam features  of the calendar  shown  in Table  4 will now be described.
Spring  grazing
At flock turnout  the amount  of pasture  on offer for grazing  at Belclare  
IS nomally  about  550 kg DM per ha. Research  by W. Sheehan  at Creagh  
has shown that the daily feed requirements  of the ewe in lactation  are 
approximately  double her requirements  before lambing.  In terms of 
pas ire with 70% DMD a lactating  ewe with twins needs to consume  
about 12 kg freshweight  per day in order  to satisfy  her nutrient  require ­
17
ments  for maintenance  and milk production.  This amounts  to about 1.8 
kg DM/ewe/day  on spring  grass  with  a moisture  content  ot 85
Thus with 550 kg pasture  DM on offer per ha the carrying  capacity  
is 16 ewes and their lambs  per ha for about  3 weeks.  Afterwards  m April,
grass growth  accelerates.  u- u uAfter lambing,  ewes and lambs are transferred  to pasture  which has 
been rested for the winter  and they are grazed  over the whole area in 
small groups  initially  to avoid mismothering,  building  up to 15 ewes per 
ha about April 1 when lambing  is fully complete.  After about 3 weeks  
ewes and lambs  are grouped  together  in flocks  not exceeding  150 ewes  
for convenience  in management  up to weaning.  Thus,  there would be Z 
groups  of 150 ewes on the sheep  unit described  in Table  4.
Meal supplements  are not normally  required  after flock turnout,  when  
pasture  has been rested and adequately  fertilised  with P and K in winter  
and with N as described  in Table 3. But in a cold spring grass growth  
will be poor and 1 kg meal supplement/ewe/day  should be fed until 
grass supply  is adequate.
Grazing  method  and number  of paddocks  r j .
At high stocking  rates, rotational  paddock  grazing  is preferred  to set 
stocking.  The main advantages  in a rotational  paddock  system  are in 
better  overall  management  and as an aid in allocating  grass between  the 
needs of ewes and lambs, and for conservation.  Paddocks  can be 
reserved  for special  needs,  such as, early grass or flushing,  and ewes can 
be confined  to a small area after weaning  when their feed requirements  
are low. A minimum  of 6 paddocks  is recommended  and 8 to 9 paddocks  
provide  greater  flexibility  when part of the farm is closed for silage, 
when ewes and lambs are grazed separately  after weaning  and when 
ewes  in poor body condition  recjuire  extra attention  for flushing.
Grazing  time per paddock  varies from 3 to 6 days depending  on the 
current  supply  of grass and the rapidity  of re-growth.
Silage  conservationIn mid-April  decisions  on silage conservation  must be made. Jne 
amount  of silage  required  for 300 ewes  is 180 tonnes  and this is conserved 
in 2 cuts as follows ; The whole  pasture  area is grazed  at 15 ewes per ha 
until mid-April.  Then 4 ha are closed  for silage and the remaining  area 
is grazed at 17 ewes per ha until weaning  in June using a rotational  
grazing  system. The silage is cut about June 1 and, at an average  yield  
of 25 tonnes  per ha, about 100 tonnes  are conserved.  A further  4 ha ^e 
closed at weaning  and cut in August  which,  at an average  yield of 20 
tonnes per ha, produces  on additional  80 tonnes of silage. Hence, 
sufficient  silage is conserved  by closing  20% of the area for the early cut 
and 20% for the late cut.
WcfliiinsLambs  are weaned  at 14 weeks of age and they are weighed  and 
handled  so that finished  lambs can be identified  for sale. Lambs  are
18
Where  * *
there ’s growth  
—there ’s 
Grcissland  
Fertilizers
HEAD  OFFICE;
75 Mertion  Square.  Dublin  2.
Tel. COD 600011/680788  Telex 24130
FACTORIES
Carrigrohane  Road,  Cork.  TeI.C02l)44188  
Dock Road.  Limerick.  Tel. C061)27788  
The Pound  Road,  Slane,  Co. Meath.
Tel. (041)24124  & 24160
Grassland  
covers  Ireland.
Grassland  Fertilizers  Ltd. The Pound Road, Slane Tel (041) 24124 & 24160
19
drafted  for slaughter  at 36 kg liveweight  provided  that they are adequat ­
ely fleshed. Some lambs reach this liveweight  before weaning.  Lambs  
sold directly  off the ewe tend to have higher  killing-out  percentages (48 /o) 
than lambs sold later in the summer  (44%); the latter are generally  
drafted  at 41-43 kg liveweight. *
After weaning,  ewes are stocked  at 44 ewes per ha until mid-August  
and lambs  are stocked  at 40-44 per ha initially,  and declining  to 
per ha in September  as lambs  are sold out. In mid-August  the ewe flock  
should  be condition  scored and ewes in poor body condition  should  be 
given extra grazing  to improve  bodyweight.  It should  be noted  that after  
the late cut silage in August,  20% of the farm is released  for grazing 
again.
Dosing  , „It is important  to emphasise  that growing  good grass and maintaining  
a high stocking  rate of 15 ewes per ha does not mean problems  from 
worm parasites.  There are now excellent  drugs on the market  which  
were not available  in the distant  past and sheep farmers  should seek 
advice  on dosing  programmes  for their flocks.
Breeding  seasonWith a grazing  intensity  of 15 ewes per ha the whole pasture  area is 
required  from September  onwards  for the ewes. At Blindwell  where  the 
level of intensification  is similar  to that described  here, the proportion  
of lambs which do not reach the target slaughter  weight  of 41 kg in 
autumn  has been 24-30%.  These lambs  are either  transferred  to forage 
crops  elsewhere  for winter  finishing  or sold.
The importance  of good ewe body condition  at mating is well 
recognised.  Research  has shown that increased  levels of feeding  of the 
ewe before mating  (flushing)  increase  the number  of lambs  born. The 
length  of the flushing  period  depends  on ewe body condition.  A period  
of 3-4 weeks on good grass before ram turnout  should be adequate  to 
obtain the desired response.  On average  the gestation  length in the 
sheep is 21 weeks and mating  should be arranged  for mid-October  so 
that lambing  begins in mid-March.  Flushing  should therefore  begin  
about  September  21. 2Rams  (raddled)  are turned  out in mid-October  and 
remain  with the ewes for 5 to 6 weeks.
Winter  management
After mating  is completed,  the ewes are flocked  in one group,  grazed 
for one rotation  around  the paddocks  and transferred  to the wintering
area about  December  1. j i, ijIn early pregnancy  high levels  of feeding  are unnecessary  and should 
be avoided.  A moderate  level of feeding,  even giving  a small loss of 7.8%  
of bodyweight,  will suffice.  , , , ..But in the final 6 weeks cf pregnancy  over 75% of foetal growth  
occurs and, consequently,  to satisfy the high foetal requirements  for 
nutrients  at this time the level of feeding  must be increased.  Results
20
show that silage will not be consumed  in sufficient  quantities  by ewes in 
late pregnancy  to give satisfactory  lambing  performance.  It is necessary  
to supplement  the silage  in late pregnancy  with concentrates  commencing  
with 0.25 kg/ewe/day  at six weeks before lambing  and increasing  to 
0.75 kg/ewe/day  in the final fortnight.
Details  of feeding  and flock management  are given in Handbook  
Series  No. 20, Sheep  Production,  published  by the Agricultural  Institute,  
19, Sandymount  Avenue,  Dublin  4.
Synchronised  breeding
In traditional  practice,  rams are joined with ewe flocks for 6 to 8 
weeks  during  the breeding  season. This results  in a protracted  lambing  
season. The progestagen-impregnated  intravaginal  sponge is a cheap,  
simple  and effective  method  of synchronising  oestrus  during  the breeding  
season. The sponges  are placed in the vagina,  using a speculum,  for 
12-16 days and practically  all the ewes are in oestrus  on the second  day 
after sponge removal.  The lambing  pattern  following  synchronisation  
has two phases,  with ewes lambing  to the post-treatment  oestrus  (60- 
90%) over a period  of about 9 days, then a period  of about  7 days with 
very few ewes lambing;  this is followed  by the ewes that held to the 
second  post-treatment  oestrus  lambing  over a period  of 8 days or so.
To illustrate  this general pattern,  a summary  of the reproductive  
performance  of the spring-lambing  flock at Blindwell  is shown  in Table
5. In this flock the percentage  of pregnant  ewes which lambed  to the 
synchronised  mating  was 82%. Of those, 90% lambed  over a 1-week  
p)ericd with a mid-week  peak. By planning  the dates of insertion  and 
removal  of sponges,  peak lambing  at week-ends  can be avoided.
Compact  lambing  is applicable  mainly  in flocks of 250 ewes or less; 
it is necessary  to organise  a ‘ram pool ’, i.e. one ram per 10 ewes.
Table 5
Reproductive  performance  of Blindwell  flock following  oestrous  synchronisation
with vaginal  sponges  
(Data  pooled  for 1978-1982)
No. %
Ewes treated 1,036
Ewes died 12 1.2
Ewes barren 46 4.4
Ewes aborted 23 2.2
Ewes lambed  to synchronised  mating 780 75.3
Ewes lambed  subsequently 175 16.3
Ewes lambed  to synchronised  mating  
— as a % of all ewes lambed 82%
Ewes lambed  over a 7-day period  — as a % of 
all ewes lambing  to synchronised  mating 90%
21
Sheep  Farm Production  Targets  and Income
Using the research  results  on sheep breeding  efficiency  and grassland  
management  as described,  the production  targets for spring lambing  
flocks  are shown  in Table 6.
Table 6
Sheep  farm production  targets
1. Ewes lambing  % 95.0
2. Litter size 1.8
3. Lamb mortality  % 13.0
4. No. lambs reared/ewe  joined 1.5
5. N fertiliser  kg/ha 150
6. No. ewes/ha 15
7. Average  carcass  wt kg 18
8. No. lambs reared/ha 22.5
9. Carcass  output  kg/ha 400
Let us now estimate  the profit margin  arising  from this level of produc ­
tivity. Assuming  an average  carcass  price of 242p per kg and using  
current  costs the gross  margin  per ha is estimated  as follows  ;
£/ha  
968 
60 
197400 kg carcass  @ 242p 
Wool @ £4/ewe  
Ewe premia  @ £13.13
1225
Direct  costs
1. Fertilisers  for grazing
5 bags 0.10.20  @ £146 /tonne  36
10 bags C.A.N.  @ £125/tonne  63
2. Silage 0.6 tonnes/ewe  @ £12/tonne  108
3. Meals*  50 kg/ewe  @ £190/tonne  143
4. Vet/medicine  @ £1.60/ewe  24
5. Ewe depreciation  @ £8 120
6. Casual  help @ £1.50/ewe  23
7. Shearing,  transport  20537
688 Gross  margin  per Ha 
* Includes  meals  for ewes suckling  triplets  and for artificial  rearing.
Facilities  for labour  productivity
To achieve  the targets  set out earlier,  some basic flock managernent  
facilities  are required.  These are : wintering  unit, stockproof  fencing, 
water distribution  around  the farm and a good set of handling  pens.  
Details  orj the construction  of these facilities  are available  at Belclare.
22
Wintering  arrangements  vary from outdoor  slatted platforms  to 
enelosed  straw bedded  houses.  Although  outdoor  units can  be constructed  
cheaply  and provide  a basic ‘off the land ’ wintering  system,  there has 
been a general  preference  for covered  sheds. The main reason  for this 
preference  is that it provides  a good working  environment  for the stock- 
man, routine  inspection  of the flock can be carried out quickly  and 
individual  ewes which  require  attention  can be treated  promptly.
The cost of sheep  housing  varies  widely  depending  on whether the work  
is done by the farmer  or contractor,  quality  of materials,  etc. Costs  have 
ranged from £10 per ewe to £50 per ewe for straw bedded  sheds. A 
concrete  pad to accommodate  a silage clamp, a power loader with 
fork grab for feeding  silage and a transport  box for sheep are also 
required.
Good fencing  and water supply  to the grazed paddocks  are essential  
for effective  grassland  management  and flock control. New electric  
fencing  systems  for sheep are now available  and they can be installed  
under  contract  for 80-100p  per metre depending  on ground  topography.  
To reduce  the work load in sheep management  a good sheep handling  
unit for collecting  and sorting  the flock, for drenching,  vaccination  and 
foot bathing  means  less man hours tied up with these routine  jobs and 
allows  more time for planning  and general  management  of the farm.
The total cost of these developments  for a modern  20 ha (50 acre)  
sheep farm with 300 ewes is shown  in Table 7. This assumes  that there  
are no existing  facilities.  The total net cost amounts  to £16,290.  Most  
sheep farms require some or all of these facilities.  This will mean  
investment  on most sheep farms to increase  productivity  per man, in 
addition  to productivity  per ewe and per ha.
Table 7
Facilities  for 300 ewes (£)
Value of
Cost Grant Grant Net Cost
1. Sheep house @ £40 12000 20% 2400 9600
2. Silage concrete  pad
@ £IO/tonne 1800 20% 360 1440
3. Machinery 2250 — — 2250
4. Fencing  1700 m @ 80p 1400 — — 1400
5. Water distribution 500 20% 100 400
6. Handling  pens 1500 20% 300 1200
TOTAL £19450 £16290
SUMMARY
Although  the introduction  of wintering  systems  and improved  man­
agement  on some farms is encouraging,  productivity  in terms of the
23
number  of lambs  reared  per ewe and per ha has not changed  for 30 years  
or more in lowland  flocks. The two main constraints  are firstly, the 
inherently  low litter size of our existing  ewe breeds  and secondly,  lack of 
grazing  management  technique  for 12-15 ewes per ha.
Research  results  have shown clearly that the production  targets  for 
mid-season  lamb production  are 22 lambs sold per ha from 1.5 lambs  
reared per ewe stocked  at 15 ewes to the acre. These targets  involve  a 
change  to new ewe breeds  not yet familiar  to many traditional  sheep 
farmers  and the implementation  of paddock  grazing  systems  for high 
stocking  rates.
Before  it is decided  to increase  sheep stocking  rates, existing  deficien­
cies in, flock management,  e.g. high ewe barrenness  rate, low litter size 
or high lamb mortality,  should be rectified.  In the process  of sheep  
intensification,  increases  in stocking  rate should  be phased  over 2-3 years  
in order to give adequate  opportunity  for the stockman  to develop  
confidence  in flock management  procedures  at high stocking  rates.
Output  per man is also an important  feature  of production  efliciency.  
Obviously,  facilities  which reduce the work load in a sheep flock will 
result in more time for managing  the farm generally  and for managing  
other enterprises.
In conclusion,  if we are to take advantage  of the opportunities  which  
the sheep market  now provides,  we must modify  traditional  practice  on 
many sheep  farms  and move productivity  into the modern  era. Overseas  
markets  are likely to become  increasingly  competitive  and if we fail to 
modernise  our production  industry,  tbe comfort  derived  from price rises 
in recent  years  may turn out to be transitory.
24
CBF-lrish  Livestock  
and Meat Board
TKe link to 
the marlietplace
CBF —The  Irish Livestock  and Meat  
Board,  is the truly  effective  and vitally  
important  link between  the industry  and the 
marketplace.
It continually  monitors  market  potential,  
assists  in market  development  and promotes  
the name  of Irish  cattle,  beef  and lamb  
wherever  there  is a realistic  prospect  of trade.
Through  its offices  in London,  Paris  and 
Dusseldorf,  and by regular  participation in 
food  fairs and special  promotions,  CBF  is in 
constant  touch  with all aspects  of the 
industry,  at home  and abroad.
It is well equipped  to serve  Ireland ’s biggest  
and most  important  industry.
CBF
Irish Livestock  and Meat Board,  
Clanwilliam  Court,
Lower  Mount  Street,  Dublin  2.
Tel. 01 -68515  5 Telex  24440
25
Sheep  Farming  in England:  Specialist  
Sheep  Units  with Full Time  Shepherds
S. FLANAGAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Belclare,  Tuam,  Co. Galway.
]n recent  years the Association  organised  two Sheep Farm Study Tours  
in England,  initially  in 1980 and again in 1984, in order to examine  
breeding  and management  skills underlying  the high levels of flock  
productivity  being achieved  in top performance  lowland  flocks. This 
report  describes  the main features  observed  on the 1984 tour and their  
relevance  to Irish conditions.
The flocks were specially  selected  by the U.K. Meat and Livestock  
Commission  and they were located  in Flereford,  Hampshire  and Wilt­
shire. The overall  impression  was one of high productivity  based on 
prolific  ewes rearing  170-200  lambs  per 100 ewes joined and stocked  at 
6-8 ewes per acre over the grazing  season. Flock size was generally  of 
sufficient  scale to justify the employment  of a full-time  shepherd.  The 
main aspects  of productivity  are summarised  here under the various  
headings.
Flock  records
In order to discuss  flock productivity  in a meaningful  way, it is first of 
all necessary  to measure  it by keeping  basic flock records.  On all farms  
visited  it was clear that flock records  were available  and these provided 
a solid basis for discussing  barrenness,  mortality  and profitability.  Flock  
records  on Irish farms are generally  notable  by their absence  and in 
order  to improve  this situation  the necessary  records  are listed in Table 1 
together  with current  targets. It should  be noted that the average  per­
formance  in U.K. flocks is 143 lambs  reared per 100 ewes joined  which  
is lower  than that seen cn the tour.
Table 1
Records  on components  of output  per ewe
I. No. of ewes joinedTarget
100
2. No. of ewes barren 3
3. No. of ewes dead 2
4. No. of ewes lambed 95
5. Total no. of lambs born 175
6. No. of lambs born dead 10
7. No. of lambs reared 150
26
Prolific  ewes
Mule ewes (the progeny  of Blueface  Leicester  rams on Swaledale  ewes)  
are used widely. Of the many breeds  and crosses  in the U.K. the Mule 
is the most prolific;  the number  of live lambs born per ewe lambed  is 
1.76 on average  and 1.89 in the top i of flocks.
In clear recognition  of the importance  of prolificacy  and particularly  
litter size, there has been rapid expansion  of Mule flecks on lowland 
farms in England  and unproductive  breeds have been replaced.  In 
response  to the demand,  hill farmers  have produced  them commercially  
in large numbers.  Hill and lowland  sheep  farming  in the U.K. are highly 
integrated,  with mutual  advantages  to both hill and lowland  producers.
Irish flocks  on average  produce  1.25 lambs  reared  per ewe joined  com­
pared with 1.43 in the U.K. Consequently,  to remain  competitive  on 
export  markets  productivity  per ewe needs to be improved  substantially.  
This means  organising  a programme  for the production  of prolific  ewes.  
The basis for immediate  action already  exists. Belclare  Improver  ewes  
have yielded  a litter size of 2.0 at Blindwell  over a number  of years and 
rams have been located  on commercial  farms for upgrading  our tradit ­
ional ewe breeds. In hill areas  the Department  of Agriculture  has intro ­
duced Blueface  Leicester  rams for crossing  with hill ewes to produce  fat 
lamb mothers  for lowland  farmers.
The Suffolk is the main ram breed used in England  for fat lamb  
production  but on some farms the Dorset  Horn is preferred  because  of 
its earlier  maturity.
Stocking  rate and nitrogen  use
Stocking  rates are 6-8 ewes per grass acre using flexible  systems  of 
paddock  grazing  together  with high quality  fencing.
Nitrogen  fertiliser  is generally  applied  at rates of 200-220  units per acre 
through  the grazing  season. Under  Irish conditions  6 ewes per acre can 
be maintained  on dry land using 150 units N per acre.
Specialist  sheep units
Unlike  Ireland  where sheep  are very much subordinate  to a predomin ­
ant cattle  economy,  in England  sheep  have replaced  cattle  on many  farms,  
mainly  because  of lower  investment  costs  and higher  net income.
The basic approach  to flock management  is considerably  more special ­
ised than in Ireland  and sheep  enterprises  are practised  on a scale which 
justifies  the employment  of a skilled  shepherd  full-time.  Whilst  there is 
a strong  tradition  of shepherding,  two farms  on the tour employed  head  
shepherds  from non-farming  backgrounds.
Flock size on the farms visited varied widely  from 300 ewes to 3000  
ewes. There were many common  features,  however,  on all farms. High  
quality  fencing,  paddock  grazing,  high stocking  rates, low cost feeding
27
and wintering  systems  and detailed  care and attention  to critical  points  
of management  are given priority.
In mixed tillage/sheep  units, the grass ‘break ’ consists  of a 2-3 year 
ley which  is heavily  stocked  at 6-8 ewes per acre over the grazing  season 
and winter  feeding  is based on forage  crops sown after winter  barley  is 
harvested.  The double  cropped  area is then ploughed  for spring  barley.
Thus,  sheep  and arable  crops are fully integrated  with advantages  for 
both; sheep  grazing  benefits  the next crop in the rotation  through  better  
soil fertility  and arable  farming  benefits  the sheep  by providing  low cost 
winter  feed. Another  major advantage  is that reseeded  pasture  is free 
from worm parasites.  Also, on tillage farms sheep are the cheapest  and 
quickest  livestock  enterprise  to exploit  short term leys through  intensive 
grazing.
Fencing
Both permanent  and temporary  electric  fencing  systems  for sheep are 
widely  used. High tensile  5-strand  eleetric  fencing  is now commercially  
available  in Ireland  costing  80-100p  per metre  erected  by contract.  Trials  
at Belclare  and Blindwell  have proved  its effectiveness;  not only is it stock 
proof for ewes and lambs but it is also a deterrent  against  marauding  
dogs.
An interesting  semi-permanent  fence was seen on Chilbolton  Down  
Farms  near Stockbridge.  This is a 3-strand  system  costing  38p per metre.  
It is easy to erect by using a wheel barrow  type machine  geared for 
reeling  out the wire and is capable  of carrying  up to 4 reels at a time.
Conventional  sheep-wire  fencing  is common  but wire quality  is superior  
to ours. A 14-15 cm mesh is preferred  in order  to reduce  the possibility  
of sheep  becoming  entangled  in the wire. The contract  charge  for erecting  
this type of fence is £15 sterling  per 50 metres.
Breeding  management
Particular  attention  is devoted  to the preparation  of both ewes and 
rams  for the breeding  season.  Although  Mule ewes are inherently  prolific  
they are also subject  to management.  It is worth noting again that 
although  the average  value for lambs  born alive per ewe joined is 1.76, 
in the top j of flecks it is 1.89 and this increase  is very likely due to 
superior  management.
After weaning,  ewes are ‘tubed ’ on some farms with long acting cow 
intramammary  antibiotic  (half a tube per teat).
Flushing  of ewes before  mating  is given major  priority  in the manage ­
ment calendar.  In addition,  rams are fed meal supplements  for a few 
weeks before  joining  with ewes and on one farm they were fed 120 g/ 
ram/day  for 3-4 weeks before mating  and 450 g/ram/day  during  the 
mating  season. If there are doubts  about  semen  quality,  it is tested.
On some farms  with lambing  in early spring,  teaser  rams are used for 
about 16 days before  fertile  rams are turned  out, in order  to get the rams
28
to cycle and synchronise  heat. On other farms  where lambing  is later in 
Spring,  teaser  rams are not used because  ewes have entered  their natural  
cycle at mating  time.
For spring lambing  flocks the benefit of using teaser rams in Irish 
conditions  is very doubtful.  To ensure an effect, ewes must be totally  
isolated  from rams during  the summer.  It is in the August/early  Sep­
tember  period  that the use of tea.ser  rams  would  be of likely value.
Housing  and winter  shearing
Both indoor  and outdoor  evve wintering  systems  are practised  depend ­
ing on individual  farm conditions.  On one farm waste ground with 
shelter  was available  and ewes were wintered  there on hay and meals.  
In this case the cost of building  a sheep  house  was eonsidered  uneconomie.
Three  of the flocks  visited  were housed.  The sheds  varied  in type from 
traditional  barn type structures  to purpose  built sheep houses. Signific­
antly, the flock with highest  profitability  and far exceeding  the top i of 
of MLC recorded  flocks was housed  in an existing  barn, cheaply  con­
structed  and modified  to accommodate  in-lamb  ewes penned  in groups  
of 50. Silage  is block fed once a week on both sides of a central  passage. 
The shed is straw bedded  with 1 bale per pen every two days. About  23 
kg concentrates  per ewe were fed as supplements,  generally  in nut form 
with 14% crude protein  content.
In this flock also, which technically  and financially  is very efficient,  
winter  shearing  has proved  very satisfactory  and in the words  of the flock  
owner  “you must shear  if you house ”. Experience  at Belclare  shows  that 
ewes shorn shortly after housing  produce  lambs with increased  birth  
weights,  they require  less floor and trough  space than unshorn  ewes and 
were easier to manage Although  no problems  have been encountered  
on turn-out  in spring  to date, caution  against  turning  out shorn ewes in 
bad weather  is advised.
Forage  roots
Outdoor  wintering  is practised  in the largest  sheep  enterprise  seen on 
this tour, nmely 3000 ewes grazing  stubble  turnips  in situ. Average  
rainfall is 840 mm compared  with 1175 at Belclare  and the soil is 
predominantly  light loam over chalk.
After tupping  on new leys, the ewes are transferred  to stubble  turnips  
^nd in late February  ewes are transferred  to lambing  
paddocks  and fed hay and meals during  lambing.  The stubble  turnips  
250 acres  variety  Toronda,  are sown within  one week of harvesting  winter  
barley,  using disc cultivation  and 1.2 kg seed per acre broadcast  with a 
fertiliser  spinner  together  with 0.5 kg rape. Seed and fertiliser  cost £24 
per aere which is equivalent  to £2 per ewe.
29
Shepherding  at lambing
Since ewe wintering  on roots is essentially  an outdoor  system,  lambing  
down the flock is considered  to be an outdoor  operation  also. However,  
a high degree  of organisation  in the preparations  for lambing  and in care 
and supervision  is implemented.
After grazing  stubble  turnips,  the 3000 ewe flock is transferred  in 
groups  of 300 to a series of 3 acre paddocks,  equipped  with individual  
pens along the fence line, for lambing.  Each pen is constructed  with 10 
straw bales with one pen provided  for every 10 ewes lambing  i.e. 3000 
bales for 3000 ewes.
Because  lambing  is concentrated  into a 3-4 week period temporary  
helpers  are hired to assist the three full-time  shepherds.  The temporary  
staff are students  who report to the head shepherd  a week prior to 
lambing  and are given instructions  and a short course  on skills in lambing 
down ewes. Video and slide displays  and practical  demonstrations  are 
used. Each temporary  helper  is given responsibility  for lambing  300 ewes  
and work from 6 a.m. until darkness.  Supervision  during  night-time  is 
not considered  necessary  and any problems  receive  immediate  attention  
in the morning.
To deal with individual  ewes or lambs which require  extra attention  
or nursing,  each helper  has access  to a tractor  and transport  box to con­
vey problem  animals  to a central  nursing/fostering  unit located  in the 
main yard. An experienced  shepherd  supervises  this unit and deals  with 
weak lambs,  fostering  and other problems.  Such a facility  enables  the 
helpers  to return to the lambing  paddocks  without  delay and continue  
their work without  undue  interruption.
It is this organisational  approach  which is largely  responsible  for the 
high levels  of 170-200  lambs  reared  per 100 ewes in the top performance  
flocks. Fostering  is a central  feature  of lambing  husbandry  with as many  
ewes as possible  suckling  twin lambs by taking  one of triplets  and cross 
fostering  to single rearing  ewes.
Success  in fostering  is more easily accomplished  in large flocks where  
ewes are lambing  rapidly  and where fostering  is done before  the foster 
mother  has adequate  time to distinguish  her own lamb from the fostered 
lamb.
In indoor  lambing,  ewes and lambs  were held indoor  for periods  of up 
to two weeks  in order to allow lambs  to get strong  before  turnout.  Ewes 
are lambed  from group  pens into individual  pens where  they remain  for 
24-48  hours  and are then transferred  to other  buildings  and group  penned 
until turnout.
Triplets  suckling  ewes
On some farms  triplets  remain  suckling  on the ewes at pasture  and in 
other cases, two lambs are left on the ewe and the extra lambs are 
artificially  reared. The economics  of artificial  rearing  are questionable  
and the rearing  of triplets  on the ewes is effective  where  meal supplements
30
are fed to the ewe at pasture  together  with meal creep  feed for the lambs. 
Triplet  rearing  ewes are grazed  separately.
Lambing  to weaning
Ewes are run in groups  of 150 or so with their lambs on pasture,  
although  the 3000 ewe flock was managed  in groups  of 600 on 100 acre 
blocks. Rotational  grazing  or creep grazing are not practised.  The 
shepherd  decides  when it is time to change  to a new field.
All the flocks  visited  were spring  lambing  and early marketing  was not 
a priority  in view of the extra costs which would be incurred.  The 
objective  is to achieve  high output  per acre at low cost and lambs are 
drafted  for sale from June to Christmas.
On one all-grass  farm meal supplements  are fed to lambs  after weaning  
at the rate of 120 g/lamb/day  to prevent  lambs  entering  a store phase. 
In the 3000 ewe flock lambs  are not weaned  until September  and unsold  
lambs are finished  on new leys and stubble  turnips  by December.  On 
some farms  weaning  is delayed  until August  if grass  is plentiful.
Lamb marketing
Lambs  are weighed  and sold as they become  fit to produce  18 kg 
carcasses.  To date there has been no incentive  to produce  early lambs. 
Indeed,  late lambing  in April, late weaning  and selling  in late autumn  
fits in better  with the new U.K. seasonal  target  price for sheep meat.
Sheep  and cattle
Where  sheep and cattle enterprises  are maintained  on the same farm,  
the sheep and cattle are alternated  on the pasture  area and they are not 
co-grazed  as in Ireland.  One 450 ewe flock was grazed  intensively  behind 
18 month beef cattle and by cleaning  up the paddocks  after the cattle  
the stock manager  maintained  that he maximised  grassland  utilisation  
while achieving  0.9 kg DLWG  in the cattle  over the grazing  season.
Flock  health
Proper  timing  in dealing  with critical  points  of management  together  
with attention  to detail are clear priorities  and are the responsibility  of 
the shepherd.  Extra lambs are saved and successfully  reared using a 
series of lambing  aids. This approach  boosts  the size of the lamb crop.  
170-200  lambs  alive and reared  per 100 ewes joined  as previously  stated.
Mule ewes have proved  to be very good mothers  and they are readily  
available.  After weaning,  ewes are culled for mastitis  and poor teeth,  
although  on one farm poor teeth were tolerated  to some extent  because 
retention  of such ewes lowered  replacement  costs. Replacements  are 
purchased  with great care; hog mouthed  ewes and ewes with teeth 
protruding  past the dental  pad are avoided.
Crutching  and foot trimming  of ewes are done at flushing  time and 
pre-lambing.  In the 3000 ewe flock a rotary foot trimmer  costing  £800
31
Stg. is used and is economically  justified  in 1000 ewe flocks  or particularly  
where  joint ownership  can be arranged.
Ewes are footbathed  three times during  the housing  period  and both 
ewes and lambs are footbathed  regularly  during  the grazing  season. In 
one case a footbath  Im x 3m was bedded  with straw and filled with 5% 
formalin  solution.  There is a trend towards  the use of Zinc sulphate  
solutions.
Ewes are dosed twice against  fluke and worms  : pre-mating  and pre­
lambing.  Lambs  are dosed firstly in mid-May  and once monthly  after ­
wards. The first dose is primarily  against  Nematodirus.
A wide variety  of drugs are used to treat E. coli scours including 
Terramycin  powder.  Neomycin,  Neftin,  and Orojet. It is considered  that 
the use of these drugs should  be alternated  rather  than rely solely on a 
particular  one. Adequate  nutrition  of the ewe, adequate  intake  of colos ­
trum by the new born lamb and hygiene  are the predominant  manage ­
ment factors  which  reduce  the problem  of E.coli scours.
Other health problems  such as Pasturella,  orf and vaginal  prolapses  
occur in individual  cases. Generally,  Pasturella  vaccine  is not used and 
in some flocks orf vaccines  are used. Harnesses  for rectifying  vaginal  
prolapses  are commercially  available  and are much more satisfactory  
than stitching  or using plastic  retainers.
Table 2
Financial  results  1983 (£ Stg./ewe  to ram)
Bishops  Frome MLC
flock Top Third
Ewes to ram 353 —
Lambs  born alive 170
Lamb sales 55.00 56.35
Wool sales 2.50 2.95
Ewe Premium 0.90 1.16
Flock maintenance -5.20 6.75
Output 53.30 53.71
Ewe feed 2.50 6.44
Lamb feed 1.10 1.35
Grass and Forage  costs 3.70 5.33
Vet and medicine 1.30 2.35
Other costs 2.60 0.94
Total variable  costs 11.30 16,41
Gross margin/ewe 42.00 37.30
Grass margin/acre 357.00 250.00
32
To prevent  grass tetany,  high magnesium  cake is fed at the rate of 
120 g/ewe/day  for 10 days after turnout  in spring.
Profitability
In appraising  the role of lowland  sheep enterprises  in England,  it is 
felt that sheep are maintained  as much for the way in which they fitted 
into the whole  farm programme  as for the income  they generate.  Incomes  
from sheep are nevertheless  high and gross margins  are about £42 per 
ewe and £250 to £357 per acre depending  on stocking  density. The 
financial  results  on cne award winning  flock at Bishop  Frome in Here ­
fordshire  are summarised  in Table 2 together  with the results  on MLC  
top third of flocks. Sheep  profits  are comparable  with winter  wheat.
Cheveley  Johnston  & Company
Agricultural  Consultants  & Land Agents
Farm Reports  and Feasibility  Studies  
Management  Accounts  and Enterprise  Costings  
Farm and Estate  Management  
Staff Selection
Budgetary  Control  and Cash Flow Forecasts  
Land and Stock  Valuations —Farm Sales and Purchases
26/27 WELLINGTON  ROAD, CORK  
(Cork 501109)
33
Winter  Fattening  of Cattle
M. DRENNAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Grange,  Dunsany.  Co. Meath.
The objective  of this paper is to discuss  factors  that influence  economic  
returns  from winter  fattening.  Like any farming  enterprise  there are a 
considerable  number  of factors  involved  but the most important  are .
1. Weight  gain achieved
2. Feed cost
3. Winter  cattle price increase
The weight  gain achieved  is the most important  of these factors  and 
unlike  the price increase  it is directly  under  the control  of the producer.  
To achieve  high weight  gains at reasonable  costs the following  factors  
must be considered  ;
1. High quality  silage fed to appetite
2. Optimum  level of concentrates  (consider  costs)
3. Minerals/vitamins
4. Implants
5. Feed additives
6. Control  of internal  (fluke)  and external  (lice) parasites
BARLEY  SUPPLEMENTS  WITH SILAGE
As the cost of grass silage is lower  than barley  a large proportion  of 
the feed requirement  for fattening  cattle is usually  provided  as sila^.  
However,  because  high rates of gain are required  it is essential  that the 
silage is properly  preserved  and of high digestibility.
The optimum  level of barley  for fattening  cattle fed silage depends  on 
a number  of factors.  To determine  this level,  a brief summary  of feeding 
experiments  carried  out at Grange  will be presented  and economic  returns  
then calculated  using various  winter cattle price increases  and barley  
prices.
The data presented  are the average  results  from a number  of experi ­
ments  in which cattle were fed grass silage alone or with different  levels  
of supplementary  barley. From these, the response  from feeding  1.8 kg 
and 3.6 kg of barley  per animal  daily were calculated  and adjusted  to a 
140-day  feeding  period.  The average  daily liveweight  gain of animals  fed 
silage alone was 0.57 kg. Over the 140-day  period,  animals  fed 1.8 and 
3.6 kg barley per day gained respectively  23 and 36 kg more carcass  
weight  than those fed silage only (Table 1).
Feeding  1.8 and 3.6 kg of barley reduced  silage intake  by 10 and 19 
percent  respectively.  A good response  in terms of animal  performance  
was obtained  from feeding  1.8 kg of barley per head per day. This 
response  declined  when the level of supplementation  was increased  to 
3.6 kg per day.
34
Table 1
Effect  of feeding  barley  with silage  on140-day  gains and silage intakes
Barley  fed (kg per day)
0 1.8 3.6
Liveweight  gain (kg) 79 116 132
Carcass  gain (kg) 41 64 77
Daily silage intake (kg) 7.3 6.5 5.9
Based on these results the economic  returns  from feeding  different  
levels of barley were calculated.  Implants  or feed additives  were not 
used in these experiments  so the above gains were increased  by a con­
servative  figure  of 20 kg liveweight  (over 30 kg can be expected)  to allow  
for the effects  of growth  promoters.  Although  there are inadequate  data 
available  to provide  a precise  figure,  a better response  to implants  can 
be expected  with the barley  fed animals  (have higher  rates of gain) than 
those fed silage alone. Thus, using a standard  figure for implants  of 20 
kg liveweight  will tend to underestimate  the level of barley  which  should 
be fed.
The adjusted  gains and feed costs are given in Table 2. Adjustments  
in final liveweights  are made to allow for the better  killing-out  percent ­
ages of those fed barley. Feed costs are shown  when barley  is charged  
at £150 or £180 per tonne  and it is noteworthy  that increasing  concentrate  
costs by £30 per tonne increases  total feed costs from £135 to £150 per 
animal  when animals  are fed 3.6 kg of concentrates  daily.
Table 2
Adjusted  daily gains and feed costs (£) per animal  (400 kg initial  livewt.)
Barley  fed (kg/day)
0 1.8 3.6
Daily gain (kg) 0.60 0.91 1.08
Feed costs
Silage £12/t — Barley £150/t 72 103 135
Silage £12/t — Barley £180/t 72 111 150
The total non-feed  cost of maintaining  a fattening  animal  for a 140-day  
period  will vary widely  with circumstances  but for the present  discussion  
a figure of £68 is taken. Included  in this cost are interest  charges  on the 
animal,  overhead  costs,  transport,  mortality,  dosing  and growth  promoter  
costs. There is no labour  charge  or any allowance  for repayments  on 
buildings.
35
The economic  returns  per animal  are shown  in Tables  3 and 4.
Table. 3
Effect  of feeding  barley  (£150/t)  with silage  on returns  per animal  (£)
Winter  price increase  (£/100  kg)Barley  fed (kg/head/day)
0 1.8 3.6
6 -13 10 7
12 15 41 40
18
Purchase  price = £118/100  kg44 72 72
Table 4
Effect  of feeding  barley  (£180/t)  with silage onreturns  per animal  (£)
Barley  fed (kg/head/day)
Winter  price increase  (£/100  kg) 0 1.8 3.6
6 13 2 -8
12 15 33 25
18 44 64 57
When silage only is fed the cattle price increase  required  to break  even 
is about £9 per 100 kg despite  a daily gain of 0.6 kg and a feed cost of 
only £72 per animal.  Feeding  1.8 kg of barley  daily with silage irnproved  
economic  returns  in all circumstances.  The optimum  level of barley  
feeding  depends  on the cost of concentrates  and the winter  price increase 
of cattle. If concentrates  are charged  at £150 per tonne (Table  3), it is 
economical  to feed 3.6 kg daily. However,  if concentrates  are charged  at 
£180 per tonne the optimum  level of barley feeding  is reduced.  The 
major  point indicated  by these calculations  is that high levels  of concen ­
trates can be fed provided  they are available  at the right price. This 
generally  means  that the concentrate  should be based on home stored 
barley,  rcot crops and beet pulp.
CANE  MOLASSES
Molasses  is often available  at reasonable  prices  on the world market  
and could be fed as an alternative  to cereals. In two experiments  with 
fattening  cattle  fed high quality  silage  to appetite,  molasses  was compared  
with barley  as a supplementary  feed. Molasses  is low in protein  content  
(about  4% crude protein)  and in the comparisons  soyabean  meal was fed 
with molasses  to provide  similar  supplementary  protein  from the barley  
and molasses  based diets. In terms of energy,  molasses  was assumed  to 
have 70 percent  the value of barley. The diets fed and the results 
obtained  from the two experiments  are presented  in Tables  5 and 6.
36
ORBENIN  IM
MASTITIS  OUT!
ORBENIN
Orbenin  Q.R. and L.A. contain  200 mg cloxacillin  per syringe.  
Orbenin  Dry Cow contains  500 mg cloxacillin  per syringe.  
Orbenin  is a Beecham  Group trademark.
37
Table 5
Silage  intakes  (kg DM/day)  and gains (g/day)  of bulls (510 kg) fed barley  or 
molasses/soyabean  meal with silage  for 100 days — Experiment  1
Supplement  (kg per head daily)
Barley Molasses  (2.9) Barley  
(5.0) Soyabean  meal (0.49)  (2.5)Molasses  (5.7) 
Soyabean  meal (0.9)
Silage  7.53 7.24 6.17 5.91
Liveweight  gain 952 952 1056 981
Carcass  weight  gain 527 552 670 622
Table 6
Silage  intakes  (kg DM/day),  weight  gains (g/day)  of steers  (450 kg) fed barley  or 
molasses/soyabean  meal for 122 days — Experiment  2
Supplement  (kg per head daily)
None Barley
(2.5)Molasses  (2.3) 
Soyabean  (0.45)Barley
(5.0)Molasses  (4.6) 
Soyabean  (0.9)
Silage  6.70 6.04
Liveweight  gain 502 785
Carcass  gain 287 4606.17
880
5265.55
1037
6325.93
964
616
In both experiments  molasses/soyabean  meal gave higher  liveweight 
and carcass  gains  than barley  when  the comparison  was at a low level of 
supplementation  (2.5 kg barley  per head daily). When  the quantities  fed 
daily were doubled,  liveweight  and carcass  weight  gains  of the barley  fed 
animals  were greater  than when molasses  was given. This would  suggest  
that the efficiency  with which molasses  is used declines  as the level of 
molasses  feeding  is increased.  Thus,  when molasses  is fed the inclusion 
rate in the diet should  be in the region  of 15 percent  of total dry matter.  
For fattening  cattle about  2 kg of molasses  can be fed daily and to allow  
for the low protein  content  in molasses  0.25 kg of soyabean  should  also 
bfe given. At this low inclusion  rate the molasses/soyabean  would be 
equivalent  to about  1.8 kg of barley  and the remainder  of the concentrate  
could be fed as barley  or pulp.
ENSILED  PRESSED  BEET  PULP
Pressed  beet pulp (dry matter  content  15-20 percent)  is available  from 
C.S.E. Teo and by using proper  ensiling  techniques  (rapid and proper  
covering  with polythene)  this material  can be successfully  ensiled  without
38
an additive.  The resulting  silage was evaluated  in two feeding  experi ­
ments  using fattening  cattle. The treatments  were :
1. Grass  silage + 4 kg of rolled barley  per head daily
2. Grass  silage + pulp and 0.15 kg of soyabean  (Experiment  1) or pulp 
alone (Experiment  2) providing  the same supplement  DM as treat ­
ment 1
3. Barley  beef (barley  soyabean  meal to appetite)
4. Pressed  pulp to appetite  + soyabean  meal (0.67 and 0.60 kg in 
Experiments  I and 2 respectively)
5. Pressed  pulp to appetite
Treatments  3, 4 and 5 were fed 2.5 kg of grass silage per head daily as 
a source  of roughage.  All treatment  groups  received  a suitable  mineral/  
vitamin  supplement.
Good quality  grass silage was fed in both experiments  and high per­
formance  was obtained  with all groups  (Table  7). When  compared  with 
4 kg of rolled barley as a supplement  to silage, ensiled pressed  pulp 
resulted  in 54 g per day lower carcass  gain in Experiment  1 but carcass  
gains  were similar  in Experiment  2. In both Experiments  1 and 2 animals  
fed barley  or pressed  beet pulp as a supplement  to silage had the same 
feed conversion  rates (kg feed DM/kg  carcass  gain). When animals  were
Table 7
A comparison  of ensiled  pressed  pulp and barley  for fattening  cattle
Diet
Grass  silage Grass  silage  Barley/ Pulp/  Pulp
+ barley -f pulp  soyabean  soyabean
Experiment  1 (304 kg initially)  — 152 day feeding period)
Daily DM intake (kg) 8.32 7.77 9.40 7.90
Daily liveweight  gain (g) 1249 1163 1262 1132
Daily carcass  gain (g) 715 661 760 665
kg DM/kg  carcass  gain 11.7 12.0 12.7 12.2
Value of gain less feed
costs (£) 119 134 19 94
Experiment  2 (491 kg initially  — 104day feeding period)
Daily DM intake (kg) 9.39 9.21 10.43 9.23 9.00
Daily liveweight  gain (kg) 1039 1000 1267 1176 975
Daily carcass  gain (kg) 646 648 882 693 553
kg DM/kg  carcass  gain 14.4 14.2 11.9 13.4 16.4
Value of gain less feed
costs (£) 57 82 37 64 41
Barley  = £150/t Soyabean  = £270/t Silage  = £72/t DM Pressed  pulp  = £l 10/t DM
39
fed either rolled barley or beet pulp to appetite  those receiving  barley  
had greater  feed intakes  and higher  carcass  gains than animals  receiving 
pulp. While  the difference  in feed conversion  was small in Experiment  1 
animals  fed barley had superior  conversions  in Experiment  2 (11.9 vs. 
13.4 kg feed DM per kg carcass  gain). When pressed  pulp was fed to 
appetite  exclusion  of soyabean  meal (Experiment  2) reduced  daily feed 
intake  by 0.2 kg and carcass  weight  gain by 140 g per day. In terms of 
kg feed DM per kg carcass  gain the pulp/soyabean  meal and pulp only 
animals  had figures  of 13.4 and 16.4 respectively.  In conclusion,  the 
ensiled  pressed  pulp is a high quality  feed but the protein  quality  is low 
which  should  be kept in mind particularly  at high inclusion  rates or when  
fed to young  animals.
For both experiments,  the value of carcass  gain less feed costs was 
calculated  using costs per tonne of dry matter  of £176, £307, £72 and 
£110 for barley, soyabean  meal, silage and pressed  pulp respectively. 
Due to the lower cost of the ensiled  pressed  pulp, diets based on pulp 
gave better returns  than those based on barley. The return frorn the 
barley  beef treatment  in Experiment  1 was particularly  low due to higher 
intakes and lower gains than normally  obtained  with barley beef.  
Inclusion  of soyabean  in the pressed  pulp diet in Experiment  2 shows  the 
very good economic  response  which can be obtained  from a protein  
supplement  where  protein  is limiting.  It should  be noted that grass silage  
is charged  at production  costs only, whereas  market  prices  are used for 
other feeds.
Supplementary  protein
When  barley  is the supplement  and the silage  is of high quality,  protein  
intake should be sufficient  to meet the requirements  of fattening  cattle.  
However,  when feeds such as molasses  (low in protein)  or fodder  beet 
roots are used rather  than barley,  a protein  supplement  should be pro­
vided. It should also be considered  with barley if the protein  content  
of silage is low (less than 11 % crude protein).  Replacing  0.3 kg of barley  
daily by soyabean  meal amounts  to 45 kg over a 150 day winter  and if 
the price difference  between  barley  and soyabean  is £120 per tonne this 
increases  the feed costs per animal  by £5.40. With a price of £2.42 per 
kg of carcass  the additional  carcass  gain required  to cover the cost of 
replacing  the 45 kg of barley  by soyabean  meal is about  2.2 kg. Such a 
small difference  could not be measured  in a feeding  experiment  but when  
there is a doubt  concerning  protein  adequacy  such as in the cases men­
tioned  above it is a good policy  to include  protein.
Supplementary  minerals
Although  grass silage is usually  balanced  for minerals  a feed such as 
barley  is low in calcium  whereas  pulp is low in phosphorus.  Thus when  
reasonable  levels of supplements  are fed it is advisable  to feed 60 g (2 
ozs) per animal  daily of supplementary  minerals/vitamins.
40
Feed additives
Three feed additives  (Romensin,  Flavomycin  and Avotan)  are avail ­
able,  all of which  act by altering  fermentation  in the rumen.  As Romensin  
was the first product  marketed  most of the studies  at Grange  have been 
with this product. These and other studies would suggest  that with 
fattening  diets based on grass silage and concentrates  the improvement  
expected  from using a feed additive  would be 7 to 15 kg of extra live- 
weight  gain over a 5 month  period. Where  feeds such as barley  and pulp 
are used the best method  of giving the feed additive  is by having it 
included  in the mineral/vitamin  mixture  which can be spread  over the 
concentrate  at feeding  time.
Type of animal
As animals  become  heavy and fat the rate of gain declines  and the 
response  to feeding  decreases.  Heavy,  fat cattle should  not be retained  
for further  feeding.  In most instances  this is best overcome  by purchasing  
the proper  weight  of animal,  taking  account  of the possible  selling  time 
and the expected  rate of gain.
As the overall quality  of the winter diet improves  it will be more 
economical  to use animals  of lower initial liveweight  with higher  growth  
potential.  The results  of a study  with young  fattening  bulls (| continental  
cross) fed moderate  to high quality  grass silage and concentrates  are 
shown in Table 8.
Table 8
Performance  of young  bulls fed moderate  to high quality  silage  — 218 days
Supplement  (kg/day)
Barley
(4.3)Barley  (3.9) 
Soyabean  (0.4)Barley  (4.1) 
(Fishmeal  (0.22)
Initial liveweight  (kg) 297 296 298
Final liveweight  (kg) 563 560 559
Cold carcass  weight  (kg) 322.3 320.3 319.2
Killing-out  percent 57.3 57.1 56.8
Liveweight  gain (g/d) 1,211 1,219 1,200
The average  daily intake  of concentrates  was 4.3 kg and feeding  either  
soyabean  meal or fishmeal  with barley  did not increase  daily liveweight 
gain (1.2 kg). It should be noted that the killing-out  percentage  (57%  
using a full final liveweight)  of these young  continental  cross animals  is 
considerably  greater  than that of conventional  breeds finished  at two 
years of age. In addition  to their potentially  high growth  rate and high 
killing-out  percentages  three-quarters  of these animals  had a score of U
41
for conformation  on the carcass  classification  scale. Thus,  a price prem ­
ium should  be available  for these compared  with standard  carcasses.
CONCLUSIONS
1. It is important  to obtain  high liveweight  gains  (over 1 kg/day).
2. If available  at the right price (e.g. home grown  barley)  feed 4 kg of 
concentrates  daily with silage.
3. If feeding  molasses,  include  at about 15 percent  of total dry matter,  
e.g. replace 1.8 kg of barley by 2 kg of molasses  plus 0.25 kg of 
soyabean  meal.
4. A high protein  supplement  is not necessary  with high quality  silage  
and barley  (or pulp).
5. When  using low protein  feeds (e.g. molasses),  fodder beet roots or 
silages  of low protein  content  (under 11%) it is advisable  to feed a 
high protein  supplement.
6. When  feeding  4 kg of concentrates  daily it is preferable  to provide  it 
in two feeds.
7. Control  parasites  (fluke and lice), use implants  and a suitable  mineral  
/vitamin  mixture  containing  a feed additive.
42
Cal-Mag  nuts are inexpensive,  easy i
to handle,  easy to store and help ^ ^
protect  your animals  against  grass ||f*ppi1VQl|/  
tetany because  Cal-Mag  nuts are vlwv***'** ’ |
formulated  to give the required  daily p k 1 Aki Ml 
amount  of calcined  magnesite,  vML  IVIMW
NUTS
Available  from  all C.SET  branches  and Greenvale  stockists
43
Use of Implants  for Beef Cattle
M. G. KEANE
An Foras  Talunlais,  Grange,  Dunmny,  Co. Meath.
Growth  promoting  implants  are widely  used in beef cattle in Ireland  and 
the general  principles  of their use are well understood.  This paper  briefly  
reviews  the information  which has been widely  publicised  in the past,  
and expands  on aspects  which have received  less attention  heretofore.  
The growth  promoters  and feed additives  at present  available  on the Irish 
market  are shewn in Table 1. Ralgro,  Synovex-S  and Compudose  are 
oestrogenic  type substances.  They are substitutes  for one another  and in 
steers they are additive  with Finaplix  which is an androgenic  type 
substance.
Table I
Available  growth  promoters  and feed additives
Growlh  Promoters Feed Additives
Trade Name Active  ingredients Trade Ndme Active  ingredient
Ralgro  (Ral)T Resorcyclic  acid 
lactoneRumensin Monensin  sodium
Finaplix  (Fin) ’’’ Trenbolone  acetate Flavomycin Bambcrmycin
*Synovex-S(Syn-S) Progesterone  + 
OestradiolAvotan Avoparcin
*.Synovex-H(Syn-H) Progesterone  -1- 
Oestradiol
Compudose  365 (Comp  
365)Oestradiol  17 B
Compudose  200 — Oestradiol  17 B
S* = Steer H Heifer T = Withdrawal  period
Synovex-H  is specifically  for heifers  and cull cows. Ralgro  and Finaplix  
have withdrawal  periods  of 65 and 60 days respectively  whereas  the other  
products  have no withdrawal  period. All the growth  promoters  are ear 
implants  and as the ear is discarded  with the hide at slaughter,  there is 
no risk of contamination  of edible tissue. The duration  of effectiveness  
of Ralgro,  Synovex-S,  Synovex-H  and Finaplix  is 3 to 4 months.  Cem-  
pudose  365 is effective  for about  one year and Compudose  200 is effective  
for 6-7 months.
44
General  Efficacy
Numerous  experiments  have been carried  out to determine  the effect­
iveness  of the various  products  and combinations  of products  now avail ­
able. A summary  of the results  from one such experiment  (Drennan  et 
al, 1981) is shown  in Table 2.
Table 2
Response  to Ral and Ral + Fin infinishing  steers  (112 days)
Control Ral Ral + fin
Initial live wt. (kg) 416 426 418
Carcass  gain (g/d) 417 499 578
% of control 100 120 139
Silage intake (kg/d) 5.00 5.31 5.22
% of control 100 106 104
% meat 67.7 ~ 69,4
The carcass gains of the finishing  cattle in this experiment  were 
increased  20% by Ralgro  and 39% by Ralgro  and Finaplix.  This shows 
that the combination  of Ralgro  and Finaplix  was superior  to Ralgro  
alone. Treatment  increased  silage intake  by 4.6% and practically  all of 
the extra carcass  gain obtained  from implants  was in the form of meat.  
Having demonstrated  that growth promoters  are effective,  the most  
logical way of discussing  their use is in the context  of the different  
phases  of a calf to beef production  system.
Calves  at Pasture
The response  to Ralgro  and Synovex-S  in castrated  male calves is 
shown in Table 3; both prc^ducts  increased  liveweight  gain by 11-16%  
over a 100 day period.
Table 3
Response  to Ral and Syii-S  in steer calves  (100 d)
Control Ral Syn-S
Initial live wt. no 109 109
Gain (kg) 77.9 86.8 90.0
Gain (g/d) 779 868 900
% of control 100 111 116
(Keane,  1982)
Similarly  Ralgro administered  three times at 90 day intervals  and 
Compudose  365 increased  liveweight  gain by 16-17%  (Table  4).
45
Table 4
Response  to Ral and Comp  365 in steer calves  (263 d)
Control Ral (X3) Comp  365
Initial live wt. 105 106 105
Gain (kg) 145.9 168.5 170.5
Gain (g/d) 555 641 649
% of control 100 116 117
1 ••(Keane,  1982)
This shows that Ralgro,  Synovex-S  and Compudose  improves  the per­
formance  of castrated  male calves by 11-17%.  Finaplix  however  is not 
effective  in steer calves (Table 5) and therefore  no additional  response 
would  be expected  from the inclusion  of Finaplix  with Ralgro,  Synovex-S  
or Compudose  365 in calves.
Table 5
Response  to Fin in steer calves  (112 d)
Control Fin
Initial live wt. 90 86
Gain (kg) 92.2 94.4
Gain (g/d) 823 843
% of control 100 102
(Keane,  1982)
There has been less work with female  than with male calves  but the
results  in Table  6 show that female  calves  for beef production  do respond
to Ralgro.
Table 6
Response  to Ral in heifer  calves  (180 d)
Control Ralgro  (X 2)
Initial live wt. (kg) 86 87
Gain (kg) 123.3 139.0
Gain (g/d) 685 772
% of control 100 113
(Keane,  1983)
Weanlings  in Winter
If calves respond  to growth  promoters  then weanlings  would be ex­
pected  to respond  also. However,  spring bom calves  generally  perform
46
reasonably  well at pasture  whereas  weanlings  are fed for low to moderate  
performance  only in winter. Therefore  because  of the low gains there  
may not be a worthwhile  response  to growth  promoters  in weanlings.  
This was investigated  in an experiment  where  weanlings  were grown at 
normal (300 g/d) or high (800 g/d) rates in winter (140 days) and 
implanted  twice or not implanted  with Ralgro. The results  in Table 7 
show that during  the winter,  the response  to Ralgro  was better in the 
animals  on the high rate of gain (12.3 v 6.6 kg).
Table 7
Response  to Ral in weanlings  and yearlings  (356 d)
Winter  gains 300 g/d (silage  only) 800 g/d (silage  + concentrates)
No Ral Ral Dilf No Ral Ral Diff
Initial 1. wt. (kg) 229 229 — 227 229 —
Winter  gain (kg) 43.0 49.6 6.6 104.6 116.9 12.3
Summer  gain (kg) 156.5 179.3 22.8 128.3 144.9 16.6
Total gain 199.5 228.9 29.4 232.9 261.9 29.0
(Keane,  1983)
At pasture,  however,  the animals  with the low rate of gain in winter  grew  
fastest  and gave the best response  to Ralgro. At the end of the grazing  
season the response  to Ralgro  was the same (29.6 v 29.4 kg) for both 
winter  rates of growth  but the proportion  of the total response  obtained  
in winter  was much lower (22 v 42%) for the lower  winter  rate of gain. 
Based  on these results  the response  to Ralgro  in winter  at different  rates  
of gain was calculated  (Table  8). It is clear that at low rates of winter  
gain there is not a worthwhile  response  to Ralgro  (and presumably  the 
other products)  in weanlings.
Table 8
Response  to Ral in relation  to winter  gain
Winter  gain (g/d) 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
kg in 140 d winter 1.5 3.6 5.5 7.3 9.1 10.9 12.7
(Keane,  1983)
Yearlings  at Pasture
In the early part of the grazing  season  animal  performance  is generally  
high and a good response  to growth  promoters  would  be expected.  The 
data in Table 9 show that yearling  steers  at pasture  responded  better  to 
a combination  of two implants  (Compudose  365 + Finaplix)  than to a 
single implant  (Compudose  365) and that there was also a response  to a
47
second impiantation  midway  through  the grazing season. It can be 
concluded  from these results  that yearling  cattle at pasture  should be 
implanted  twice during  the grazing  season  using a combination  of two 
products  (oestrogenic  and androgenic)  each time. In this particular  
experiment  Compudose  365 alone increased  liveweight  gain by 18 kg 
(12%)  over a 189 day grazing  season. The corresponding  increase  for 
Compudose  + Finaplix  (twice)  and Ralgro  + Finaplix  (both twice)  was 
39 kg (25%.)
Table 9
Response  in yearling  steers*  at pasture  to growth  promoters  (189 d)
Control Comp. Comp.  365 + Ral + Fin 
365 (FinX2) (X 2)
Gain to 1st implant  (kg in
106 d) 106 111 129 131
% of Control
Gain to 2nd implant  (kg in100 105 122 124
83 d) 51 64 68 65
% of Control 100 125 133 127
Total gain (kg in 189 d) 157 175 196 196
% of Control 100 112 125 125
* Initial L.W. 310 kg (Keane,  1982)
Winter  Fattening  of Heifers  and Cull Cows
Responses  to growth  promoters  in heifers  are lower  andmore variable
than in steers. Treatment  of heifers  twice with Ralgro  during  a 163 day 
fattening  period  (Table  10) had a negligible  effect  on carcass  gain, kidney 
and channel  fat or carcass  fat score. This sugge.sts  that Ralgro  was not
Table 10
Response  infattening  heifers*  to Ral and Fin (163 d)
Control Ral (X 2) Fin (X 2)
Carcass  gain (kg) 68.4 70.8 74.8
% of Control 100 104 109
K & C* fat (kg) 10.7 10.8 9.2
Fat score 2.6 2.9 2.1
♦Kidney  and channel ♦Initial  L.W. = 309 kg (Keane,  1982)
effective  in increasing  growth rate of fattening  heifers (indicators  of 
fatness  are generally  reduced  when there is a growth  promotion  effect).  
Finaplix  on the other hand increased  carcass  gain by 6.4 kg (9%). Since  
the animals  were implanted  twice the response  per implant  was only 3.2
48
kg carcass  but the fattening  period (163 d) was probably  not sufficiently  
long to get the maximum  response  from two implants.  Since Ralgro  was 
not effective  it is unlikely  that there would be any advantage  from in­
cluding  it with Finaplix  for fattening  heifers. A comparison  of Finaplix  
and Synovex-H  is shown  in Table 11. Over the 116 day period  Finaplix  
and Synovex-Fl  increased  carcass  gain by 5.4 kg (13%)  and 4.2 kg (10%)  
respectively.  Finaplix  had no effect on udder size but the Synovex-FI  
caused  substantial  udder  enlargement.
Table 11
Response  in fattening  heifers  to Fin and Syn-H  (116 d)
Control Fin
Initial live wt. (kg) 368
Carcass  gain 42.2
Udder  size*  0.6
*Scored  0 = normal,  3 = very enlarged386
47.6
0.4Syn-H
378
46.4
1.5
(Keane,  1982)
The response  in cull cows to Finaplix  is shown  in Table 12. Over a 90 
day period  carcass  gain was increased  by 7.7 kg (17%,)  and meat gain by 
7.2 kg (30%). In cull cows, as in steers,  practically  all the carcass  gain 
due to growth  promoters  was in the form of meat.
Table 12
Response  to cull cows to Fin (90 d)
Control Fin
Initial live wt. (kg) 435 433
Carcass  gain (kg) 46.0 53.7
% of Control 100 117
Meat gain 24.0 31.2
(Drennan  et al., 1983)
Winter  Fattening  of Steers
Having  shown  earlier  (Table  2) that growth  promoters  and combina ­
tions of growth  promoters  are effective  in finishing  steers,  the additional  
questions  that arise in respect  of finishing  cattle relate to the use of feed 
additives  in conjunction  with growth promoters  and whether  animals  
may respond  to a second  implantation  during  a normal  winter  finishing 
period. With regard to the use of growth  promoters  and feed additives  
together,  the results  of the experiments  which have been conducted  on 
this subject  are not consistent.  In 4 experiments  animals  implanted  with 
Ralgro + Finaplix  were either  fed or not fed Rumensin  (Table 13). In
49
Expt.Table 13
Response  to Rumensin  in finishing  steers  treated  with Ral + Fin
Ral + Fin Ral + Fin + Rumensin
1
2
3
4
AverageADG (g/d) 1180 1150
1160 1200
1200 1300
1250 1350
1198 1250
(Drennan  et al..
(Drennan —unpublished
the first comparison  there was a slight negative  effect of Rumensin,  in 
the second  there was a small positive  effect  while in the third and fourth  
experiments  there was the normally  expected  response  to Rumensin.  It 
is not clear why these different  responses  occurred  and consequently  it 
is not possible  to give an unequivocal  recommendation  on the use of feed 
additives  with growth  promoters.  However,  as the average  response  over 
the 4 experiments  was more than sufficient  to cover the costs associated  
^ith using a feed additive  and as there are results  from elsewhere  showing 
additivity  between  growth  promoters  and feed additives,  it can be con­
cluded  that on balance  the use of a feed additive  in conjunction  with 
growth  promoters  is worthwhile.
Whether  or not cattle should be implanted  once or twice during a 
normal  finishing  period  depends  on the duration  of effectiveness  of the 
products  used. Attempts  to define the response  curves  for the different  
products  and combinations  of products  have not been successful.  The 
results  of an experiment  in which Ralgro + Finaplix  was given at the 
start, midway,  and both at the start and midway  of a 168 day fattening  
period  are shown in Table 14.
Table 14
Repeated  implantation  of finishing  steers*  (168 d)
Control Ral + Fin 
(day 1)Ral -I- Fin 
(day 84)Ral-t-Fin  
(days 1 and 84)
Gain (days 1-84) 96 117 97 116
Response  (days 1-84) — 21 — 20
Gain (days 85-168) 62 67 89 88
Response  (days 85-168) — 4 27 26
Total gain (days 1-168) 159 184 186 204
Response  (kg live wt.) — 25 27 45
Response  (kg carcass) — 14 13 24
♦Initial  live wt. 369 kg (Keane,  1982)
50
Treatment  once only, increased  carcass  weight by 13-14 kg whereas  
treatment  on two occasions increased  carcass  weight  by 24 kg. This shows 
clearly  that when the fattening  period is as long at 168 days a second  
implantation  is justified.  Animals  treated  at the start of the experiment  
only gave a response  of 21 kg liveweight  over the first 84 days and an 
additional  4 kg over the second  84 days. This suggests  an effective  period  
of about 100 days. The carcass  response  to this treatment  was 14 kg or 
140 g/d if an effective  period  of 100 days is assumed.  On this basis the 
expected  carcass  response  of the animals  implanted  twice would  be 23.5 
kg. This is very close to the observed  response  of 24 kg. It can be 
concluded  therefore  from this experiment  that the Ralgro + Finaplix  
combination  is effective  for about 100 days on average. It is likely, 
however,  that effectiveness  declines  from about  80 days onwards  but does 
not cease until perhaps  120 days. Another  point of interest  apparent  from 
the data in Table 14 is that the response  in animals  treated  for the second 
time was no different  from that of animals  treated  for the first time. Over  
the second  half of the experiment  (days 84-168)  animals  treated  for the 
first time on day 84 showed  a response  of 27 kg liveweight  and 13 kg 
carcass  weight. Corresponding  values  over the same period  for animals  
treated  on both days 1 and 84 were 26 kg liveweight  and 11 kg carcass  
weight.
Even with fattening  periods  shorter  than 168 days repeated  implan ­
tation is also justified.  The results  of a trial in which  Ralgro  + Finaplix  
and Synovex  + Finaplix  were used once or twice during a 133 day 
finishing  period are shown  in Table 15. There was also a treatment  in 
which Synovex-S  was used the second  time. As there was no untreated  
group,  actual responses  could not be measured  but it is clear that the 
groups  implanted  twice performed  substantially  better  than those implan ­
ted once only. Over the 133 day period  the animals  implanted  twice with 
Ralgro -f- Finaplix  gained 17 kg liveweight  more than those implanted  
once. The improvement  from the second  Synovex-S  + Finaplix  implan ­
tation was 12 kg liveweight.  Using Synovex-S  alone at the second 
implantation  was not as good as Synovex-S  + Finaplix.  It can be 
concluded  from that data in Tables  14 and 15 that repeated  implantation  
is worthwhile  when the fattening  period  is of 133 days duration  or greater.
Table 15
Repeated  implantation  in finishing  steers  (133 d)
Ral + Fin Ral -1-Fin Syn-S  -b Fin Syn-S-b  Fin Syn-S-b  Fin
(X 1) (X 2) (X 1) -b Syn-S (X2)
Initial live wt. 472 457 449 454 455
Gain (days 1-70)  86 83 92 89 92
Gain (70-133)  46 66 51 57 63
Total gain (1-133) 132 149 143 146 155
(Keane,  1982)
51
Total  Lifetime  Responses
While there have been numerous  experiments  in which  different  treat ­
ments  were imposed  over the lifetime  of animals  only on rare occasions  
have what would  be considered  optimal  treatments  been used throughout  
life. Some comparisons  involving  different  lifetime  treatments  are shown  
in Table 16.
Table 16
Lifetime  re.sponses  (kg carcass)  to growth  promoters
Carcass  wt. Response Treatment Reference
Control Treated kg %
283 320 37 13 Ral (X 6) Roche  et al, 1981
281 300 19 7 Ral (X 6) Roche, 1982
281 304 23 8 Ral (X 4) Roche, 1982
261 286 24 9 Ral (X 4) Keane, 1983
281 304 23 8 Ral(X  4)-l-Fin(X  3) Roche, 1982
300 321 21 7 Ral-b  Fin (X 3) Roche, 1982
271 298 27 10 Comp.  365 Keane,  1983
The responses  in this selection  ranged  from 19 to 37 kg (7-13%).  The 
highest  and lowest  responses  shown in this table were both obtained  to 
6 Ralgro  implants  over a two year period.  This just emphasises  the degree 
of variation  encountered  in response  to growth  promoters.  In view of 
the results presented  earlier  on the response  to implantation  at various  
stages of the production  cycle it is likely that a total lifetime  response 
superior  to any of those in Table 16 is possible.
References
Drennan,  M. J., Roche,  J. F. and L’Estrange,  J. L. (1981). Effect of monensin  
sodium,  resorcyclic  acid lactone  and trenbolone  acetate  on performance  and 
feed intake of finishing  cattle. Ir. J. Agric. Res. 20: 113-123.
Drennan,  M. J., Nicoll,  G. B. and Caffrey,  P. J. (1983).  Effects  of level of barley,  
trenbolone  acetate  and duration  of feeding  on beef production  from cull cows 
fed silage. Ir. J. Agric. Res. 22 : 79-94.
Roche,  J. F., FJarte, F. J., Joseph,  R. 1.. and Davis, W. D. (1981). The use of 
growth  promoters  in beef production.  In: Anabolic  Agents  in Beef and Veal 
Production.  E.E.C.  Workshop,  Brussels  : March,  1981 (p. 27-44).
Keane,  M. G. (1982). Unpublished  data.
Roche,  J. F. (1982). Unpublished  data.
Keane,  M. G. (1983). Unpublished  data.
52
The  AIB Guide  
to Farm  Finance  gives  
you  a heiping  hand.
In the farming  business, an extra  
helping  hand  is always  welcome  
—particularly  when  you ’re 
dealing  with a specialist  area like 
farm  finance.
That ’s why  you need  the Al B 
Guide  to Farm  Finance —a 
concise  and practical  guide  to 
efficient  financial  managementon your  farm.  In it you ’ll find very  
useful  guidelines  on farm 
accounting,  planning  and many  
other  subjects  relevant  to your 
livelihood;  plus information  on the 
various  financial  services  and 
grants  available  to farmers.
Pick up your  copy  of this vital 
booklet  at any branch  of Allied  
Irish Banks.
Fora  betterfuture  on  yourfarm
53
Money  from Grass  through  a Beef  
Breeding  Herd
D. G. O’NEILL
Farm Director,  Castle  Archdale  EHF, Co. Fermanagh.
Introduction
Lack of profitability  has been a major  factor  in the rapid decline  in teef 
cow numbers  in N. Ireland  (reduction  from 339,000  in 1974 to 200,000  
in 1983) It is important,  however,  to appreciate  that irrespective  of the 
low profitability  of suckling  relative  to other enterprises,  at any point m 
time, there are many farm situations  where  there is no readily  available  
alternative  to suckling.  These producers  should  be consoled  by the fact 
that profitability  is closely  related  to performance  and that much can be 
done to improve  that performance.  I see it as my role to attempt  to 
show how these improvements  can be brought  about.
While it would be foolhardy  for me to be eurphoric  about the pros­
pects for suckling  in the light of present-day  performance,  a number  of 
pointers  encourage  me to take a more optimistic  stand for the future.
1. For the second year running  there has been a brisk trade at the 
autumn  suckler  sales. Farm  management  results  for the 1982/83  year 
show an improvement  in profitability  and suckling  no longer  fills the 
bottom  slot of enterprise  gross margins.
2. Constraints  on further  expansion  in milk production,  which  the EEC  
appears  intent  on imposing,  would  mean that we cannot  look to the 
dairy herd source  to provide  an increasing  supply  of calves  for beef 
production.
3. There are now indications  in N. Ireland  that the decline  in suckler 
cow numbers  has been halted and that suckling  is now being firmly  
consolidated  into the Less Favoured  Areas, where extra incentives 
and allowances  are available.
4. In future dairy producers  wishing  to expand  their farming  activities  
may look to suckling  as a possible  alternative.  Many milk producers  
have built up a high degree  of expertise  in their grassland  manage ­
ment and are likely  to bring  their skills to bear on the suckler  cow.
Since the only product  of a beef cow is her weaned  calf, the objective 
of suckling  should be to regularly  produce,  as ECONOMICALLY  as 
possible,  a heavy calf at weaning  which  has further  growth  potential.
Financial  results from MLC recorded  suckler  herds show that all 
round attention  to detail is necessary  to attain top-third  performance.  
Compared  to average  herds,  the top-third  herds  :
— sold bigger  calves
— fed less concentrates  to cows
— had lower  total variable  costs
54
— reared  more calves  per cow
— had similar  or better  calf daily gains
— had higher  stocking  rates (lowlands  and uplands)
Detailed  analyses  of the contribution  of different  factors  to the top-third  
superiority  in gross margins  show that the most important  factors  are :
* stocking  rate
* weight  of calf produced
* number  of calves  weaned/ 100 cows
I would like to consider  my recommendations  for suckling  under two 
headings.
1. Animal  performance  aspects
2. Output  from grass
The first category  of topics  is common  to all suckler  systems,  while the 
second topic is more specific  to lowland  suckling  and areas within the 
LFA where  grass has potential  for improvement.
1. ANIMAL  PERFORMANCE  ASPECTS
(A) Time of year to calve cows
Based  on experience  at Castle  Archdale  the main merits  of early summer
calving  can be summarised  as follows  :
* Ideal environment.
* Favourable  conditions  at and after calving,  simplified  management  
and a good start in life for calves.
* Tight calving  pattern.
* A 3-week  calving  spread (90%)  has been achieved  and maintained  
with minimum  culling.
* High conception  rate; although  bulling  was restricted  to one month,  
on average  only 7% of May/June  cows proved  barren  over an 8-year  
period  at Castle  Archdale.  It appears  that plane of nutrition  and good 
body condition  of the cows  post-calving  and during  the mating  period,  
provide  the correct  conditions  for high conception.
* Good  growth  rates; average  weights  of 300 kg can be achieved  at 
weaning  (9 months)  without  any concentrate  feeding  to the dams  and 
little concentrate  feeding  to the calves.
* Few health problems;  there have been no calf deaths  by the common  
disease  problems  of scour and pneumonia.  Mastitis  is not a problem,  
and veterinary  bills are small.
* High  output  from grass; finished  cattle can be produced  for sale at 
14-15 months  of age.
* Low labour  requirement;  labour  needs  are greatly  reduced  due to the 
near absence  of disease problems  and the excellent  environmental  
conditions  which occur at calving.
* Flexibility  in sale date; disposal  off the unit may take place at wean ­
ing or on turnout  to grass. Alternatively  weaned  calves may be 
returned  to pasture  for sale off grass  in the summer  or autumn.
* Profitability;  each year the highest  gross margins  were achieved  with 
the summer  calving  herd. Experience  with summer  calving  at Castle
55
Archdale  has shown that the system  has much to commend  it for a 
wide range of farming  situations.
However,  housing  of a summer  ealving  herd is required  and suitable  
aeeommodation  must be provided  for the cow and a strong calf. 
Summer  calving  has particular  application  on farms where adequate  
housing  already  exists and where sufficient  quantities  of good quality  
silage can be made.
It is recognised,  however,  that many produeers  in the LFA are spring 
calving  at present  and do not have sufficient  suitable  land for making  
adequate  silage. My advice  to these farmers  is to continue  to spring 
calve their herds but if possible  calve earlier and consolidate  the 
calving  period by redueing  the spread  in calving.  These actions  will 
allow cows to make fuller use of the grass season and to produce 
heavier  calves  for disposal  at the autumn  sales.
(B) Breed  of bull
It is now well established  that sire breed has a major effect on calf 
weaning  weight,  much greater  than that of eow type. The heavy late 
maturing  breeds  produce  ealves  with the highest  weaning  weights  (Table 
1).
Table 1
Sire breed effect on calf 200-day  weight  (kg)
I.owland Upland
Charolais 240 227
Simmental 232 222
South Devon 231 221
l.imousin 215 204
Hereford 208 194
Angus 194 182
(MLC)
For many years at Castle Arehdale  we have used Charolais  and 
Simmental  as our main top crossing  sires. In recent years we have 
introduced  Limousin  on our first calving  heifers. As well as benefiting 
from their extra size, surveys  of suckled  ealf priees  in reeent  years have 
shown that the eontinental  crosses  also command  a price premium  uer 
unit weight  sold.
Finishers  of suekled  ealves should be aware that while undoubtedly  
there are large differences  between  the crosses  of different  breeds  in the 
duration  of the feeding  period,  weight  at slaughter  and total feed con­
sumption  (Table 2), the differences  in feed conversion  efficiency  are
56
generally  small. MLC found in their beef breed evaluation  programme  
that when cattle were slaughtered  at a fixed level of external  fatness  
Charolais  crosses  had the highest  slaughter  weights  and were oldest at 
slaughter.  Simmental  crosses  were broadly  similar  to the Charolais  in 
performance.  Size and speed of maturity  had significant  effects  on feed 
consumption.  Big, late maturing  crosses  consumed  much more feed in 
total than smaller  early maturing  crosses. For instance  the Charolais  
crosses  needed  about 40% more feed in total than the Hereford  crosses.  
Being bigger,  they consumed  more per day and being  later maturing  they 
had to be fed for longer. However,  the extra feed was just about bal­
anced by extra growth  rate so differences  in feed conversion  efficiency  
were small.
Table 2
Winter  finished  suckled  calves  (slaughtered  at fixed level of fatness)
S'.re breedStart
wt.
(kg)Finishing
period
daysDaily
gain
(kg)Slaughter  
wt. (kg)Total
feed
(DM)Kg feed 
DM per 
kg gain
Charolais 363 157 0.84 494 1.37 11.0
Simmental 359 153 0.86 490 1.34 10.7
Limousin 332 156 0.78 454 1.21 10.6
Hereford 322 113 0,78 410 0.96 10.2
Aberdeen 319 97 0.77 393 0.83 10.5
Angus
(Ml.C)
(C) Choice  of Cow
The factors  of importance  in the suckler  dam arc : 
regular  breeding  
high calf weaning  weights 
low mortality  
low feed costs 
some degree  of hardiness
fn our experience  the Aberdeen  Angus  crossed  with the dairy type 
animal— Friesian  or Shorthorn —appear  to produce  a near ideal suckler  
dam whieh  fulfils  all the above  requirements  remarkably  well.
A trial, carried  out at our agricultural  colleges  in NI, provides  us with 
some useful  data on the performance  of 3 dairy/beef  crosses  under local  
conditions.  Calf 200-day  weights  over a 6-year  period  for 3 different  sire 
breeds  are summarised  in Table 3.
Although  all 3 cow types produced  similar  weight  of calf at 200 days,  
the Angus  crosses  produced  it more efficiently  in relation  to their body  
size.
57
Table 3
Comparison  of weights  (kg) of cross-bred  suckler  cows and of the calves  from  
different  sires at 200 days of age
Cow breed
Dam / Sire HerefordBreed of Calf
Charolais  SimmentalCow
wt.kg calf 200 day wt. 
per 100 kg cow 
wt
Her X Fr 200 232 222 472 45
AA X Fr. 204 228 217 449 47
AA X Sh 208 227 219 450 47
(NI, 1970/76)
(D) Reduce  calving  spread
Compact  calving  is a key factor involved  in improving  profitability  
and simplifying  management.  The advantages  of compact  calving  can 
be summarised  as follows  :
* heavy  weaning  weights  and a more even batch of calves 
simplified  management
improved  fertility  due to a higher  conception  rate 
accurate  feeding  of cows 
less risk of scour and grass tetany  
saving  in labour
There are a number  of piossible  ways producers  can reduce  spread  of 
calving.  These  include  split calving,  the culling  of late calving  cows and 
attention  to management  factors  such as level of feeding,  cow condition  
and bull potency. Improvement  in management  alone is usually  net 
sufficient  to reduce  an existing  wide spread. The culling  of late calving 
cows and their replacement  with early calving  heifers  may be the most  
appropriate  action for the majority  of producers.  It is important  that 
replacement  heifers  calve early in the calving  period,  preferably  2-3 
weeks before the main herd as calving  pattern  is difficult  to alter once 
established.
(E) Fertility
In order to maintain  calving  pattern  and achieve  satisfactory  output  
each suckler  cow should  produce  a weaned  calf every  year. A number  of 
factors  which  influence  fertility  should  be considered.
(i) Calving  to service  interval  : It is well established  that conception  
rates at second  and subsequent  oestruses  are higher  than with first 
oestrus.
(ii) Maturity  : Farmers  often observe  that first calvers  are more difficult  
to get into calf than mature  cows. This may be partly due to the 
higher  nutritional  stress  on a young  animal  in its first lactation.  Of 
more importanee  is undoubtedly  its slowness  to cycle with the re­
sulting  fewer  opportunities  for service  and the greater  risk of service  
on first heat. Hence  the importance  of calving  heifers  early.
58
(iii) Late  calvers  ; Researchers  have found  a general  decline  in fertility  as 
cows calve later in the season.
(iv) Nutrition  ; There is evidence  that very thin cows have an unaccept ­
ably high incidence  of barrenness  due to anoestrus.  Selective  feed­
ing of these animals  is necessary  to stabilise  liveweight  loss, to get 
them cycling  and achieve  acceptable  levels  of fertility.
(v) A.I. versus  natural  mating  : The major benefits  of A.I,, namely  the 
potential  use of a wide selection  of superior  sires from a range of 
different  breeds,  must be apparent  to almost  all producers  especially  
those with small herds  where  it is difficult  to justify  the purchase  of 
a bull. Farmers  are often deterred  from using A.I. either because 
of inconvenience  or fear of poor results. At Castle Archdale  A.I. 
has been used very successfully  for many years. A most important  
factor in determining  the successful  use of A.I. and one which is 
taken too much for granted  is heat detection  itself.
(F) Feeding
Since feed costs can account  for 80% of total variable  costs, feeding 
is an obvious  area to focus attention  on if we are going to reduce  costs 
and improve  efficiency  of production.
(i) Cow feeding  : Due to basic inefficiency  of beef production  from the 
suckler  cow, and since a large proportion  of feed costs  occur  during  
the winter period, all systems  of suckled  calf production  should 
rely on mobilising  the cow ’s body reserves  of fat during winter  
feeding. These reserves  can subsequently  be cheaply  replenished  
at grass. Our experience  suggests  that there is considerable  scope  
for exploration  of her reserves  once the cow is in calf. There  
appears  to be no overall  adverse  affects  on dam performance  and 
subsequent  cost benefits  to be achieved  so long as cows are per­
mitted to completely  rebuild  their reserves  the following  season  at 
grass.
(ii) Creep feeding  : Creep feeding  ealves at pasture is not normally  
justified  and responses  will only be obtained  under conditions  of 
severe  pasture  scarcity.  Several  trials  at Castle  Archdale  have shown  
good responses  to creep feeding  indoors.  Flowever  as the response 
to creep  feeding  is much greater  when measured  at turnout  to grass  
than subsequently  at weaning  after a grazing  period,  the optimum  
feed rate will depend  on disposal  date and the relative  prices of 
concentrates  and beef. As our trials produced  much poorer  con­
version  rates at higher levels of creep feeding  (dams feeding  on 
silage only) we restrict  creep feeding  to a maximum  of 1 kg head/  
day.
(G) Housing
Flousing  is important  in relation  to grass  production  rather  than animal  
performance.  Our experience  with various  housing  systems  including  
topless  cublicles,  kennels,  indoor  cubicles  and totally  slatted  accommod-
59
ation is that it is not necessary  to provide  elaborate  housing  (nor probably  
any housing)  for suckler  cows. In fact from an animal  health point of 
view our experience  with topless  cubicles  and kennel  units would  confirm 
that a well ventilated  environment  is highly  desirable  and that all that is 
required  is a dry area for cows to lie down and some shelter  for young 
calves. There  are however,  in our moist  climate,  very good reasons  from 
a grass production  viewpoint,  to take stock off the land during  the winter  
rnonths.  Unless  an unproductive  dry area or rock outcrop  is available  on 
the farm as a winter  site, suckler  stock should be yarded  and provided  
with cheap  and simple  accommodation.
The effect of winter  shelter  on the performance  of suckler  cows and 
their autumn  born calves has been evaluated  in a major study, carried  
out over a 5-year  period,  at Craibstone  in Aberdeen.  Suckler  cows were 
wintered  from October  to April on 4 sites. These were a slatted  house, 
an exposed  unroofed  slatted pad, a sheltered  paddock  and an exposed'  
paddock.  The main findings  on shelter  were :
* Suckler  cows obtain  little benefit  from the provision  of winter  shelter  
in the British  Isles.
* The lower the level of feeding  the more benefit  the cows may gain 
from shelter. At most it could amount  to the equivalent  of saving  8 
MJ ME per day over the winter  which could be provided  by 0.7 kg 
barley per day. However,  at typical  feed levels for autumn  calving 
cows it is much less.
* Calves  benefit  from shelter  but a house is not economically  justified.  
Where  natural  shelter  is not available  a simple  windbreak  will suffice.  
Although  housed  calves grow faster during  the winter,  outwintered  
calves  compensate  by faster  growth  at grass.
* Confining  cows during  winter  eases labour  and management  prob ­
lems and controls  the effects  of poaching  on crop and grass production.
* Cows can be confined  without  shelter  but should have a lying area 
free from surface  water. Outwintering  sites should have a frost-free 
water  supply  and good feeding  handling  facilities.
1. OUTPUT  FROM  GRASS
My discussion  on breed and management  factors  have emphasised  the 
need for :
— A live calf
— a cow capable  of adequate  milk production
— a calf capable  of good growth  rate
— avoidance  of disease  problems  which  inhibit  performance.
In other words  we provide  an animal  with the potential  for very rapid  
growth  and by making  available  sufficient  grass (in the form of grazing  
or silage)  of adequate  quality  we hope to exploit  that potential.  Accord ­
ingly the animal factors  and grass production  aspects  are very much 
inter-related  in the achievement  of our goal, which is high output  from 
our grassland.
60
1 would like to make some points about the utilisation  of our grass  
with sucklers  as this is undoubtedly  an area where  there is great  potential  
for improvement.  If single suckling  is to be made competitive  with other  
grass using  enterprises  then stocking  rate must be con.sidered  as the single  
most important  task in our grassland  management.
(A) What stocking  rate ?
On average,  ‘good ’ lowland  producers  are achieving  a stocking  rate of 
1.5 suckler  cows per hectare.  For many years at Castle  Archdale  (under  
LFA conditions)  we have been stocking  at 2 cows per hectare. What  
level of stocking  rate should  the prime lowland  grass producer  be aiming
The total annual  energy  requirement  for the maintenance  of a 500 kg 
suckler  cow and the production  of 350 kg suckled  calf is about 40 000 
MJ. If we assume  a pasture  yield of 12,000  kg DM per hectare  (approx ­
imately  5 tons per acre) and an energy  concentration  of just 10 MJ per 
kg, the energy  output  from a hectare  of grass would be 120,000  MJ. On 
this basis it would be possible  to produce  3 calves, with a combined  
weight  exceeding  1 tonne per hectare.
This level of output is by no means theoretical,  as targets  bailed on 
research  work at Hillsborough  indicate  (Table  4).
Table 4
Targets  for lowland  suckling
Calving  season
Autumn
Spring
Summer
Summer*Calf wt. 
(kg)
300
270
330
450Stocking  rate 
(cows/ha)
2.8
3.3
3.1
2.5Calf output  
(kg/ha)
840
890
1025
1125
* Intensive  finishing
Stocking  rates given are ba.sed on well-managed,  re-seeded  lowland 
ryegrass  pasture  receiving  400 kg N per hectare  (320 units per acre)  
There is no spring calving  herd at Hillsborough  but the performance  
targets  quoted  are being achieved  with the summer  and autumn  herds at 
the Institute.
(B) Some general  guidelines  on grassland  management
1. Stocking  rate — singly the most important  factor. Examination  of 
individual  farm results show a wide range of stocking  rates at all 
levels  of N use. Inadequate  use of fertiliser  N may not be the main  
cause of low stocking  rates. Many  producers  could improve  grassland
61
utilisation  simply  by increasing  stock numbers  on a given grass area 
and tightening  up grassland  management  all round.
2. N usage — there are many suckler  units where only low levels of 
nitrogen  are applied. In these cases more N usage would greatly 
increase  the potential  for improvement  in stocking  rates. It is im­
portant  to appreciate  that the additional  acreage  created  need not 
necessarily  be occupied  with more suckler  cows. The farmer  may 
wish to conserve  a greater  quantity  of fodder  and retain some of his 
suckled  calves  for finishing  or sale at a later stage in production.  This 
type of approach  can help to protect  him from the vagaries  of the 
suckler  calf sales.
3. Grass quality  — suckled  calves  do not need as high quality  grazing 
as dairy bred calves  and are usually  easier  to manage  because  the cow 
shields  the calf from the environment.
4. Leys versus  permanent  pasture  — permanent  pasture  is capable  of 
supporting  similar  stocking  rates to leys up to about 150 kg N per 
hectare.  Above  this the response  to N tails off on permanent  pasture,  
and for really  intensive  grassland  management  the advantage  lies with 
leys.
5. Grazing  system — irrespective  of cattle type stocking  rate is more 
important  than grazing  system. At low levels of stocking  grazing  
system  has little or no effect on performance.  At high stocking  rates  
there are advantages  in rotational  grazing. A simple system,  com­
prising  4 to 6 fields, whereby  the herd rotates  in a period of one 
month  or less, is all that is required.
6. Creep  grazing  — where a paddock  grazing  system  is adopted  creep  
grazing  can be easily  arranged.  Generally  tbe benefits  to be had from 
creep  grazing  are small but are likely to be more pronounced  in high 
stocking  rate situations  or where  grass availability  is limited.  In one 
comparison  at Hillsborough  creep grazed  May born calves  were 6 kg 
heavier  at time of housing.  At Castle  Archdale  2 out of 3 trials gave 
a small (7 kg, 3 kg) advantage  to creep grazing.
7. Clover  — a really  good clover  sward  has the capacity  to produce  the 
equivalent  of 200 kg N per hectare. In practice  there are probably  
few suckler  producers  who would exceed  this level of N application  
on their grazing  areas. Undoubtedly  one looses  flexibility  with clover  
but there must be a good case for developing  clover swards  on at 
least part of the grazing  area.
(C) Output  from permanent  pasture
Almost 70% (75% including  rough grazing)  of our grassland  is 
permanent  pasture  (5 years old and over). Accordingly  most of our 
ruminant  production,  especially  that from suckler  cows,  comes  from old 
pasture.  A major  study by the ‘Joint Permanent  Pasture  Group ’ on the 
‘factors  affecting  the productivity  of permanent  grassland ’ was published 
in 1980. This document  makes  very interesting  reading  and I think the 
findings  provide  a challenge  to grassland  producers.
62
* The average  annual  UME output  for dairy farms was some 44 GJ 
ha" ’ compared  with 40 GJ ha’' for beef farms and 38 GJ ha“' for 
suckler  farms.
* On dairy farms ME derived  from grass was only sufficient  to supply  
Maintenance  and about 5% of ME for milk production  (i.e. 55% of 
total). On the average  suckler  farm grass supplied  81% of the total 
requirement  (46% of production).
* The  difference  in output  between  dairy and suckler  farms  was smaller  
than would be expected  from the differences  in stocking  rate and N 
use.
Dairy cows  
Suckler  cows.Stocking  rate 
(c.e. ha~')
1.8
1.2N
(kg ha-')
154
42UME output  
GJ ha-')
44
38
* Stocking  rate was consistently  the variable  most strongly  associated  
with output accounting  for 51% of the variation  in UME between 
dairy farms and 82% on suckler  farms.
* Other variables  consistently  associated  with output  were fertiliser  N 
and the manageability  of land.
* Botanical  composition  was more important  than the age of grass.  
Composition  was of little consequence  on high N farms.
* GRASS  HAS POTENTIAL  AS A PRODUCTION  FEED.  BUT  
MANY  FARMERS  USE IT LARGELY  AS A MAINTENANCE  
FEED.
CONCLUSIONS
(1) Much  can be done on the stock and management  aspects  to improve  
suckler  output.
(2) Suckling  is the one enterprise  that obtains  most of its production  
from grass.
(3) On many suckler  units grass is not managed  intensively  and stocking 
rates could be greatly  improved.
(4) Stocking  rates can be improved  without  keeping  more suckler  cows.
(5) Silage  quality  is important  for sucklers  as, generally,  little concentrate  
is used.
(6) A challenge  faces suckler producers  to get more “Money from 
Grass ”.
63
Breeding  Strategy  in High Producing  
Dairy  Herds
G. J. MORE  O’FERRALL
The Agricultural  Institute,  Dunsinea,  Castleknock,  Co. Dublin.
The average  milk yield of a herd can be increased  both through  improved  
management  and through  a well planned  breeding  programme.  While  
increased  yields  due to improved  management  (particularly  at low levels  
of production)  are usually  more dramatic  than those due to breeding,  
that does not mean the latter is any less important.  Lifting  the genetic 
merit of a herd is cheap  and easy to do. It involves  a planned  approach  
to culling and breeding  of replacements,  activities  which must occur 
anyhow.  In addition,  genetic  improvement  is permanent  and, provided  
bulls of inferior  merit are not used, cumulative.  Relatively,  genetic 
improvement  is more important  in high compared  to low producing  
herds.
Dairy cattle breeding  has made major advances  in this country  in 
recent years. The industry  is rather well organised,  through  the Al 
structure,  to make genetic  progress  though  there are many improvements  
yet to be made. Larger  dairy herds,  with more attention  being paid by 
farmers  to breeding  merit,  together  with improved  sire and cow evalua ­
tion and more intense  sire selection,  will lead to an acceleration  in the 
rate of genetic  change  for economic  characters  in dairy cattle over the 
next few years.
Genetic  Improvement  Pathways
Genetic  progress  in a dairy population  can arise through  four path­
ways. In a well organised  progeny  testing  system  the estimated  genetic 
progress  resulting  from the four paths are approximately  as follows  :
1. Bulls to breed bulls
2. Cows  to breed bulls
3. Bulls to breed cows
4. Cows to breed cowsBB
CB
BC
CC% Contribution  
45%
30%
20%
5%
64
The contribution  of each pathway  will vary according  to the intensity  of 
selection.  The reason  that bull sires (BB) give a higher  contribution  than 
bull dams (CB) is solely attributable  to the fact that sires are reliably  
progeny  tested on the performance  of many of their daughters.  The 
information  on the cow, on the other hand, is usually  based on her own 
performance  ever 3 or 4 lactations,  plus some information  on her sire 
and dam. Thus the information  on a cow can never be as reliable  as a 
bull proof and so the contribution  from the dam is lower. The above  
figures  show the tremendous  importance  of sire selection  — 75% of the 
genetic  progress  on average  is made through  the breeding  of bulls — this 
is outside  the scope of the commercial  dairy farmer. Thus in the context  
of this paper  we are only concerned  with pathways  3 and 4 above.
Improving  Herd Genetic  Merit
There are 3 ways in which the diary farmer  can improve  the genetic  
merit of his herd ;
1. By culling  low yielding  cows
2. By using only the best cows to breed replacements
3. By proper  use of top sires to breed replacements
1. Culling  low yielding  cows
There is only limited  scope for farmers  to genetically  improve  yields  
through  culling,  largely  because  of the high rate of involuntary  culling. 
Of the 20% or so cows culled by the farmers  each year only 3 to 4% 
can be culled on yield. Table 1 lists the primary  reasons  for culling  
cows in Moorepark  herds in 1970-72,  1980-81,  and from 1970-81  and in 
26 commercial  herds in 1980-81.  These show that while there has been
Table I
Primary  reasons  for cow culling  in Moorepark  and 26 commercial  herds
(% of cows)
Moorepark  Herds Commercial  Herds
1970-72 1980-81 1970-81 1980-81
Not in calf 8.4 4.9 6.8 3.7
Abortion  (incl. Brucellosis) 1.8 1.4 3.2 5.3
T.B. 4.5 1.3 2.1 0.3
Udder disorders 0.8 1.9 1.6 2.1
Leg and foot disorders 0.0 1.4 0.8 0.8
Accidents 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1
Calving  difficulties 0.1 0.2 0,2 0.1
l.ate calving 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2Other reasons 0.9 6.2 2.9 0.6Not recorded 1.4 0.0 0.6 1.6
Low production 1.7 3.7 3.1 4.7
TOTAL 20.3 21.3 21.6 19.5
65
an improvement  from under  2% in 1970-72  to almost  4% in 1980-81  in 
Moorepark  and almost  5% in commercial  herds scope for improvement  
through  culling low yields is limited. A recent study of MMB milk 
recorded  herds by McClintock  showed  that culling  low yielders  would 
account  for about  0.2% improvement  per year of age.
2. Using  better  cows to breed replacements
This method  of genetically  improving  one’s herd also has limited  scope  
especially  for the majority  of Irish dairy farmers.  Firstly,  in order to 
identify  the genetically  superior  animals  in a herd, cows have to be milk 
recorded  and yields adjusted  for age and date of calving.  A cow’s milk 
production  increases  until her 4th or 5th lactation  so that age adjustment  
is necessary,  while in a creamery  milk situation  every day later calving 
in the year can mean a drop of 2.2 gallons  in milk yield.
Secondly,  in order to have heifers  calving  down  at 2 years of age they 
need to be born early in the calving  season,  so that in order to optimise  
this means of improvement  the better cows need to be calving  early.  
This would not be the same problem  in a high producing  or liquid milk 
herd when calving  would  occur  throughout  most of the year.
In the study mentioned  above,  McClintock  retrospectively  looked  at 
the phenotypic  superiority  of the dams of herd replacements  and found 
them on average  to be only 1.37 phenotypic  units above the average  of 
all cows in the herds in which  they were milked.  He estimated  that this 
average  selection  intensity  among  dams would only account  for 0.02%  
genetic  change  per year. These are average  figures  over all herds and 
obviously  individual  breeders  could do considerably  better  than this.
3. Use good sires to breed replacements
For most farmers,  the simplest  and most efficient  way of improving  the 
genetic  merit of their herds is through  the planned  use of genetically 
superior  bulls. This can best be done by Al, as the proven  Al stud is a 
group  of highly  selected  genetically  superior  bulls. Their merit for dairy 
and heifer conformation  traits are reliably  known,  while beef merit 
and ease of calving  are available  on most.
a. Sire evaluation  : Bulls are evaluated  on the basis of the production  of 
a sample  of their progeny  (usually  40 or more) and their proofs are 
expressed  in terms of PREDICTED  DIFFERENCES  (PD) for milk, fat 
and protein  yields  and fat % and protein  %. All PD’s are expressed  as 
deviations  from a fixed base level of production.  Predicted  Difference  is 
expressed  as the difference  that is expected  between  the average  produc ­
tion of future  daughters  of the bull and the base level of production.  The 
difference  between  the PD’s of two bulls is the expected  difference  in the 
average  production  of their daughters  when milked  in the same herd and 
treated  alike.
The RELATIVE  BREEDING  INDEX  (RBI) quoted  for each bull 
combines  his PD’s for fat and protein  yield in a single figure. It is a 
breeding  value for the bull and as such in twice the PD’s. The RBI is
66
expressed  in terms of percent  superiority  above a mean base population  
yield cf 188 kg of fat plus protein.
2 (PD fat + PD protein)
RBI =------------------ ------------- - X 100 + 100
188
The mean RBI for all the young bulls whose proofs  became  available  
this year was 122 or 22% above the base level. The minimum  RBI for 
any bull approved  for widespread  use in 1984 is 121 ’, while thb mean of 
the proven  stud is 127. The estimated  mean RBI of all natural  service 
bulls is 113 so that on average  an approved  Al bull is 14 points  higher  
in Relative  Breeding  Index.  >
Furthermore,  a weighting,  which reflects the number  of effective  
daughters  on which the bull ’s proof is based,  is also given. The higher  
the weighting  the more accurate  the proof. No bull is approved  with a 
weighting  of less than 20 — to achieve  this figure approximately  40 
daughters  are recorded.  The reliability  of the proof is also given,  this is 
merely  the weighting  expressed  as a scale of 0.0 to 1.0. A weighting  of 
20 is equivalent  to a reliability  of 0.60. To have a reliability  of about  
0.8 a weighting  of 60 and for 0.9 a weighting  of 135 would  be required.
b. Value  of Al: The value of each unit on the RBI scale is estimated  to 
be worth  £1.60 at 1983 prices. In financial  terms,  the expected  benefit  to 
the farmer  of using an average  proven  bull in preference  to an average  
natural  service  bull, is about  £22 (14 x £1.60). This represents  the value  
to the farmer  in today ’s money  of the additional  future production  due 
to each insemination,  net of production  costs. Of course,  if a farmer  uses 
one of the top proven  bulls,  with say an RBI of 134. he stands  to benefit 
even more : about  £34.
c. Choosing  the right bull(s)  for the herd : Dairy  farmers  should  not rely 
on RBI ’s alone in selecting  bulls for their herds but rather  should  select  
bulls  with acceptable  RBI ’s which  will largely  compensate  for weaknesses 
in particular  cows. This can be done by referring  to the bull ’s PDs for 
different  production  and conformation  traits. For example,  bulls with 
the same RBI can have quite different  PD’s for different  traits as shown 
in Table 2.
Thus a bull such as KMK  can have high milk yield at average  fat %, 
compared  to a bull such as TWB with high fat % at average  milk yield.
Table 2
Comparison  of PD’s for production  of two bulls with similar  RBI
PD
Bull
CodeRBI Weighting Milk
(kg)Fat
(kg)Protein
(kg)Fat
%Protein
%
KMK 128 23 332 15 12 .09 .06
TWB 128 32 185 18 9 .35 .10
67
This can result  in similar  PD’s for butterfat  yield. The same can be true 
of protein. Therefore,  if a farmer  wants to improve  his fat percentage  
he should  use TWB,  if he is a liquid  milk producer  he should  use KMK. 
In addition  KMK  is strong  on legs and feet and general  appearance  while  
TWB is particularly  good on udders  and teats.
Even if a farmer  is not milk recording  he will have a reasonable  idea 
of his herd average  milk yield and fat %; he should  then be able to select  
a group  of bulls suitable  for use within  the herd as a whole.
It is this type of approach  that the farmer  with high producing  cows  
must take if he is to make continued  genetic  improvement  in his herd. 
A word of warning  should be sounded  against  trying to improve  too 
many  traits at one time. The higher  the number  of traits,  many  of which  
will have little economic  value,  the more difficult  it will be to get a bull 
near the top in any of them; rather select bulls for just one or two 
economically  important  traits which have acceptable  conformation  or 
type.
The average  genetic  improvement  in the population  through  the use 
cf top sires can be as high as 1% per annum;  in Ireland  at present  it is 
probably  somewhere  between  0.5% and 1.0%. McClintock  in his study 
of MMB recorded  herds estimated  that in the UK the annual  genetic 
improvement  through  this source  is between  0.2% and 0.4%. However,  
individuals  can do considerably  better than average,  particularly  in the 
initial  years of selection.
Genetic  improvement  is a slow but on-going  process. For a farmer  
starting  on a new breeding  policy  now, it will be 9 or 10 years before  all 
the cows in his herd are top proven  sires for continued  genetic  improve ­
ment. At the same time breeders  share a responsibility  to mate a 
proportion  (20%)  of their cows to young  bulls in Al and milk some of 
their progeny  in order to help the national  progeny  test programme.  
The average  genetic  merit of young  bulls is improving  annually,  and this 
year at an RBI of 122 was 9 points  above that of natural  service  bulls, 
so that the use of young bull semen on a portion  of the herd will not 
impede  genetic  improvement.
Place of the Holstein
There  has been considerable  interest  in the use of Holsteins  to upgrade  
the dairy merit of our herds in the past number  of years. The Holstein  
has been sweeping  through  most European  Black  and White  populations  
but its impact  here has been less dramatic.  It is unfortunate  that Hol­
steins appear  to be regarded  as a different  breed than Friesians,  rather  
than as a strain,  highly  selected  for dairy merit,  within  the same breed. 
It would be better if we could look at bulls of both strains  in terms of 
their individual  genetic  merit, namely  their RBIs and PDs. Obviously  
the average  genetic  merit of Holsteins  is considerably  higher  than that 
of Friesians  so that it would be much easier  to find outstanding  Holstein  
bulls in terms of genetic  merit, relative  to our population,  than among  
Friesian  bulls. FSM was such a bull. The other proven  Holstein  bulls
68
in Al here are all above average  in RBI but there are a number  of 
Friesian  bulls of similar  genetic  merit in the Al stud.
Economic  evaluation  of Holstein
We have recently  carried  out an economic  evaluation  of the Holstein  
compared  to Friesians  in different  production  environments  ranging  from  
600 to 1200 gallons.  Holsteins  are on average  about 17% superior  in milk 
yield, 12% in fat yield and 15% in protein  yield. The increased  output  
that would be expected  from Holsteins  over Friesians  in the different  
production  environments  is shown  in Table  3. The net value of the extra  
output  from Holsteins  ranged from £45 to £71 after deduction  of feed 
costs. Feed costs were assumed  to range  from just over 20% in the lower 
production  environment  to almost  40% in the 1200 gallon  environment.
Table 3
Increased  output  as a result  of replacing  Friesians  by Holsteins  in different  
production  environments
Production  Environment
600 gal 800 gal 1000 gal 1200 gal
Fr. Holst* Fr. Holst* Fr. Holst* Fr. Holst*
Fat yield (kg) 100 112 122 149 166 186 200 224
Prot. yield (kg 91 105 122 140 152 175 183 210
Total value (£) 426 483 568 643 709 803 854 966
Extra  gross  value  (GV)  
due to Holstein  (£) 57 75 94 112
Feed  cost (FC) of extra  
output  (output  £) 12 19 31 41
Extra net value (£) 
(GV - FC) 45 56 63 71
♦Assuming  12% increase  in butterfat  yield @ £2.56/kg  and 
15% increase  in protein  yield @ £ 1.87/kg
Holsteins  would have other costs associated  with them compared  to 
Friesians.  Much of these costs would be concerned  with the lower beef 
merit of cull cows and poorer  prices for calves; in addition  Holsteins,  
because  of their higher  production,  are assumed  to have a higher  replace ­
ment rate (25% vs 20%),  this would result in only 4 lactations  instead  
of 5 for Friesians,  while in addition  Holsteins  have about 7 days longer  
calving  intervals.  The effect of cull cow price and calving  interval  is 
assumed  to be less in the higher production  environments  because  of 
higher level of concentrate  feeding  which would result in better body  
condition.  These costs are listed in Table 4 and are deducted  from the 
extra value of output  in Table  4.
69
Table 4
Economic  benefits  of Holstein  over Friesian  cows at different  production  levels
(£ per cow)
Production Environment
600 gal 800 gal 1000 gal 1200 gal
Benefits
Daily merit (O) 45 56 63
(. ■
I71
Costs
Cull cow price 12 8 4 0
Calf price 20 20 20 20
Longevity 14 16 17 18
Calving  interval 10 8 6 4
Veterinary,  labour,  
mortality,  insurance 5 5 5 5
Calving  difficulty/stillbirths 2 2 2 2
Total costs (C) 63 59 54 49
Overall  benefit  (O-C)  (£/cow) -18 -3 9 22
As a result of these calculations  the effect  of a changing  from Friesian  
to Holstein  would  range from a loss of £18 per cow in the low production  
environment  to a gain of £22 per cow in a 1200 gallon  environment.  A 
farmer  would need to be producing  in excess  of 800 gallons  per cow 
before  he would  even break even from such a change. At present  pro­
duction  levels this would mean that less than 20% of dairy farmers  
would gain from Holsteinisation.  However,  high producing  herds in 
excess of 1000 gallons  (about 5% of herds) would stand to gain by 
grading  up to high genetic  merit Holsteins.
Milk Composition
Considerable  attention  has been devoted  recently  to the fact that there 
has been no increase  in the compgsitipn  of Irish milk in the last 20 years 
compared  to other European  countries.  To some extent  this has to do 
with our breeding  policy where selection  has been for yield of fat and 
protein. The reason for this has been straight  forward  and has to do 
with the heritabilities  and genetic  correlations  between  the different  
production  traits  — milk yield and composition  have a negative  genetic  
correlation  This is probably  best illustrated  by looking  at Tables  5 and 6.
In Table 5 are shown the relative  gains from selecting  for fat and 
protein  yield compared  to milk yield plus fat % and protein % at 
different  value ratios  of fat to proteia.  The gains from selection  are 20% 
to 16% greater  when selection  is for yield.
70
Table 5
Relative  gains from selection  for milk yield and composition  compared  to fat 
and protein  yield*
Selection  forValue  ratio (fat : protein)
60 : 40 50 : 50 40 : 60
Milk yield plus fat % & protein 100 100 100
Fat and protein  yield 120 118 116
Table  6 shows  the direct  and correlated  responses  from selection  of the 
best 20% of bulls for a single trait at a time. Selection  for milk yield  
gives the greatest  response  in milk but gives rise to a decrease  in fat and 
protein  percent. Direct selection  gives the greatest  response  in fat %, 
but only small responses  in yields  of milk, fat and protein.  Thus as the 
price of milk is largely  related to the yield of fat and in some cases  
protein also, greatest  gains are achieved  through  selection  of fat and 
protein  yields.
Table 6
Direct  and correlated  responses  from selection  for a single  trait in dairy cattle
Best 20% of bulls  
selected  on :Milk  
yield (kg)Fat
yield (kg)Protein  
yield (kg)Fat
%Protein
%
Milk yield 159 5.0 4.1 -.04 -.02
Fat yield 132 6.4 4.5 + .02 + .01
Protein  yield 146 5.9 5.0 + .01 0
Fat % 59 0.9 0.5 + .12 + .05
Protein % -4.5 0,9 0.5 + .07 + .08
If we want to improve  fat and protein  yield and milk composition  at 
the same time the quickest  way this will happen  is if creameries  put a 
negative  value on milk volume. We were told at this meeting  last year 
that is the way the Dutch  do it and we all know they have one of the 
highest  fat percentages  in Europe  at 4.1%. If a negative  value was put 
on milk volume  by creameries  then farmers  would  have to pay consider ­
ably more attention  to the selection  of bulls with high RBIs associated  
with high PD’s for fat % and protein %, as for example,  bull TWB 
referred  to above.
Milk recording
Milk recording  is expensive.  The cost of the A4 type milk recording  
scheme  is approximately  £12.50  per cow, a cost which is borne almost  
equally  by the Department  of Agriculture,  the dairy  co-ops  and individual  
farmers.  In 1984, approximately  106,000  of 6.6% of our dairy cows  will 
be recorded  under this scheme. This is the scheme  which should be
71
providing  the records  for the national  progeny  testing  programme,  but 
unfortunately  up to now a number  of farmers  have been using  this scheme  
for their own benefit  with little input to the national  testing  programme.  
In time it is envisaged  that approximately  15% of cows would be 
recorded  under such a scheme.  However  unless  farmers  provide  records  
for the national  progeny  testing  programme  they may not continue  to 
receive  this service,  or if they do, they could have to pay the full cost of 
it. The lack of milk recorded  daughters  of young bulls is one of the 
biggest  obstacles  to an expansion  in the number  of young  bulls going  on 
test each year, and hence  increasing  the intensity  of selection  among  bulls.
While milk recording  is important,  its main advantage  to a dairy  
farmer  is in the day to day management  of his herd. For this, the simpler  
and considerably  less costly  type of DIY recording  as operated  by many 
of the Co-ops  is adequate  and will provide  sufficient  information  in help­
ing to identify  the better  animals  from which  to breed replacements.  The 
use of the A4 type recording  scheme  is a luxury  for dairy farmers  not 
involved  in the progeny  testing programme  and if the full cost of the 
recording  were to be borne by these farmers,  economics  wculd,  I think,  
dictate  that he utilises  a less costly DIY type scheme.
Summary
Herd yields can be improved  through  improved  management  and an 
improved  breeding  programme.  Genetic  improvement  is relatively  more 
important  in higher  producing  herds.
Genetic  improvement  can be achieved  through  four pathways.  Two of 
these, bulls to breed bulls and cows to breed bulls, account  for 75% of 
the improvement,  are concerned  with the selection  of bulls for Al and so 
are outside  the scope of the dairy farmer.  Of the ether  two, the selection 
of bulls to breed cows,  and hence  the sires selected  by the farmer  for use 
on his herd contributes  considerably  more to genetic  improvement  than 
the selection  of cows to breed replacements.  Culling  of low yielders 
offers  limited  scope for genetic  improvement.  Farmers  with high yielding 
herds  should  define  their breeding  goals  in terms  of improving  economic ­
ally valuable  traits and then select bulls with the highest  available  PD’s 
(or RBI) for these traits.
A change  to Holstein  would only have advantages  for herds yielding 
1000 gallons  or more. Such a change  should  lead to an increase  of about  
17% in milk, 12% in fat and 15% in protein  yields,  but would lead to 
a considerable  fall in the price of dropped  calves  and cull cows and lead 
to a higher  replacement  rate in the herd. In economic  terms  the advan ­
tages are estimated  to be £9 per cow in a 1000 gallon  herd and £22 per 
cow in a 1200 gallon  environment.  At 800 and 600 gallons  there would 
be a loss of from £3 to £18 per cow from a change  to Holstein.
Milk recording  is important,  firstly  to provide  records  for the national  
progeny  testing  programme  and secondly  for the day to day management  
of the herd. If milk recording  is primarily  used for management  purposes  
then the less costly DIY type service  is sufficient  and will also help in 
identifying  the higher  producing  cows.
72
Ireland's  dairy  industry  
has  come  a long  way  since.
The days of dairymaids  and horse-drawn  creameries  
have  passed.  In tneir place  has emerged  one of the world's  
most  modern  and dynamic  dairy  industries.  Today  Ireland  turns  
the greenest  grass  in Europe  into a diverse  range of the best-  
known  dairy  products  in the world.
From  Honduras-to  Hong  Kong,  from Trinidad  fo 
Tokyo  you will find Irish cream,  milk powder,  chocolate  crumb,  
cheese,  casein  and a great  variety  of other products,  many  of 
them  sold under  the Kerrygold  brand  name.
Irish dairy  exports  last year  were  worth  over£700m.  
Which  gives  you some idea  just how  far the industry has come  
since  the days of the dairymaid.
73
Advances  in Semen  Technology  
in Ireland
K. J. O’FARRELL
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moore  park. Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
Introduction
Since the introduction  of artificial  insemination  (A.I.) in 1940 as a fresh  
semen  service,  many technological  advances  have taken place. The main  
changes  have centred  on methods  of processing  and semen storage  with 
particular  emphasis  on deep freezing  of semen. Cryoprotective  agents  
such as glycerol  were added to allow deep freezing  of semen in either  
ampoules  or Continental  (Cassau)  straws.  For the deep freezing  of semen  
the exact rates of cooling  from +5°C to — 195°C are well defined. It 
appears  that cooling  should be at a slow rate especially  through  the 
critical  temperature  zone of — 15°C to —25°C and once having  passed 
this danger  zone rapid cooling  can take place without  any adverse  effects  
(Luyet  and Keane,  1955).
Rate of thawing  is one of the most important  factors  affecting  post 
thaw spermatozoal  viability  (Robbins,  Gerber  and Saacke,  1972; Alm- 
quist, 1976). Rapid thawing  rates of frozen  semen packaged  in Contin ­
ental straws  has been shown  to significantly  increase  post thaw acrosomal  
maintenance  and the percentage  of motile  spermatozoa  (Almquist,  1976).  
Thawing  in water at 35°C for 30 sec will give seminal  temperatures  of 
32'’C approximately  and this is the conventional  thawing  practise  
adopted  by A.I. Centres.  However,  there are divergent  views as to the 
effeet of raising seminal temperatures  above 5°C during the initial  
thawing  process. It has been suggested  that thawing  in warm water  
should  be timed to prevent  seminal  temperatures  from rising above 50°C  
and the thawed  semen should be used immediately  to avoid a drop in 
fertility  (De Abreu,  Bemdtson,  Smith and Pickett,  1979). It was sug­
gested that keeping  the temperature  from rising above 5°C will prevent 
cold shock especially  when external  temperatures  are zero or sub-zero. 
However,  Almquist,  Rosenberger  and Branas  (1979)  recommended  that 
seminal  temperatures  should  be raised above 5°C especially  during  cold 
weather  if maximum  fertility  rates  are to be achieved.  Other  field studies 
found that non-return  rates were similar  for semen  warmed  to 5°C or to 
near body temperature  in 35°C water  (Forde  and Gravir,  1973).
The effect of thawing  procedure  in most studies  has been based on 
laboratory  tests in which the percentage  of motile spermatozoa  and the 
amount  of damage  done to spermatazoa  are assessed.  Field trials in 
which  the effect of thawing  procedure  on actual  fertility  are likely  to be 
much more meaningful.  Stewart  (1969)  at the Reading  Cattle Breeding 
Centre  found little effect on conception  rate from conventional  thawing
74
procedures  relative  to thawing  “in the gun”. Similarly  Davidovic,  Bor- 
janovic,  Cvetkov  and Knezevic  (1972)  obtained  a non-return  rate of 74% 
for 166 inseminations  from conventionally  thawed  semen  as compared  to 
72% for 392 inseminations  with semen  thawed  “in the cow”. In the U.S., 
Almquist  et at (1979)  obtained  a 66 day non-return  of 72% for semen 
thawed  for thirty seconds  in water at 35°C compared  to 70% for that 
thawed to 0°C. An experiment  by Rugg, Bemdtson,  Mortimer  and 
Pickett  (1977)  showed  that “in cow” thawing  significantly  depressed  the 
pregnancy  rate in 108 cows and concluded  that thawing  “in the cow” or 
“in the pocket”  was unacceptable.
From the practical  point of view “in cow” thawing  would save a 
considerable  amount  of time since the straw could be directly  loaded  
into the inseminating  gun and used immediately.  In addition  many  
farmers  feel that the thawing  process  needs to be exact and precise  if 
maximum  conception  rates are to be obtained.  Since both of these fac­
tors are very important  the purpose  of this trial was to compare  the 
effect on conception  rates of “in cow” thawing  with conventional  thawing  
procedures.  For “in cow” thawing  the end of each straw was rolled  
between  the fore finger and thumb,  until the semen at that end became  
fluid, before  cutting  with a scissors  for insertion  in the insemination  gun. 
For conventional  thawing  the straw was placed  in a container  with water  
at 35°C for 30 sec. Animals  were randomly  allocated  to “in cow” or 
conventional  thawing  based  on similarity  of lactation  number  and calving  
date. The trial was carried  out for a two year period  on four of the 
Moorepark  herds using one A.I. operator  and one semen ejaculate  for 
each bull. Conception  was verified  by rectal pregnancy  diagnosis  90 to 
120 days after service.
Results  and Discussion
The first service  conception  rates for semen  thawed  in the conventional  
manner  and “in-cow ” thawing  are shown  for 1981 in Table 1. There  was 
no significant  difference  between  farm or bull and overall  the 90-120  day
Table I
First service  conception  rate for semen  thawed  in water  at 3S°C for 30 sec. and 
“in cow” thawing  (1981)
Farm
codeBull
code■‘In cow” 35°C for 30 sec.
X2No.
servedNo.
conceived  (%)No.
servedNo.
conceived  (%)
CRT BTL 45 28 (60) 34 24 (71) NS
MPN TET 37 21 (57) 43 32 (74) NS
MPG GOL 61 47 (77) 63 44 (70) NS
BDR TET 62 47  (76) 67 49 (73) NS
TOTAL 205 142 (69) 207 149 (72) NS
75
pregnancy  rate for “in-cow ” thawing  was 69% and 72% for the conven ­
tional  method.  This difference  was not significant.  In 1982 (Table  2) seven  
bulls were used across the four farms. On the MPN farm “in-cow ” 
thawing  gave a significantly  higher pregnancy  rate than conventional  
thawing  but this was largely  due to a difference  in conception  rate for 
bull PRS. Overall  the first service  conception  rate for “in-cow ” thawing  
was 77% and 74% for the conventional  method. These were not sig­
nificantly  different.
The overall  results  for the two years of experimentation  indicate  that 
there is no significant  difference  in conception  rate for “in-cow ” thawing  
versus  the conventional  method.  This stands  to reason since “in-cow ” 
thawing  is actually  thawing  the straw in an animal whose body tem­
perature  is approximately  37°C and therefore  similar  to thawing  in water  
at 37°C. Since “in-cow ” thawing  offers  considerable  saving  in time and 
no apparent  effect on fertility,  this method  has been adopted  as standard  
procedure  in the Moorepark  herds serviced  by our own A.I. operator.
Table 2
First service  conception  rate for semen  thawed  in water  at 35°C for 30 sec and 
“in cow” thawing  (1982)
“In cow” 35'°C for 30 sec.
Farm codeNo.
servedNo.
conceived  (%)No.
servedNo.
conceived  (%)
CRT 37 27 (73) 37 27 (73) NS
BDR 70 51 (73) 71 52 (73) NS
MPG 35 29 (8) 43 39 (91) NS
MPN 54 43  (80) 53 32 (60) 4.7*
TOTAL 196 150 (77) 204 150 (74) NS
Bull code
GOL 54 44 (81) 51 41 (80) NS
BTL 54 42 (78) 68 50 (73) NS
BIR 18 11 (61) 21 14 (67) NS
PRS 27 23 (85) 29 20 (70) NS
BLC 20 13 (65) 14 9 (64) NS
BTY 20 16 (80) 17 13 (76) NS
AS6 3 1 (33) 4 3 (75) NS
TOTAL 196 150 (77) 204 150 (74) NS
Bull Usage
In the U.S. extensive  dilution  rate trials using egg yolk citrate  diluent  
have shown  that fertility  progressively  drops  with increasing  dilution  and
76
that this rate of decline  is gradual  down to 15 million  total sperm and 
rapid as sperm levels are further  decreased  (Salisbury  and Vandemark,  
1961). In Ireland,  frozen semen is processed  to contain  between  20-30  
million  spermatazoa  and these sperm levels are maintained  even when a 
fresh semen service  is provided.  As a result it is only possible  to obtain  
between  25,000  and 40,000  doses of semen  per annum  from the top A.I. 
bulls. In addition,  since 80% of Friesian  inseminations  occur in the 
months  March,  April and May, conditions  are ideally  suited to the use 
of a fresh semen service.  However,  bull usage could not be significantly 
improved  unless  sperm numbers  per insemination  could be dramatically  
reduced.  In New Zealand,  Caprogen  diluent  has been used with sperm 
numbers  as low as 2.5 million  without  adversely  affecting  fertility.  In this 
country  by reducing  sperm numbers  to 10 million  per dose it would be 
possible  to meet the demand  from the top dairy bulls during  the peak  
breeding  months  and thereby  greatly  improve  bull usage.  In 1983 a study  
was set up to compare  fertility  of Caprogen  diluent  containing  10 million  
sperm  per dose with a standard  fresh semen  diluent  containing  30 million  
sperm per dose.
The Caprogen  diluent  was made up at Moorepark  and distributed  to 
the five Munster  A.I. Centres.  The standard  diluent  was made up at each 
centre in the usual manner.  Semen dilutions  were based on obtaining  
an equal number  of inseminations  from a split ejaculate  from each bull 
under  test. Estimates  of sperm  density  were made based on colorimetric  
analysis.  In addition  to the diluent  comparisons  the non-return  rates for 
the same day and day after collection  were made. For the day of col­
lection (same day) semen was collected  from the bulls at 5.00 a.m.,  
processed  and delivered  to the other four centres  for bulls not standing  
at each centre. For the day after comparison  semen  was collected  at the 
usual time (11.00 a.m.), processed  and then used for inseminations  on 
the following  day. Semen  was distributed  in both diluents  using  the 0.25 
ml Cassau  straw. Both diluents  were transported  on ice at 5°C and the 
straws  were coded as follows : (a) day after Caprogen  diluent,  (b) day 
after standard  diluent,  (c) same day Caprogen  diluent,  (d) same day 
standard  diluent. The objective  was to obtain approximately  9,000  
inseminations  per treatment  in order  to have an 80% chance  of detecting  
a 2% difference  which  would  be significant  at the 5% level.
Results  and Discussion
Non-return  rates were standardised  between  all centres  and the data 
were analysed  on the basis of a three month non-return  rate to first 
service  only. During  the trial a total of 27 bulls were used, but not all 
bulls were used across all centres  or diluents.  Thus, in an attempt  to 
reduce  the variation  between  bulls and centres  the data were reduced  to 
information  from 8 bulls which  were used across  all centres  and diluents.  
In Table 3 the total number  of inseminations  for each centre and each  
diluent  are given. In Table 4 the 3-month  non-return  rate by bull and
77
Table 3
Reduced  set data (8 bulls). Total number  of cows inseminated
Treatment
CentreTotal (1) 
Day after  
CAP STDSame day 
CAP STD Total
Galtee 1315 1203 812 758 4088
Ballyclough 1532 1440 565 603 4140
Bandon 769 679 503 501 2470
Castleisland 1151 1022 464 406 3043
Clarecastle 409 366 167 308 1250
TOTAL 5176 4728 2511 2576 14991
Caprogen  Diluent containing  10m 1. sperm
Standard  Diluent containing  30m. , sperm
by centre  are given.  A bull by eentre  by diluent  interaetion  was found,  in 
that some bulls had a signifieantly  higher  non-return  rate in some centres  
relative  to others. In Table 5 the non-return  rates for standard  and 
Caprogen  on same day and day after eollection  are given.
Table 4
Three  month  non-return  rate (reduced  data set) for each bull and Centre
Bull
Galtee BallyclCentre
Bandon  Castleil Clarecas Total
BBT 75.04 76.25 77.25 78.25 74.52 76.19
COL 75.23 71.70 71.30 71.75 74.19 73.08
CCR 73.62 76.06 81.52 74.22 68.83 74.72
KMK 76.73 73.81 82.42 74.12 66.30 74.72
IBB 75.73 69.93 74.46 71.51 68.83 73.00
SAK 76.30 74.44 75.29 81.10 75.63 76.85
EJA 74.69 78.69 75.70 77.25 85.54 77.43
TET 73.30 74.65 72.90 71.43 76.38 73.37
TOTAL  75.17  74.81  75.51
Bull X Centre  Interaction  (P<0.05)75.45 75.28 75.19
78
Table 5
3 month  non-return  rate (reduced  data set) for Standard  and Caprogen  diluent  on 
same day and day after collection
Diluent Standard Caprogen Total
Day
Same 76.24 75.15 75.70
After 75.78 74.15 74.93
TOTAL 75.94 74.48 75.19
Standard  vs. Caprogen  1.44 (P<0.05)
Same vs. After N.S.
The standard  diluent  was significantly  better by 1.44% relative  to the 
Caprogen  diluent. However,  this also depended  on which centre and
which bull was being considered. This interaction  effect is illustrated  in
Table 6 where for example  bull GOL at Bandon A.I. Centre had a
significantly  higher  non-return  rate for standard  diluent  than for Capro ­
gen. However,  this effect  was not apparent  in other  centres.
Table 6
Interaction  effects  of bull, diluent,  and centre,  on 3-month  non return  rate
Bull Standard Caprogen
GOL Bandon 80.4 65.1
CCR Clarecastle 94.0 59.4
TET Galtee 79.8 66.8
SAK Bandon 67.0 81.2
LBB Ballyclough 75.4 61.0
BRT Castleil 74.5 82.3
On average 75.94 74.48
Diff. 1.46 (P<0.05)
The low non-return  rate with the Caprogen  diluent  in this particular  
trial is not consistent  with the evidence  from other countries.  In New 
Zealand  no differences  were found  between  standard  diluent  and Capro ­
gen diluent  even with sperm numbers  as low as five million  (Shannon,  
1968). Similar  results  were found in the U.K. using 5 million  sperm in 
0.5 ml Cassau  straws  (Anon.,  1967/68).  In our studies  one of the factors  
which  may have had an adverse  effect on the Caprogen  diluent  was the 
fact that it was stored at 5°C when it is best suited to ambient  tempera ­
79
ture (I3-24°C).  In addition  there is some suggestion  that the nitrogen  
gas (an essential  componnt  of the Caprogen  diluent) may escape 
through  the PVC seals at the ends of the straw. A further  experiment  is 
currently  underway  taking  these factors  into account.
In conclusion,  while the 1.44% drop in N.R.R. was found to be 
statistically  significant  in this trial, it must be weighed  up against  the 
greater  utilisation  of top quality  bulls which can be achieved  through  
using this diluent.
Acknowledgements
The author  wishes  to thank Mr. T. Condon,  Mr. B. O’Reilly,  and Mr. 
T. O’Connor  for skilled technical  assistance  and the managers  and 
personnel  of the A.I. centres  for their cooperation.
Reference.s
Anon. (1967/68).  A year ’s experience  of Caprogen  and Caprogen/Catalese  Diluent  
at Penrith.  M.M.B.  Rep. of Breed,  and Prod. Orgn. No. 18 : 126-131.
Almquist,  J. O. (1976).  Limit thawing  time to avoid cold shock.  A.I. Digest  24(3):  
17.
Almquist,  J. O., Rosenberger,  J. L. and Branas,  R. J. (1979).  Effect of thaw time 
in warm water on fertility  of bovine  spermatazoa  in plastic  straws.  J. Dairy Sci. 
62 : 772-775.
Davidovic,  A., Borjanovic,  S., Cvetkov,  B. and Kuezevic,  D. (1972).  Some charac ­
ters of deep frozen semen and new possibilities  of its use. Anim. Breed.  Abstr.  
40 : 72.
De Abreu,  R. M., Bemdtson.  W. E., Smith,  R. L. and Pickett,  B. W. (1979).  Effect 
of post-thaw  warming  on viability  of bovine  spermatozoa  thawed  at different  
rates in French  straws.  J. Dairy Sci. 62 : 1449-1454.
Forde, B. and Gravir,  K. (1973). A uniform  method  of thawing  frozen semen.  
Norwegian  Vet. 85 ; 146. (Anim.  Breed. Abstr.  42 : 432, 1974).
Luyet, B. J. and Keane, J., Jr. (1955). A critical temperature  range apparently  
characterised  by sensitivity  of bull semen  to high freezing  velocity.  Biodynamica,  
7, 281.
Robbins,  R. K., Gerber,  L. E. and Saacke,  R. G. 1972. Influence  of thaw rate on 
the maintenance  of the acrosomal  cap. J. Anim.  Sci. 35 : 253 (Abstr.).
Rugg,  C. D., Berndston,  W. E., Mortimer,  R. G. and Pickett,  B. W. (1977).  Effect 
of thawing  procedures  on fertility  of bovine spermatozoa  frozen in 0.25 ml. 
straws.  J. Anim.  Sci. 44 : 2 : 266-270.
Salisbury,  G. W. and Van Demark,  N. L. (1961).  Physiology  of reproduction  and 
artificial  insemination  of cattle. Freeman  and Co., San Francisco  and London.  
639 pp.
Shannon,  P. (1968).  Advances  in semen  dilution.  Pros. N.Z. Soc. Anim. Prod. 28 : 
23-31.
80
trust
NET
EEC fertiliser  !
theONIY
Mshnitrogen
81
Dairying  — Where  Now  ?
J. WALSH
The Agricultural  Institute,  Moorepark,  Fermoy,  Co. Cork.
The Irish dairying  industry  is examined  in terms of its competitive  
strength  and its suitability  as a major  focus of national  industrial  invest ­
ment. The industry  review  is to a background  of changing  national  and 
international  business  policies,  an economy  in continuing  recession  and a 
dairying  industry  with, among  other factors,  low income  levels on many  
farms and great uncertainties  about the future  market  arrangements  for 
its present  product  range.
The milk production  industry  in Ireland is apparently  becoming  
concentrated  in a small number  of dairy farms  where  increasing  produc ­
tion efficiency  is indicated  by good technical  performance,  low costs of 
production,  efficiency  in the use of major production  inputs  and expan ­
sion despite  milk prices that are lower than those in most competing  
Europiean  countries.  Although  the problem  of low income  remains  on 
many dairy farms,  the efficiency  of many producers  and the considerable  
financial  incentives  to increase  technical  improvement  in milk production  
methods,  suggests  a considerable  potential  competitiveness  in the milk 
production  industry  in Ireland.
This competitiveness  is in contrast  to the Telesis conclusion  that 
“. . . Irish dairy farming  . . . is . . . uncompetitive  . . . rnaking  the total 
dairy product  uncompetitive ”, which if accepted  in national  industrial  
policy  would  greatly  reduce  the possibility  of the dairying  industry  being 
a major  focus of indigenous  industry  investment.
In milk processing,  it is recognised  that there is already  considerable  
innovation  in the process  efficiency  by which major milk commodity  
products  are manufactured.  However,  experience  in other industries  
suggests  that there is an important  distinction  between  the manufacturing  
focus of product  as distinct  from process  innovation.  Plants that are 
centred  on process  innovation  find it exceedingly  difficult,  and generally  
inadvisable,  to focus on both strategies  at the same time within  a single  
plant. It is suggested  that there is a need for a re-directiori  of dairy  
industry  investment,  manufacturing  structure,  marketing  and research  
and development,  if attempts  to steer the dairy industry  towards  product  
innovation  are to be successful.  Many recent studies  have examined  
changes  in the technical,  social and demographic  structures  of dairy  
farming  in Ireland  and some have projected  these into predictions  of 
future changes.  Also, especially  in the past year, the future of Li^ 
dairying  has been discussed  mainly  in terms  of the instabilities  of E.E.C.  
marketing  arrangements  for dairy produce.
Continuing  these themes,  it is proposed  here to examine  in some  
detail  the industrial  policies  of the Irish dairying  industry.  The proposed
82
industrial  strategy  is that Ireland  develop,  within  the dairying  industry,  
a successful  indigenous  industry  based on traded products  that have 
competitive  advantage  over international  competitors.  Is national  invest ­
ment in the dairying  industry  worthwhile,  and if so, how should the 
investment  be directed  ? The criteria used is an economic  one. If 
competitive  advantages  in dairying  do not exist; or cannot  be created,  
then development  of indigenous  industry  must pursue  alternative  strat­
egies, both in its export  businesses  and in the capital  investment  used to 
support  these businesses.  Capital  thvestment  in dairying  is thus seen as 
an aid to national  economic  development  and such investment  is seen 
as being  worthwhile  only if it can support export  business  on a continuing  
basis.
National  Industrial  Policy
The period  since 1979 has been characterised  by extreme  environmental  
uncertainties  and rapid structural  changes  in both the world  and the Irish 
economies.  New competitive  strategies  are being evolved  with major  
re-alignment  of previously  held values in almost all of the economic  
structures  of nations,  especially  in the western  world. In Ireland,  the 
continuing  economic  recession  since the 1970 ’s has brought  many prob ­
lems, including  inflation,  overseas  borrowing,  balance  of payments  diffi-' 
culties,  business  failures  and particularly,  unemployment.  In response,  
national priorities  increasingly  centre on the necessity  to provide  
employment,  especially  for an expanding  labour  force of young  people. 
These priorities  emphasise  especially  the requirement  for the establish ­
ment of new businesses  in Ireland, especially  where Ireland has 
competitive  advantages.  Economic  difficulties  have been felt especially  
in the industrial  sectors  in Ireland  but within  agriculture  also there is a 
growing  realisation  that previous  priorities  in food production  may be 
untenable  in the future.
In February  1982, the Telesis  Consultancy  Group suggested  the re­
alignment  of investment  priorities  in Ireland  with a substantial  reduction  
of average  grant levels for many foreign  owned  firms located  in Ireland  
and for indigenous  companies  in non-traded  businesses.  Additionally,  it 
suggested  “a substantial  increase  in funds  devoted  to the development  of 
indigenous  export buinessses ”. It was suggested  that the proportion  of 
funds allocated  to indigenous  export or skilled sub-supply  firms be 
increased  from a level of less than 40% over the past 10 years  to 50% in 
1985 and 75% in 1990. The Consultancy  Group  concluded  that “new 
joint efforts  should  be undertaken  to oversee  the development  of Ireland ’s 
resource-based  industries ”. Although  the Telesis  Group  did not study  
the agricultural  industry  directly,  and did not propose  the form of a 
co-ordinated  effort, they concluded  that “we are certain that a great  
opportunity  will continue  to be lost if nothing  is done ”. However,  they 
did suggest  that “inefficient  farming  practices  prevents  the country  from 
realising  its full income  potential  in beef and dairy products.  Since farm  
costs are between  70 and 90% of almost  all traded products  in dairying
83
and beef, this penalty  is particularly  severe;  it results  in an uncompetitive  
final product  and in low prices to farmers  who cannot maintain  a 
satisfactory  standard  of living ”.
Despite perceived  difficulties,  the dairying  industry  provides  the 
greatest  possibility  for development  of new indigenous  business  in 
Ireland  based on natural  resources  and with considerable  possibilities  of 
competitive  advantages  in world markets.  Thus,  the Telesis  Consultancy  
Group  acknowledged  that “the Irish dairy processing  industry  possesses  
facilities  considered  to be fully competitive  in Europe  . . . cheese . . . 
offers opportunities  for price premium  through  product  differentiation ”.
Milk Production
There are at present  rapid changes  in the structure  and concentration  
of milk production  on Irish dairy  farms. Despite  a 40% reduction  in the 
number  of milk suppliers  between  1961 and 1981, the quantity  of milk 
supplied  to creameries  increased  almost  2.5-fold  over 1961 values  and 
the quantity  of milk per supplier  increased  4 times.  In the period  between 
1972 and 1981, the land area devoted  to dairying  in Ireland  decreased  
from 2.7 million  acres to 2.6 million  acres although  milk production  
increased  by nearly 50% in the same period. There has been a com­
parable  change  in the structure  of milk supplies  (Table 1). Whereas,  in 
1966, suppliers  of less than 5,000 gallons comprised  76.8% of all 
suppliers  and supplied  40.7% of all milk, the proportion  of suppliers  in 
this group in 1981 was estimated  to be 36.8% and they supplied  only 
7% of the total manufacturing  milk. Similarly,  the number  of suppliers
Table 1
Structure  of milk supplies  by level of supply
Supply
(gallon)1966
Suppliers  Supply1976  1981
Suppliers  Supply  Suppliers  Supply
Per cent
2,500 and less 53.6 18.7 27.9 3.7 18.9 1.9
2,501 - 5,000 23.2 22.0 21.5 9.4 17.9 5.1
5,001 - 10,000 16.1 31.1 22.6 19.3 22.3 12.6
10,001  - 15,000 4.7 15.5 11.3 15.8 12.5 11.9
15,001  - 20,000 1.5 7.4 6.5 13.1 8.6 11.7
20,001-25,000  ' 3.8 10.2 5.3 9.3
25,001  - 30,000 0.9 5.3 2.2 7.3 4.1 8.6
30,001  - 40,000 2.4 9.4 4.5 12.4
40,000  -1- 1.8 11.8 5.8 26.6
Source  : Kearney,  B. “Potential,  performance  and constraints  in Irish agriculture” . 
Agricultural  Science  Association  Conference,  Sept. 16th, 1982.
84
producing  over 20.000  gallons  annually  increased  from less than 1 % in 
1966 to 19.7% in 1981. By 1981, it was estimated  that 57% of Irish 
manufacturing  milk supplied  was produced  by only 20% of milk 
suppliers,  or about 13,000  dairy farmers.  At the top of the production  
scale, the contrast  is even more striking.  It is estimated  that, in 1981,  
3,700 (or 5.8% of total) milk producers  supplied  26.6% of all manufac ­
turing  milk supplies.  In that year, there were a total of 64,400  suppliers  
in Ireland.
There have been, apparently,  equally  dramatic  changes  in the tech­
nology  of the milk supply  pattern  (Table  2). Herd size increases  have  
l^en concurrent  with dramatic  changes  in the efficiencies  of milk produc ­
tion as measured  by two important  criteria;  that is, milk yield per cow 
and stocking  intensity.  Similarly,  there has been an increased  specialis ­
ation in dairying  in the farms holding  the bigger  herds. It is apparent  
that the adoption  of new technology  has effectively  removed  the limit to 
size in dairy farming  (1). These  changes  in the milk production  indu.stry  
are similar to those which have dramatically  altered the Irish pig 
production  industry  in recent  years. Present  indications  in dairy farming,  
and the precedent  afforded  in the patterns  of pig produetion,  suggest  a 
continuing  concentration  of the milk production  industry  into fewer and 
more efficient  dairy farms with a concurrent  emphasis  by suppliers  on 
technical  information  associated  with profit maximisation.
Table 2
Relationships  between  dairy herd size and other  variables  in 1972/1973  and
1980/1981
Herd size <10 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 50-b
Farm size (acres) :
1972/1973 40 70 94 110 148 168
1980/1981 44 66 84 100 119 157
Milk yield (gal/cow) :
1972/1973 491 561 604 639 658 665
1980/1981 564 615 709 731 738 789
Stocking  rate (ac/LU) :
1972/1973 2.41 2.03 1.74 1.55 1.67 1.40
1980/1981 2.26 1.95 1.72 1.56 1.46 1.30
Dairy output  as % total :
1972/1973 41 48 52 55 60 61
1980/1981 35 51 61 64 65 67
Cows —% of total grazing  LU’s : 
1972/1973  34 43 48 51 50 55
1980/1981 32 46 53 56 59 61
Kearney,  B. (as in Table I).
85
Over the past 10 years,  Irish agriculture  has been characterised  by an 
increasing  division  into two groups,  one relatively  prosperous  (especially 
within the dairying  sector) and oite stagnating  or even decreasing  in 
family  farm income  (2). Numerically  the latter group  has predominated  
and it has been estimated  that most of the growth  in Irish agriculture  
that has occurred  between  1976 and 1981, has come from no more than 
about  25% of farms.
Within the dairying  industry  also, there has been a wide disparity  
between  farmers  in income  and in farm output. When specialist  dairy  
farms  in the 1981 Farm  Management  Survey  of the Agricultural  Institute  
were ranked  in order according  to their gross margin  per acre, those in 
the top third of the rank produced  nearly twice as much per man as 
farms  ranked  in the bottom  third (3). This difference  was found  through ­
out the range of farm sizes from 30 to 150 acres. Farmers  in the top 
third also produced  more than twice as much milk per acre as those in 
the bottom  third. Furthermore,  in a study of low income  farms  (4), it is 
concluded  that in a large proportion  of farms,  change  is unlikely  in the 
future. This was due to “the existence  of some deeply entrenched  
obstacles  to the generation  of higher  income  among  low income  farmers ”.
Despite  low income  levels on many farms,  there were, in 1983, still 
considerable  financial  rewards  for increased  milk production  efficiency  
on those dairy farms where profit maximisation  was an important  ob­
jective. Present  average  dairy farm size is about  57 statute  acres. Recent  
data (Table  3) showed  a net margin  of 1R17,294  punts  to service  capital  
investment  and reward  labour  on a 50-acre  dairy farm using 1983 prices, 
a stocking  rate of 1 cow/acre,  and a milk yield per cow of 1,050 gallons;  
a technical  value achieved  on many  farms  in Ireland  (5). This represents
Table 3
E.stimated  net margins  at ditt'erent  levels  of intensification  on a 50 acre 
free-draining  farm (£)
2.0 ac/LU 1.5 ac/LU 1.0 ac/LU
Gallons/cow
650 2,296 3,975 7,424
750 3,530 5,562 9,891
850 4,664 7,148 12,358
950 5,998 8,734 14,826
1050 7,231 10,320 17,294
Source  : MacCarthy,  D. (5). “Financial  Returns  from Dairying ”, Milk Production  
Seminar,  Moorepark,  May 24-26, 1983.
a net margin  of IR412 punts per cow or a return to service  labour  of 
about IR300  per cow (or IR 12,600  per 50 acre farm) after allowing  for 
servicing  of 1R700 punts per cow space borrowed  against working  
capital and other capital requirements.  Similarly,  Crosse (6) reported
86
that the average  dairy farm in his recording  of Dairy Herd Management  
Information  Schemes  in 1983 had margins  of IR479  punts  per acre over 
feed and fertiliser  costs (Table  4). These farms  had average  milk yields  
per cow of 991 gallons  and each acre of the farm carried  1.02 livestock 
units. Since feed and fertilisers  may be expected  to account  for about  
half of total dairy farm fixed and variable  costs, the recorded  profit 
margins  amount  to a net margin  per acre of IR240 punts, to service 
capital  and labour  requirements.  A total of 139 creamery  milk herds  
recorded  in the l.C.I. Dairymaid  recording  scheme (7) in 1982 had 
margins  over meals and fertiliser  of 1R423 punts per acre, giving an 
expected  total net margin  of about 1R10,600  punts on a 50-acre  dairy  
farm. The data indicate  considerable  financial  returns  at attainable  
performance,  even on relatively  small farms.
Table 4
Performance  and margins  on 41 dairy farms (1983)
Milk yield  
(gals/cow)Stocking  rate 
(LU/ac)Margin  over
F & Fa (£)
Mean all herds 991 1.02 479
— Range 819-1370 0.73-1.24 313-719
Curtins  Farm (AFT) 1074 1.24 660
a Margin  over feed and fertiliser  costs
Source  : S. Crosse,  Moorepark  (Dairymis  Herds)
It is suggested  that concepts  of production  efficiencies  in a growing  
section of the dairying  industry  differs considerably  from the Telesis 
conclusion  that “. . . Irish dairy farming  ... is still generally  uncom ­
petitive  and has a negative  impact  on processing  costs,  making  the total  
dairy product  uncompetitive ”. It is believed  that estimates  of milk  
production  competitive  advantage  based on national  average  values  are 
only an extremely  limited  measure  of the potential  competitive  abilities  
of the industry.  Average  production  efficiencies  in dairy farming  are, 
arguably,  more demonstrative  of the origins  and history  of Irish dairy  
farming  practices  and land tenure arrangements  as well as market  
influences  rather  than as a measure  of potential  competitiveness.  Perhaps  
a more realistic  measure  of competitiveness  might be the extremely  low 
cost of milk production  in Ireland  relative  to the European  competitors  
(Table 5), the considerable  development  of the production  industry  
despite  the lowest  milk producer  prices  in the E.E.C.  (5) or documented  
efficiency  in the use of the major  production  inputs  (9). Inefficiencies  in 
milk production  practices  in Ireland  are already  reflected  in a milk price  
that is only about  80 to 90% of that available  to milk producers  in most  
other E.E.C. countries  and it is not correct  to further  project  these
87
inefficiencies  (as the Telesis  Report  did) as a threat to the competitive ­
ness of the whole dairying  industry.  Thus, for instance,  Reardon  (10) 
has contended  that had the Telesis  Consultants  had the opportunities  to 
see how productive  some farms were relative  to others  in Ireland,  they 
could well have concluded  that growth  of output  depended  on “giving  
highly  productive  farmers  more opportunity  to expand ”.
Table 5
Estimated  production  cost per kg of milk in the seven regions  of the EEC studied  
1977-1980,  excluding  family  labour,  interest  charges  and capital  charges
W. Germany  
DMFrance
FFNetherlands Belgium
BFUK
£STGIreland
£IRDenmark
KR
1977 0.122 0.086 0.122 0.077 0.098 0.055 0.122
1978 0.119 0.088 0.121 0.073 0.101 0.051 0,1551979 0.121 0.092 0.129 0.076 0.116 0.063 0.1251980 0.121 0.099 0.137 0.080 0.139 0.070 0.134
Source  ; Kelly, P. W. “Some developments  in dairy farming  in the EEC ”. Con­
ference  Economics  and Rural Welfare  Research  Centre,  An Foras Taluntais,  
Dublin,  Dec. 1st, 1981.
In summary,  the trends  outlined  suggest  a continuing  concentration  of 
milk production  on a decreasing  number  of dairy farms  and an increas- 
ingly competitive  milk production  industry  in Ireland.  On these farms,  
profits  will be maximised  by increasing  milk production  efficiencies.  The 
farms  will parallel  a further  sector  where social,  structural,  educational  
or other reasons  prevent  farm profit maximisation  being a critical  meas ­
ure of success. It is suggested,  however,  that it was failure  to measure  
the growing  competitive  strength  of the milk production  industry  in 
Ireland  that led the Telesis  Group to erroneously  conclude  that there 
were not potential  competitive  structures  in the Irish milk production  industry.
Dairy  Processing
The potential  for efficiency  in the processing  of commodity  milk 
products  in Ireland  and the progress  made in diversification  of commod ­
ity products  is now recognised.  The Telesis  Consultancy  Group saw 
competitive  advantages  for export  marketing  in the size, modernity  and 
investmerit  that has already  taken place in Irish cooperative  processing 
plants. Similarly,  there has been considerable  investment  and apparent  
success  in the research  and technology  servicing  of process  efficiency.
In contrast,  there remains  a critical need for product  diversification  
programmes  towards  consumer  products.  The main dairy products  
manufactured  in Ireland  are butter,  skim milk powder  and cheese  (Table  
6). The product  mix has not changed  markedly  in the past 5 years. The
88
Table 6
Production  of major  Irish dairy products  (tonnes)
Year
1978 1979 1980 1981 1982
Butter 118110 121650 111050 111591 132281
Butteroil 9762 8900 12091 8484 2454
Cheese 49640 57500 48942 52743 56325
Whole  milk powder 28380 19152 34600 35840 38778
Chocolate  crumb 40804 41400 33020 30651 36218
Cream 5295 6083 9638 12370 15919
Skim milk powder 122541 148000 140464 141298 149576
Casein 11416 13300 16918 14483 19350
Source  : Annual  Reports,  An Bord Bainne
Table 7
Trends in whole  milk utilisation (“) (percentage  of total)
1978 1979 1980 1981 1982
Butter 70.0 70.8 66.3 66.7 71.8Butteroil 6.8 6.3 8.6 5.9 1.6
Cheese 12.9 15.1 12.9 13.9 13.2
WMP 5.4 3.1 6.6 7.0 6.7
Chocolate  crumb 2.8 2.7 2.0 2.0 2.2Cream 1.4 1.6 2.6 1.6 1.4
Others 0.7 0.4 1.0 2.9 3.1
100 100 100 100 100
(“)Util:sation  represents  milk intake  at creameries  plus net transfer  from the 
liquid sector
Source  : An Bord Bainne,  Annual  Reports
longer  term trends  in utilisation  of whole  milk (Table  7) and skim milk 
(Table 8) indicate  a continuing  dependence  on these products.  The 
cheese  manufactured  has been almost  exclusively  of the cheddar  variety.
The necessity  for product  diversification  in the dairying  industry  was 
a major  theme in the Telesis  Report  and it had been recognised  also by 
cooperatives  (11), Bord Bainne  (12), and by dairy farmers  (13). Prior to 
1981, I.D.A. policies  for the dairy industry  were to encourage  the 
establishment  of process  e fficient plants. However,  recognising  the 
necessity  for product  development,  IDA policy in 1983 stated (14) that 
“. . . dairy cooperatives  will now have to commit  resources  to product
89
Table 8
Trends  in skim milk utilisation  (percentage  of total)
Product 1979 1980 1981 1982
Skim milk powder  54.5
Casein  16.5
Animal  feed 15.7
Human  food  5.9
Pig feed 6.4
Standardisation  0.154.0
22.0
10.4
4.8
8.1
0.156.0
19.4
12.0
3.9
7.9 
0.152.3
21.3 
11.9
6.2
7.9
0.5
Source  : Annual  Reports,  An Bord Bainne
development  and marketing  and we will assist them with financial  and 
other aids . . . but we will not assist the development  of increased  
capacity  to produce  commodity  products ”. There  was no novelty  in these 
objectives  since the necessity  for product  innovation  had been advanced  
in the dairying  industry  since at least the mid- 1970 ’s. In early 1977, the 
Bord Bainne five year plan emphasised  the necessity  to reduce  dependence  
of the dairying  industry  on butter. The McKinzie  Report  (15) stated  that 
Ireland  had to change  from a commodity  base to one of marketing.
The developments  in the dairying  industry  in the 10 years since 1973 
suggest  a withdrawal  from product  innovation  and product  marketing  
rather  than an active programme  in this area as had been envi^ged  m 
1973. Research  on new products  has been greatly  reduced,  and by 1983,  
new products  that had contributed  meaningfully  to diversification  of the 
dairying  product  portfolio  were more notable  for their rarity  and because 
they had their origins  in small or private  firms  or abroad.
An understanding  of why Irish dairying  did not successfully  diversify 
its product  portfolio  is critical  to the future investment  strategies  of the 
milk processing  industry.
The Dairy  Food Industry
Irish imports  of food in 1982 (753 m. Irish punts)  exceeded  the value 
of all Irish dairy exports  (IR 710 m. punts). The dairying  industry,  
arguably  the most important  industry  in the nation  and certainly  a major  
source of exports,  was especially  vulnerable  to trading  influences.  By 
1983 world markets  for dairy produce  were extremely  difficult. Irish 
exports  to the U.K.,  the major  Irish market,  had remained  static,  despite 
reduced  market  returns  while the value of butter sales was expected  to 
be somewhat  less than half the sales in the mid-1970 ’s (about  40,000  
tonnes  annually).  Also, it was apparent  that the Irish dairying  industry  s 
combined  product  mix and marketing  arrangements  might be approach-  
ing serious  difficulties.  In 1983, it was estimated  that half of all skim  
milk pHDwder  and a third of all butter  produced  in Ireland  would  be sold 
into E.E.C.  Intervention  Stocks. Thus,  Ireland  is particularly  vulnerable
90
to those influences  which,  by mid-1983,  increasingly  threatened  the value,  
if not the continued  existence  of the E.E.C. Intervention  system. All 
E.E.C.  countries,  except  Italy and the U.K.,  produced  butter  in excess  of 
their requirements  in the period  to 1978. By mid-1983,  it was apparent  
that the United  Kingdom  market  for butter  had become  practically  self- 
sufficient  due to increased  United Kingdom  production.  New Zealand  
imports  and falling  consumption.  Thus,  in summer  1983, it was increas ­
ingly apparent  that considerable  changes  had occurred  in the dairy food 
markets  of the E.E.C.  without  apparent  parallel  changes  in Ireland.
Organisational  structure  of the Irish milk processing  industry
Although  multi-national  food companies  are extremely  big by Irish 
standards,  the E.E.C.  dairy food industry  is characterised  by a big num­
ber of small firms (16). The total number  of dairy food firms in the 
E.E.C.  in 1976 was 1,568 with 455 firms in France,  341 in Germany,  320 
in the United  Kingdom,  121 in the Netherlands  and 64 in Ireland.  As in 
Ireland,  the number  of dairy firms in the E.E.C.  is decreasing.  A total 
of 24% of firms ceased  production  between  1972 and 1976.
The size of milk processing  plants in Ireland  is big when compared  
with the dairying  manufacturing  units in other E.E.C. countries  (17). 
Annual  milk intake  per dairy in Ireland  (63,000  tonnes)  is comparable  to 
that in the Netherlands  (75,000  tonnes)  and greatly  in excess  of E.E.C.  
average  values (12,300  tonnes). The number  of creameries  in Ireland  
decreased  from 169 in 1960 to 82 in 1976. This figure had fallen still 
further  by 1980 to 48 cooperative  intake points  representing  20 manu ­
facturing  companies.  In 1970, the five largest  cooperatives  handled  27% 
of the total milk for manufacturing  while in 1982, the largest  seven co­
operatives  processed  75% of the total milk for manufacturing  in Ireland.
Generally,  in 1983, dairy cooperatives  were engaged  in conglomerates  
of unrelated  businesses  to a degree which was even more pronounced  
than that used by other  large Irish companies.  Cooperatives  were involved  
in one dominant  business,  milk processing,  with many other unrelated  
businesses.  Most cooperatives  had separate  milk, animal  feed, fertiliser,  
stores  trading,  farming,  farm advice,  artificial  insemination  and occasion ­
ally, construction  and other operating  divisions.  The involvement  in 
non-dairy  business  was considerable.  Thus, in the 10 years to 1983 it 
was estimated  (18) that dairy cooperatives  had invested  approximately  
1R45 m. punts in new animal  feed manufacturing  plants.
Within  the milk processing  units, it was apparent  that the focus  of the 
dairying  industry  was on innovation  in process  techniques  and was, 
apparently,  less concentrated  on consumer  product  innovation  and its 
distinctive  market  focus  requirements.  Manufacturing  structures,  together  
with their research  and development,  investment,  and marketing  struc ­
tures, have been focussed  essentially  on the requirements  for process  
efficiency.  The particular  focus  of these activities  are quite distinct  from  
those which would be required  if the primary  attention  of the industry  
had been towards  consumer  products  as distinct  from process  innovation.
91
Studies  (Fig. I) on the rate of commercialisation  of milk product  and 
process  innovations  at Moorepark  (1961 to 1974) showed  that whereas  
there was a 48% success  rate to a total of 81 innovations,  only 35% of 
product  innovations  achieved  commercial  success  while 74% of process  
innovations  were successful.
Reasons  for difficulties  in product  innovation  in Irish dairying
In general,  difficulties  in product  diversification  in Irish dairying  have 
been ascribed  to E.E.C. market structures  which favour commodity  
seasonality  of Irish dairy milk supply  patterns  
(19). The former  dees not explain  the very considerable  product  diversi-  
fication  that has occurred  in other E.E.C.  countries  (20) whereas,  argu­
ably, the latter is a result rather  than a cause of the limited  industry  
product  range. There  are other  less tangible  factors  such as the particular  
equity  structures  of Irish cooperatives,  their already  high risk profile  (21) 
and low profitability  (22). Despite  these factors,  it is considered  that 
difficulties  in dairy product  innovation  in Ireland  may be understood  
primarily  in terms of the present  manufacturing  focus of Irish dairy  
processing  plants and the specific  competitive  strategies  that have been 
adopted  in large Irish cooperatives.  It is suggested  that the focus of 
large-scale  dairy cooperatives  in Ireland  has been so firmly  fixed on the 
process  efficiency  of large volume  dairy products,  as well as the problems
itianaging  diverse businesses,  that it would have been extremely  
difficult  to undertake,  without  a major realignment  of manufacturing  
structures  and priorities,  the additional  management  complexes  of a 
programme  of product  diversification.  While recognising  the special  
complexities  of the E.E.C.  dairy  food market,  studies  of industries  abroad  
suggest  the great difficulties  and the general  inadvisability  of mixing  
priorities  in product  and process  innovation  within  a single manufactur ­ing plant.
Firms that are structured,  for instance,  towards  continuous  flow or 
assembly  line process  technologies  in the production  of high volume  or 
commodity  products  find it extremely  difficult  to manage,  in parallel,  
the job shop or batch flow systems  that are usually  used for standard' 
low-volume  products.  The loss of production  focus leads to basic  
structural  inconsistencies  and inadequacies  with a series  of severe  internal  
problems.  New product  management  is a totally  different  concept  to 
mature  product  or commodity  manufacturing  and marketing.
The perceived  difficulties  of operating  manufacturing  units with mul­
tiple objectives  and too many (sometimes  conflicting)  separate  skills 
requirements  has renewed  attention,  in many  countries  on the concept  of 
focussed factories,  that is production  units concentrating  on a limited 
range of production  tasks. Typically,  the focussed  factory  limits its 
number  of process technologies  and products.  The focussed  factory  
concept  does not exclude new product development  in a process- 
orientated  manufacturing  unit, but sees such products  as being produced
92
in a separate  “Plant Within  a Plant ” (PWP),  the new product  manufac ­
turing  unit being separate  both organisationally  and physically  from the 
existing  facility. Each PWP can concentrate  on its particular  manufac ­
turing  tasks, using its own work force,  management  approaches,  produc ­
tion control,  organisation  structure,  etc. Quality  and volume  levels are 
not mixed,  work training  and incentives  have a clear  focus,  the engineer ­
ing, equipment  and materials  handling  are specialised  as needed. The 
segregation  of manufacturing  of various  products  is to recognise  that 
there are important  differences  in the criteria  by which manufacturing  
(and indeed labour skills, marketing  and R and D) are measured  for 
instance  between  new products,  those in the mature  stage of their cycle, 
and commodity/high  volume  processed  products.
It is generally  accepted  now that the mixing  of priorities  towards  new 
products  and towards  process  efficiency  in a single producton  unit, 
creates  a virtually  impossible  manufacturing  task (23). Studies  on in­
novation  in the United  States  (24) concluded  that “new products  which 
require  re-orientation  of corporate  goals or production  facilities  tend to 
originate  outside  organisations  devoted  to a ‘specific ’ production  system; 
or, if originated  within,  to be rejected  by them ”.
Process  and product  innovation  in the Irish Dairying  Industry
Generally  success  in process  innovation  is measured  by the degree  by 
which savings  are made in production  costs. In large-scale  Irish milk 
processing  factories,  these strategies  have been characterised  by high 
investment  in fuel conversion  schemes  and an emphasis  on efficient 
high-volume  processing  equipment.  Experiences  in other industries  sug­
gest that not only would  it be unusual  that product  innovation  would  be 
a feature of such processing  plants, but, in fact, it might have been 
unwise for the large processing  units to undertake  such innovation  in 
plants  already  focussed  on high volume  commodity  products.  It may well 
be that product  diversification  has been sought  in Ireland  from industry  
structures  that are unlikely,  in reason,  to be able to evolve innovative  
strategy  from what are essentially  mechanistic  structures;  and possibly 
necessarily  so considering  their size and the competitive  environment  in 
international  commodity  markets.
Difficulties  of large dairy cooperatives  in focussing  on new product  
innovations  must be expected  to be further  greatly  increased  by their  
already  wide focus  on diverse  businesses.  Certainly  the diversity  of skills 
required  to manage  present large cooperative  structures  must be so 
considerable  as to make exceptionally  difficult  the inclusion  of an 
additional  focus on product  development  and export  marketing  and the 
very considerable  addition  of skills that are required.  Factors  outlined,  
and consideration  of the special  environmental  conditions  required  for 
the management  of new product  innovation,  suggest  that an increasing  
product  range in Irish dairying  may be most likely to come now from 
other industry  structures.
93
Manufacturing  structures  for product  innovation
Consideration  of factors  affecting  innovation  do not suggest  that large 
scale c^peratives  cannot,  per se. be involved  in consumer  product  
innovatio^.  On the contrary,  they provide  some of the 
ments  in a product  development  programme,  namely,  competitive  size, 
management  expertise  and technical  skills. The special organisationa  
features  required  for the innovative  stage of new consumer  product  
development  however,  and their inconsistencies  with large-scale  P^cess  manufLturing,  suggest  that new product  development  by large cooper ­
atives should  be done in separate  manufacturing  units and subject  to a 
management  and organisational  structure  that is, at least 
independent  of the base manufacturing  complex.  Apart from separate  organisation,  investment,  marketing  and R f^^uS
development  subsidiaries  would require  an equity  Je
provide  barriers  against  the instabilities  often associated  with present  
Tabour relations  in large Irish cooperatives  This is to 
work stoppages  in a plant producing  commodities  may 
damaging  than one in a plant producing  a product  of hmited  life cycle  
for international  consumer  markets.  It is most likely that mi P*^® “ 
diversification  will come from small  cooperatives or
separate  plants  within  major milk processing  factor^s  and these trends  
are already  apparent  in the Irish dairying  industry Other  options  avail ­
able to large processing  plants might be some dis-aggregation  of un­
related business  so as to allow additional
technologies  which Irish dairying  plants know best, that is, the manu  
facturing  of milk products.
Innovation  and investment  in dairying
The specific  industrial  structures  that give rise to product  innovation  
have been established  now in the economies  of most developing  nations^  
In Ireland,  this is apparent  mainly in the IDA programme  for t e 
encouragement  of small industrial  firms. In the dairying  industry  it is 
apparent  in present  IDA policies  which  favour  product  diversification.  To^date,  however,  there has not been an investment  m the dairying  as 
distinct  from other Irish industries  in the skills and structures  which  wi 
be likelv to give rise to product  innovation.  Recognising  the distinctive  
industrial  structures  that are likely to encourage  mnovation  in ctmsumer  
dairy  products  and earlier considerations  of potential  production  efficiency  
on d^afry farms,  it is suggested  that such investment  would  be worthwhile
now.
(1)
(2)References
Kearney,  B. “Potential,  performance  and constraints  in Irish agriculture  . 
Agricultural  Science  Association  Conference,  September  16, IVSZ.
Commins,  P., Cox, P. G. and Curry,  J;.ment ”. National  Economic  and Social  Council,  Paper No. 41, 184 pp., 1978.
94
(3) “The barrier  to higher farm profitability  — inefficient  farmers  or defective  
land market  ? Farm and Food Research,  An Foras  Taluntais,  Dublin,  p. 43, 
April, 1983.
(4) Kelleher,  C. and O'Hara,  P. “Adjustment  problems  of low-income  farmers ”. 
An Foras Taluntais,  Dublin,  pp. 81, 1978.
(5) MacCarthy,  D. “Financial  returns  from dairying ”. Milk Production  Seminar,  
Moorepark,  May 24th, 1983.
(6) Crosse,  S. “Management  Information  Systems  for Dairy Farms  (DAIRYMIS  
II)”. Milk Production  Seminar,  Moorepark,  May 24th, 1983.
(7) “Dairymaid  Results,  1982”. I.C.l. Ireland Ltd., 5/9 Sth. Frederick  Street,  
Dublin  2.
(8) Keane,  M. and Pitts, E. “A comparison  of producer  milk prices  in Europe ”. 
An Foras Taluntais,  Dublin,  129 pp., December,  1981.
(9) Higgins,  J. “Relative  economic  efficiency  of Irish farms ”. 9th Annual  
Conference,  Economics  and Rural Welfare Research  Centre, An Foras  
Taluntais,  Dublin,  p. 79, November  30th, 1982.
(10) Riordan,  E. B. “The barrier  to higher  farm productivity —inefficient  farmers  
or defective  land market  ?” Farm and Food Research,  An Foras Taluntais,  
Dublin,  p. 43, April, 1983.
(11) McCarrick,  J. “Organisational  aspects  of diversification  in the dairy indus ­
try”. Society  of Dairy Technology,  Conference  on Diversification  in the 
Dairy Industry,  Burlington  Hotel,  Dublin,  March  4th, 1980.
(12) Joyce, B. A. “Marketing  aspects  of diversification  in the dairy industry ”. 
Society  of Dairy Technology,  Conference  on Diversification  in the Dairy  
Industry,  Burlington  Hotel, Dubln,  March  4th, 1980.
(13) O’Keeffe,  J. Annual  Report,  An Bord Bainne,  Dublin,  p. 4, 1978.
(14) Henry,  M. “What  the IDA will and will not do for you”. Co-Op Ireland  
p. 15, July, 1983.
(15) McKinsey,  “A marketing  opportunity  for agricultural  products  beyond  the 
farm gate”. Bank of Ireland,  Dublin,  1977.
(16) “Food Industry  in the European  Economic  Community ”, Commission  of 
European  Communities,  Brussels,  108 pp., February,  1981.
(17) “EEC Dairy Facts and Figures,  1982”. Milk Marketing  Board, Thames  
Ditton,  Surrey,  England,  pp. 193, September,  1982.
(18) Barry, J. “Co-operatives  invest IR 45 m. in feed plants ”. Co-Op.  Ireland,  
April, 1983.
(19) “A strategy  for the development  of the Agricultural  Processing  Industry  in 
Ireland ”. Industrial  Development  Authority,  Dublin,  99 pp., June, 1982.
(20) Healy, J. R. “Role of Coras Trachtala ”. Society of Dairy Technology,  
Conference  on Diversification  in the Dairy Industry,  Burlington  Hotel,  
Dublin,  March  5lh, 1980.
(21) Cotter,  A. “Science  and Technology  in the Irish Food Processing  Industry ”. 
National  Board  of Science  and Technology,  Dublin,  99 pp., 1979.
(22) Condon,  S. “Adjusting  to a new food policy ”. Food, Ireland,  March/April1983.  It- ’
(23) Miller,  S. “Making  your plant managers  job manageable ”. Harvard  Business 
Review,  p. 69, January/February,  i983.
(24) Abernathy,  W. J. and Utterback,  J. M. “Patterns  of industrial  innovation ”. 
Innovation/Technology  Review,  p. 59.
95
The IDA Policy for the Dairy  
Industry  — A Programme  for 
Diversification
J. McKEON
National  Services  Division,  I.D.A.,  Dublin.
The IDA policy  for the dairy industry  is to encourage  more diversifica ­
tion in the industry  and help firms to undertake  a greater  degree of 
value added processing  than is the case at present. Financial  support  
will be particularly  focussed  on firms and projects  which involve  n^ 
products  and new market  development.  In contrast  aid will not be 
available  for projects  which merely involve increasing  or replacing  
capacity  for such products  as bulk butter  making,  milk powders,  casein  
or butteroil.
The breakdown  of products  produced  by the dairy sector in 1980 
together  with the targets  which IDA is seeking  to achieve  with the in­
dustry  over the next decade  are as follows :
Commodity  (butter,  casein,  powder)  
Value Added  Products1980
83%
17%1990 target  
65% 
35%
To encourage  the achievement  of these targets,  IDA ’s financial  aids will 
be directed  at helping  firms as follows :
-- to check out the feasibility  of new ideas and markets;
— to develop  or to modify  new products  or processes,
— to build and equip plants to process  and market  new value added
products.
This policy  was set out as part of IDA ’s consultative  document  on a 
strategy  for the food industry  published  in 1982. This paper  is presented  
as a further  contribution  to the consultative  process  on the future  of the 
dairy indusry.
International  Trade
The future of the Irish dairy industry  must be viewed  against  inter ­
national  trends including  trends  in milk supply  and m the demands  of 
the modern  consumer,  particularly  the EEC consumer.  Milk supplies 
have grown  steadily  in most advanced  economies  m recent  years wh 
at the same time demand  for many dairy products  has declined^  A 
result  of these trends  has been increased  Government  stockpiles  of dairy  
products.
96
In 1983 alone milk supplies  increased  substantially.  The increase  in 
the EEC was +3.8%.  in the USA +2.0%,  in Australia  the increase  
was +5.0%,  while in the USSR the increase  in the first six months  
was +13.0%.
Consumption  generally  has declined  in both the developed  and the 
developing  countries. The economic  recession  and changing  dietary  
patterns  have contributed  to the consumption  decline  in the developed  
countries  while such factors  as foreign  exchange  restrictions  and decline  
in oil revenues  have helped  in substantially  reducing  demand  in develop ­
ing countries.
World  dairy stocks  have increased  rapidly  as a result of these trends. 
In 1983 alone EEC and US stocks  increased  enormously.
EEC: Butter up 884,000
Skim Milk Powder up 1,000,000
US: Butter up 176,000
Cheese up 406,000
Most countries  are actively  seeking  ways to competitively  exploit  what ­
ever opportunities  can be identified  in the dairy sector. Competitiveness  
at all levels together  with attention  to consumer  requirements  will be 
necessary  for success  in what undoubtedly  is and will remain  for the 
foreseeable  future  a highly  competitive  sector. The Irish dairy industry  
must meet these challenges  if it is to have a viable future. It is with 
this in view that the IDA has decided  to concentrate  its funds,  expertise  
and facilities  in helping  dairy firms which seek out new product  oppor ­
tunities  and new market  outlets.
Ireland ’s Dairy  Industry
The Irish dairy industry  has 44 licensed  dairy processing  firms al­
though  64% of milk is handled  by the six largest  co-operatives.  Butter  
is the dominant  product  produced  by these firms followed  in a very 
poor second  place by cheese  (Table  1).
Table 1
Irish Whole  Milk Use (1983)
Butter  (with S.M.P.,  Ca.sein)
Cheese
Other% of total milk
80
11
9
Total milk production  has increased  by over 90% since 1970. In con­
trast with most EEC members,  Ireland ’s butter  production  has increased  
over this period while cheese production  has declined. Sales of inter ­
vention  products  now dominate  our exports.
97
Seasonality  of production  has remained  a major problem  with the 
increase  in milk output,  and processing  plants  now face a peak to valley 
ratio of 14:1. This compares  with the normal  European  peak to valley  
ratio of 2:1.
Average  milk yields in Ireland  have increased  rapidly  over the past 
decade  and are now at about 730 gallons  per annum. This represents  
84% of the average  of other EEC member  states as against  70% ten 
years ago.
The reliance  on butter and on intervention  sales together  with the 
seasonality  of production  and relatively  low average  yields are among 
the main issues which the Irish dairy industry  must address  if it is to 
compete  effectively  and win consumer  markets  from other dairy pro­
ducing  countries.
The Need for Diversification
The existing  product  range of the Irish dairy industry  must be viewed  
with concern  on at least three counts,  its mismatch  with the overall  
demand  of the EEC consumer,  the declining  trend in butter consump ­
tion, and the high dependence  of the sector  on intervention  products.
Ill contrasting  Ireland ’s dairy product  range with the demands  of the 
European  consumer,  as reflected  by European  production  patterns,  three  
facts stand out. our overdependence  on butter,  our low production  of 
cheese,  and our low diversification  into other dairy products  (Table  2).
Table 2
Whole  Milk Utilisation  in Europe
Ireland  (1983)
EEC average  (1982)  
Netherlands  (1982Butter
(S.M.P.,  Casein)
80
44
44Cheese
11
23
26Other
9
33
30
In The Netherlands  where the proportion  of milk going for liquid  
consumption  is lower than in Ireland  and where exports  are equally  
important,  the industry  has concentrated  26% of its manufacturing  milk 
into cheese  production  and 30% into a range of other dairy products.
The consumption  trends of butter in Europe  and world-wide  have 
been in decline  for a considerable  period. The US, for example,  has 
halved  its per capita consumption  since 1960. The decline  in Europe  
has been almost  as rapid according  to the GIRA  Study of the markets  
in the UK, Germany  and France. Since 1970 the annual  per capita  
decline  in these markets  has been 1.8% and GIRA  forecast  this annual  
decline  to continue  at about 1.5% to 1990. Special  actions  by the UK 
Mik Marketing  Board have aggravated  the problem  for Irish butter  
with the result of significantly  reducing  the opportunity  for Irish butter  
exports  to that market.
98
In contrast  with butter the consumption  of cheese is increasing  
steadily  m Europe. GIRA  estimate  that the growth  rates of the past 
decade  should  continue  for the main types of cheese  as follows ;
Natural  Cheeses  
Hard
Semi Hard  
Blue Vein 
Soft 
FreshAnnual  Growth  Rate  
’70 -’78 ’78 -’90
2.5%  2.0%
2.9%  3.1%
5.5% 0.3%
5.0%  5.8%
2.8% 2.3%
Since 1980 cheese  consumption  in Europe  has not been as buoyant  as 
previously  but the long term trends still point to the prospects  of con­
tinued  steady  growth.
Ireland  is the most directly  dependent  country  on intervention  pro­
ducts among  all EEC members.  This leaves  our dairy industry  increas ­
ingly dependent  on EEC level decisions  and also leaves it vulnerable  
to changes  in the CAP.
Possible  ways of undertaking  Diversification
Any diversification  drive must be based on a good understanding  of 
the marketplace  and on customer  requirements.  Given the huge dairy  
surpluses  which exist internationally  and with most countries  actively  
pursuing  diversification  policies  it is unlikely  that highly profitable  
new product  gaps will be easy to discover  here. The decisions  Boards  
are more likely  to have to face are on product  possibilities  which  involve 
risks and which show only modest  profit margins. It is imperative  
however,  that Co-Ops  actively  embark,  albeit in a smalt way initially,  
on a product  diversification  strategy.
A first step which  has obvious  attractions,  is to seek out joint ventures,  
or licensing  arrangements  with other firms,  either domestic  or overseas! 
There  are several  good examples  of this approach  in Ireland,  e.g. Water ­
ford and Sodema,  Town of Monaghan  and Mona. The IDA now has 
staff in its European  and US offices whose  sole function  is to seek out 
joint venture  and licensing  possibilities  for Irish firms. The IDA will 
work with Irish dairy firms who demonstrate  a serious  commitment  to 
this diversification  route and who have a clear idea of what they want  
and what they can contribute  to such a partnership.  Without  such a 
serious  commitment  both the company  and the IDA would be wasting  
time and resources.
The IDA would like to conclude  up to five joint venture  or licensing 
arrangements  during  1984 in the dairy sector. Towards  that end we are 
planning,  in conjunction  with dairy companies  interested  in joint ven­
99
tures and licensing,  to hold three major technology  drives to selected 
overseas  markets,  and companies  this year. One of the trips will be to 
the US and the other two will be to European  countries.
In addition  to seeking diversification  through  joint ventures  and 
licensing,  the larger dairy co-ops  should  seriously  consider  establishing  
their own research  and product  development  capability.  The IDA will 
provide  grant aid towards  the capital  costs of any eligible  buildings  and 
equipment  required  and in addition  will provide  up to 50% of eligible 
operating  expenses  in the product  development  work carried  out in the 
R & D facility. R & D units should be given clear responsibilities,  
targets  and resources.  To-date  the level of R & D carried  out by Irish 
dairy firms is far too low.
A central  body should  have prime responsibility  for dairy processing  
research  to support  the product  development  work of individual  firms. 
This body should  be equipped  as an operating  production  unit in the 
technologies  considered  most desirable  for the Irish industry. The 
facilities  available  in such countries  as The Netherlands  and Denmark  
could be examined  as possible  models  for Ireland.
A further  method  of diversification  which  has been little used to-date  
is the establishment  of new enterprise  companies  to exploit  new ideas in 
the dairy industry. The IDA believe  that mechanisms  should  be pro­
vided to allow for the establishment  of such companies  in the dairy  
sector  and plan to seek out such opportunities  in future.  Existing  co-ops 
would have to provide  milk to such projects  and, in addition,  could 
possibly  take an equity  participation.  The IDA would be interested  to 
hear from companies  or individuals  with new dairy product  ideas for 
export  markets  or for new segments  of the domestic  market.
Ideas  for Development
One major  gap in our dairy processing  sector  is in cheese  production.  
Cheese  has the attraction  of absorbing  large quantities  of milk and its 
consumption  is generally  increasing  across Europe. Since 1970 cheese  
production  and consumption  have both increased  by about 50% in the 
EEC but Ireland  has not captured  a share of this expanded  market.
The IDA participated  with An Bord Bainne in commissioning  the 
Boston  Consultancy  Group  to evaluate  the Irish cheddar  industry  and 
make recommendations  for its future. A draft of this study,  which the 
IDA would not accept as final, has been extensively  leaked and has 
been the subject  of much comment.  The IDA would  not agree with its 
draft conclusions  on diversification  opportunities  in cheese  nor on some  
other fundamental  issues  contained  in the leaked  draft report.
The Irish dairy industry  must carefully  evaluate  its position  yis-a-vis  
the expanding  cheese  market. Specific  product  areas which  merit exam ­
ination  include ;
Italian.  Greek  and Spanish  cheeses;
Processed  and packaged  cheeses
100
Bulk Products:
Health  Products
Fresh Dairy  
Products :— A unique  Irish cheese 
■— Natural  sliced cheeses
— Farmhouse  cheeses
Seasonality  of production  is a particular  problem  which will have to be 
reduced  for a successful  cheese  industry.
Cheese  consumption  in Ireland  is low, and at 3.3 kg./head  is less than 
one-quarter  the European  average.  New Zealand,  which had a similar  
consumption  level to Ireland,  has succeeded  in the last decade  in doubling  
consumption.  A similar  target  would  appear  to be feasible  in Ireland  for 
a good cheese  and well orchestrated  marketing  programme.
Apart  from cheese  other dairy products  which appear  to offer attract ­
ive possibilities  are :
industrial  functional  ingredients,  flavoured  milk 
powders,  convenience  foods, cheese flavour  
powders,  whey products,  consumer  packaged  
whole milk or fat filled powders,  
high protein balanced  aids, supplements  for 
hospital  feeding,  low sodium  and high calcium  
cheeses,  supplements  for athletes,  health snack  
products.
usually  high margin  and high distribution  costs.  
Yoghurt  and fresh dairy products  are showing 
significant  growth  trends  of 4% -5% annually.  
Quark/cottage  cheese with additives,  protein  
enriched  drinks,  milk shakes,  ice cream mixes, 
special  desserts,  frozen and fresh dairy cakes,  
whipped  and frozen  cream,  mousses,  soft frozen 
desserts.
‘’e highly  successful  development  of cream liqueurs  and whey based 
alcohol  in recent years gives room for optimism  that new dairy based 
product  opportunities  can be developed  and exploited  profitably  here.
Industry  Structure
Most existing  dairy co-ops are heavily  focussed  on collecting  and 
processing  large volumes  of milk. There has been insufficient  attention  
to product  development  and marketing  within individual  firms. A 
strengthening  of the marketing  and product  development  capability  is 
equally  essential  for products  sold through  An Bord Bainne  as for pro­
ducts sold directly  to retailers  or final consumers  by the Co-Op.
Within individual  firms which are setting up value added business  
there appears  to be merit in separating  the large scale processing  of 
commodity  products  from the value added business  so that the latter  
receives  the clear priority  it needs for success  and allows it to build  
up the necessary  skills it requires  for efficient  operation.
At a sectoral  level there is a need to review  existing  structures.  In 
Europe  recent rationalizations  in the industry  have seen the emergence  
of larger business  units than currently  exist in Ireland. It may be
101
opportune  for the ICOS to review existing  structures  in Ireland  and 
examine  how effective  they are against  trends in Europe. Any such 
review  would  have to examine  issues of scale, of duplication,  the man­
agement  of collection  and of processing,  and the accountability  to sup­
pliers.
Seasonality
Because  of seasonality  of production  in Ireland  the product  range is 
limited  to long shelf life products,  mainly  butter,  skim milk powder  and 
Cheddar  cheese.
The returns  on these products  will tend to decline  over the forseeable  
future  and so it is essential  to diversify  the range of products  into areas  
which  will at least maintain  the current  level of return.
To secure  all year round milk production  the supplier  must receive  a 
return over and above what he would  get from producing  milk on our 
current  seasonal  basis.
The industry  should  examine  ways of altering  prices over the year to 
encourage  greater  milk production  during  the normal  valley period  and 
by so doing to allow  for greater  product  diversification.
Marketing
The dairy industry  in Ireland,  even with a highly  successful  product  
diversification  programme  over the next decade,  wilt depend  to a large  
degree on export sales of commodity  products  sold through  An Bord 
Bainne. It is essential  for the industry  that these products  continue  to 
be delivered  at a quality  which meets customer  requirements  and are 
then marketed  to best advantage.  Individual  co-ops  must play an active 
role in this process  to ensure  the success  of the marketing  drive for these 
products.
In addition,  co-ops  need to build up their skills in the direct market ­
ing of specialized  dairy products  to identified  market  niches. There  
may be a role for some centralized  promotional  work to support  the 
marketing  activities  of individual  co-ops in these specialized  product  
areas,  as is done in other  countries.
Conclusions
Diversification  in the dairy industry  is no longer just a desirable  
option,  it is a necessity  for medium  term survival. At present  the indus ­
try is overdependent  on butter and skim milk powder  and overreliant  
on the intervention  system  for its income  and for its sales.
Our product  range is very much out of line with the product  demands  
of the EEC consumer  where  demand  for cheese  and for various  special ­
ized dairy products  is increasing  while demand  for butter is declining 
steadily.
The IDA has adopted  the targets of reducing  production  of bulk 
commodities  to 65% and of increasing  the production  of value added
102
products  to 35% by 1990. These targets  could in turn be adopted  by 
each of the individual  large co-ops for their own diversification  pro­
gramme.
Joint ventures  and licensing  arrangements  offer a first step of embark ­
ing on a diversification  programme.  The IDA has staff in the field for 
this purpose  and will work with firms which demonstrate  a serious  
commitment  to this approach  and know what they want and can give 
to such arrangements.  The IDA want to conclude  at least five joint  
venture/licensing  arrangements  in the dairy sector in 1984 and are 
organising  three special overseas  trips with dairy industry  executives  
for this purpose.
In addition  to work in joint ventures  and licensing  the larger dairy  
co-ops  should  examine  setting  up new product  development  units which 
are market  oriented  and which have clear objectives  and their own 
resources.  The IDA will provide  financial  aid towards  the cost of any 
building  and equipment  necessary  and also towards  the operating  costs  
of the product  development  work.
There is a need to encourage  new entrepreneurs  with good ideas in 
the dairy sector to set up in business  here. The IDA is planning  to 
undertake  a programme  in this area which would ideally  be linked to 
existing  co-ops  for milk supplies  and possibly  equity  participation.
Individual  companies  may have other ideas on how to embark  on a 
diversification  programme  and the IDA would welcome  such ideas. 
What is essential  is that all companies  become  acutely  aware  that diver ­
sification  from the existing  product  range is essential  to the medium  
term survival  of the industry. Companies  should  start their diversifica ­
tion programme  initially  in a modest  way but with a strong commit ­
ment to act on indentified  opportunities.  The IDA for its part will 
support  firms along this path with its funds,  its facilities  and with what ­
ever expertise  it has in the area.
103
TENTH  EDWARD  RICHARDS-ORPEN  MEMORIAL  LECTURE
Some  Aspects  of Pasture  Utilization  
by the Grazing  Animal
M. O’SULLIVAN
The Agricultural  Institute,  Johnstown  Castle,  Wexford.
latroduction
I wish to thank the trustees  of the Edward  Richards-Orpen  Memorial  
Trust for inviting  me to present  the Tenth Memorial  Lecture.  Net only 
is it a great honour  for me personally,  but it is also an appreciation  of the 
work carried  out by the Agricultural  Institute,  particularly  at Johnstown  
Castle,  to develop  Irish grassland.
It is a formidable  task to deal with the subject  of pasture  utilization  in 
a manner  befitting  the memory  of such an outstanding  man. He was a 
frequent  visitor  to Johnstown  Castle  in the early days of its establishment  
as a Research  Centre  and was appreciated  because  he was a scientifically 
minded  yet practical  farmer, who believed  strongly  in the role of research. 
Mr. Richards-Orpen  was a close associate  and friend  of the then Minister  
for Agriculture,  Mr. James  Dillon,  and his influence  was given practical  
expression  in the acquisition  of up to date scientific  equipment  for 
Johnstown  Castle. In view of his innovative  capacity  in many  spheres  and 
in particular  his life long interest  in improving  grassland  systems,  it 
seems  appropriate  that the Tenth  Memorial  Lecture  should  be devoted  to 
pasture  utilization.
Pasture  utilization  is usually  defined  as the amount  of herbage  eaten  
by the animal,  expressed  as a percentage  of either  the total annual  grass  
yield,  or of the amount  of herbage  offered  to the animal  at each grazing. 
In either case, utilization  is almost directly  related to intake and is 
affected  by factors  that influence  intake.  It is possible  however  to broaden  
this definition  by introducing  an animal  factor  and define  pasture  utiliza ­
tion as the amount  of animal  product  produced  per unit of dry matter.  
This takes into account  the varying  efficiency  with which animals  on 
different  grazing  managements  convert  food into animal  product.
The importance  of pasture  utilization  is emphasised  by the fact that 
66% of the total area of 6.89 million  hectares  in Ireland  is lowland  grass 
with a further  20% classified  as marginal  land. Only 7.5% of the area is 
used for tillage. Maximum  levels  of dry matter  production  seem to vary 
from year to year and from one location  to another,  but production  as 
high as 25 t dry matter  per ha has been achieved  in Britain  (1). However,  
in grazing  systems  there are losses in both harvesting  and conservation  
and the animal  converts  relatively  little of the food into animal  products.  
Consequently,  even the maximal  yield of 25 t dry matter  per hectare
104
would only provide  215 Giga Joules  (GJ) of metabolisable  energy  and 
would only yield in animal  products  about  41 GJ of edible  energy  and 
486 kg of protein  if converted  by dairy cattle. Alternatively,  a cereal  
grain crop in similar  conditions  would  yield 73 GJ of edible  energy  and 
670 kg of protein.  The relatively  poor return  from grassland  emphasises  
the necessity  for efficient  utilization  and conversion.
Grazing  potential  of Irish grassland
In order to put grassland  utilization  into perspective,  it is interesting  to 
look more  closely  at the potential  for grazing  in Ireland.  An attempt  was 
made to do this on the basis  of the energy  supplied  by pasture  from the 
different  categories  of soif (Table 1). The country ’s grasslands  can be 
divided  into three main soil groups,  namely,  a dry lowland  mineral  soil 
and two categories  of wet mineral  soil. The wet soil designated  A (Table  
1) is defined  as one whose  profile  is wet within  70 cm depth  for more than 
180 days but, is not wet within  40 cm depth for more than 180 days in 
most years. Typical  cf this group  of soils would be the Macamore  and 
Rathangan  soils in Cb. Wexford,  and indeed  most of the wet limestone 
soils. Category  B is a wetter  group  of soils whose profile  is wet within 
40 cm depth for more than 180 days and is usually  wet with 70 cm for 
more than 335 days in most years. This group  of soils would be rep­
resented  by the Ballinamore  drumlin  soils and most of the West Clare  
and West Limerick  wet soils.
Table 1
Grazing  potential  of Irish grassland
.Soil
Class Area  
(Ha 10»)DM
Prod.%
UtilizationEnergy
(GJ/Ha)Potential
(LU/Ha)Potential
AnimkI
Population
Dry 2.83 12.000 80 105.6 2.78 7.87
Wet A 0.93 10,440 60 68.9 1.81 1.69
Wet B 0.81 9,000 44 43.56 1.15 0.93
I LU requires  104 MJ/day  or 37.96 GJ/year  
1 kg DM = 11 MJ of metabolisable  energy
Grazing  potential  for each soil category  was calculated  from the energy  
production  per hectare  divided  by the energy  requirement  of a livestock 
unit (L.U.). Dry matter  production  and its utilization  were calculated  
from experimental  figures  from Johnstown  Castle and adjusted  for the 
wetter  soils according  to Lee (2). The degree  of dry matter  utilization  for 
the dry mineral  soils was taken as 80% of that produced.  Under  wet 
conditions  pastures  are more easily poached  and are consequently  less 
utilized  so the figures  for utilization  efficiency  were reduced  to 60% and 
44% for the two wet categories  of soil. Assuming  that the metabolisable
105
energy  value of grass is equivalent  to 11 MJ per kilo of dry matter,  the 
different  groups of soils will produce  105.6, 68.9, and 43.56 GJ of 
utilizable  energy  per hectare  respectively.
A livestock  unit (L.U.)  was defined  as 533 kg dairy cow milking  3,503  
kg per year and requiring  104 MJ per day or 37.96 GJ per annum.  Using 
this figure the grazing  potential  per hectare  was calculated  as 2.78, 1.81 
and 1.15 L.U. ha“' resulting  in a total of 7.87, 1.69 and 0.93 million  L.U. 
respectively  for the three different  groups  of soil in the country.  Thus,  
the potential  livestock  numbers  that our lowland  mineral  soils can carry  
is 10.49 million  L.U., without  the input of extra energy  in the form of 
concentrates.  If milk yield was increased  to 4671 kg per year then the 
potential  livestock  numbers would  be reduced  to 9.13 million  L.U.
In 1983 concentrate  feeding  for dairy cows and drystock  amounted  to 
a total of 1.861 million  t—1.111 million  t for dairy cows and 0.75 
million  t for drystock.  This supplies  sufficient  energy  to support  more  
than 0.5 million  L.U. When  the estimated  0.7 million  L.U. from hilland  
and marginal  land (3) are added,  the total potential  at present  levels of 
concentrate  feeding,  reaches  nearly 12 million  L.U.s, which is slightly 
higher  than the figures  of Lee and Diamond  (3). This is nearly  twice the 
actual  number  of L.Us  of 6.074  million  as reported  for 1983.
This potential  can vary greatly with fertiliser  use and utilization  
efficiency.  The postulated  figures  for dry matter  production  have been 
chosen  assuming  the use of relatively  high dressings  of fertilizer  nitrogen,  
and a reduction  in nitrogen  usage will depress  production  figures  accord ­
ingly. Variations  in utilization  efficiency  will also affect the grazing  
potential  of the country  and the remainder  of this paper will deal with 
factors that influence  such utilization.  Other  than drainage,  factors which 
influence  utilization  can be divided  into three different  general  areas,  viz. 
those of animal,  sward,  and management  origin.
Factors  of animal  origin  that affect  utilization
The central  control  of feed intake in the brain is the hypothalmus,  
which  when stimulated  either  electrically  or chemically  caused  intake  to 
be increased  (4). Feedback  to this central  control  system  to limit food 
intake is governed  by two types of stimulus,  one allowing  metabolic  
control  arising from the metabolism  of ingested  food, and the other,  
physical  control  arising  from the distension  of the alimentary  tract by 
the presence  of food.
Metabolic  feedback  has been associated  with the concentration  of 
various  chemicals  in the alimentary  tract (5), changes  in environmental  
temperature  (6) and the amount  of body fat (7). Clear  evidence  for one 
or more of these has yet to be found. Two major  factors  govern  physical 
control,  one being the capacity  of the alimentary  tract and the other  
being the rate of passage  of food through  the reticulo  rumen. A direct  
relationship  between  size and weight  of the rumen and the voluntary  
intake of food has been found (8) and consequently  intake is broadly  
related  to liveweight.
106
The rate of disappearance  of digesta  from the rumen  is a function  of 
the combined  action of microbial  fermentation,  and mechanical  break ­
down, including  chewing  during  eating,  rumination  and muscular  con­
tractions  of the gut. Presenting  the animal  with ground  roughage  that 
can readily  pass the reticulo-omasal  orifice  usually  leads  to higher  intakes  
than when the same roughage  is presented  in the long form (8).
The main animal factors  affecting  herbage  intake are age, weight,  
pregnancy  and lactation.  Intake advances  with increases  in age and 
weight. The effect of pregnancy  on intake is usually  confounded  with 
increased  growth  in heifers  or the effects  of lactation  in cows, resulting  
in an increased  intake up to mid pregnancy  (9). There is a decline  in 
voluntary  food consumption  in later pregnancy,  the reason  for which is 
not fully understood,  but may be associated  with the increasing  size of 
the foetus  in the abdominal  cavity. Maximum  milk yield in dairy cows,  
and accordingly  maximum  energy  demand  is reached  5 to 8 weeks  after  
parturition,  but maximum  intake does not occur until sometime  later,  
the period  varying  from 5 to 36 weeks  depending  largely  on diet com­
position  (16). It is suggested  that part of the reason  for this time-lag  may 
be that fat deposited  in the abdominal  cavity before calving  has to be 
mobilized  before  maximum  rumen  capacity  can be obtained.
Factors  of sward  origin  that affect  utilization
It is accepted  that grass is harvested  less efficiently  under grazing  than 
under  cutting  systems,  and that often the effect  of the grazing  animal  can 
be deleterious  to the quality  of herbage.  While both systems  can cause 
injury  to the plant,  there are two effects  peculiar  to the grazing  animals,  
namely,  the fouling  of pasture  and the selectivity  of the animal  in grazing  
either  individual  plant parts  or species.
Fouling
Studies  have shown that during  a day’s grazing,  a cow may deposit
between  18 and 27 kg fresh weight  of faeces  (10). The area of individual
patches  varies  from 0.05 to 0.09 m'' and the number  of separate  defaecat-  
ions from 10 to 16 per day (11, 12). Both dung  and urine increase  herbage  
yield,  the dung for periods  up to four cuts, and the urine for two cuts (13). 
While  the urine patches  are often grazed  preferentially,  the refusal  of the 
animal  to graze the immediate  area surrounding  the dung pat gives the 
impression  of decreased  utilization.
In an experiment  at Johnstown  Castle comparing  continuous  and 
rotational  grazing  it was found that 24% of the rotationally  grazed  area 
was rejected  when measured  after a day’s grazing,  while only 10% of the 
continuously  grazed  area was rejected  (Table  2). This represented  49% 
and 23% respectively  in terms of weight  of rejected  dry matter. The
difference  between  the two systems  could be explained  by the fact that
under  continuous  grazing  the animals  were under  much greater  pressure,  
and consequently  eat more of the fouled areas. However,  the effect of 
dunging  on animal  production  appears  to be small,  as it has been shown
107
that while  fouling  significantly  depresses  herbage  intake  it does not appear  
to alter either the milk yield, milk composition  or liveweight  change  in 
cows (14).
Table 2
Details  of rejected  herbage  due to dunging  after a day’s grazing  in antumn  on 
both a continuously  and rotationally  grazed  pasture
Extended  height  (cm) % of area Wt DM
grazed  area clump covered rejected  (%)
Continuous  grazing 7.1 19.2 10 23
Rotational  grazing 11.2 33.5 24 49
Diet selection  and digestibility
Diet selection  can be regarded  as a two-phase  process,  involving  firstly,  
the selection  of an area to be grazed  by the animal,  and secondly,  the 
preferential  selection  of species  and plant parts from within that area 
(15). However,  in temperate  pastures  under intensive  management  the 
animal  is usually  offered  little opportunity  to select  different  plant species.  
Other  than a few species  cf grass,  clover  offers  the only feasible  diversion  
to the grazing  animal.
Table 3
Digestibility  of grass and amount  of dead material  at different  heights  in the 
sward  over the grazing  season  (% OMD)
Dead material  as % of total DM
cm. above  
ground  level 8/5 30/5 22/6Date
12/7 2/8 23/8 14/9
0-4 50.5 48.0 49.2 59.5 66.7 60.3 60.5
4-8 17.8 28.3 40.0 43.1 45.8 28.0 16.7
8-12 6.6 15.6 25.7 15.0 6.6 0 0
12-16 1.0 13.2 12.5 6.3 0 0 0
16-20 0 9.1 2.7 0 0 0
20-24 0 2.9
24-28
Digestibility  (% OMD)
0-4 53.9 60.3 59.8 53.2 46.2 48.5 56.2
4-8 67.4 65.0 65.9 64.3 59.1 70.3 76.9
8-12 72.7 67.8 71.8 78.8 77.1 83.4 84.1
12-16 79.6 68.4 75.9 81.9 82.2 84.3 85.0
16-20 80.2 64.5 __♦ _* _♦83.4
20-24 82.9 71.9
24-28 84.8
* = Insufficient  sample  for analysis
108
There is now general  agreement  that animals  select (a) more clover  
than grass fram grass-clover  swards  (17), (b) material  that contains  more  
leaf than stem (18) and (c) more green than dead material  (19). The 
herbage  eaten, when compared  with that offered,  is usually  higher in 
nitrogen  and gross energy,  and lower  in fibre. It is difficult  to ascertain  
whether  this selection  by the animal is a deliberate  exercise,  or the 
natural  consequence  of the animal  grazing  down  the sward  in progressive 
layers. The distribution  cf green and dead material  and the digestibility  
of the sward in 4 cm layers  is shown  in Table 3. Digestibility  and the 
quantity  of green material  increase  with height above ground  level. It 
can be assumed  therefore,  that when animals  are not compelled  to graze 
the lower regions  of the sward they will, by chance,  select material  of 
higher  digestibility.
Early work showed  a linear relationship  between  intake  and digestib ­
ility up to a level of 67-75%  OMD, with either a curvilinear  or no 
relationship  at higher digestibilities  (20, 21). More recently  however,  
linear relationships  up to 83% OMD have been found (22, 23). The 
reason for this relationship  was explained  by Blaxter  et al. (20) when  
they demonstrated  that a decline  in intake was related  to the increased  
transit  time of the food through  the rumen. When  feeding  poor,  medium  
and good quality  hay, they showed  that the amount  of dry matter  in the 
rumen  at any one time was the same,  irrespective  of which  hay was fed, 
and that intake  was mainly  controlled  by rumen  capacity.
Most particles  greater  than 1 mm are usually  not allowed  to leave the 
rumen, but are subsequently  reduced  in size by repeated  rumination.  
This explains  the increased  intake of poor quality  forage when it is 
ground pelleted,  although  its digestibility  may have decreased  in the 
process  (24). A similar  pattern  has been found for the increased  intake  
of leaf as opposed  to stem with similar  digestibilities.  While  studying  the 
intake  of various  forages  it was shown  that the leaf fraction  remained  in 
the rumen for only 24.6 hours while the stem remained  for 33.3 hours  
(25). The faster  rate of passage  of the leaf fraction  enabled  more cf it to 
be ingested  by the animal.
Climate  and season
Climate  can affect herbage  intake  by variations  in either temperature  
or rainfall. In temperate  climates,  temperature  does not affect intake  
even over a wide range  of temperatures  (26). Rainfall  on the other hand  
has been shown by many researchers  to decrease  herbage  intake. The 
effect seems to arise more from the increased  amount  of water  ingested  
than from any unpleasantness  in conditions  caused  by the rain. This is 
in agreement  with indoor  studies  on dairy cows,  where intake  decreased  
by 0.337 kg of dry matter  for each percentage  drop in dry matter  content  
below 18.1% (27).
It is widely  accepted  that cattle grow faster  on spring  than on autumn  
pasture.  Many  factors  may contribute  to this inferior  late season  growth.  
The herbage  may differ  in chemical  composition  and hence in digestibil ­
109
ity and energy value. Pastures  become more fouled as the season 
progresses,  and dead and mould-infected  herbage  may accumulate.  The 
animal  loses its compensatory  growth  stimulus,  and it increases  in age 
and weight. Because  of these simultaneous  changes  it is difficult  to pin­
point a particular  reason why spring pasture  is more productive  than 
autumn  pasture.
Such a seasonal  effect  was experienced  on a highly  stocked  rotationally  
grazed system  of beef production  at Johnstown  Castle (Table  4). Both 
liveweight  gain and intake decreased  as grazing  progressed  throughout  
the season. The confounding  effect of varying  amounts  cf herbage  on 
offer was avoided  by expressing  liveweight  gain per unit of dry matter  
offered.  Even then there was an appreciable  advantage  in spring  pasture.  
The animal ’s efficiency  of conversion  was also greater  in spring than 
autumn —requiring  an intake  of approximately  6 kg of digestible  organic  
matter  to put on 1 kg of liveweight  gain in spring  and nearly  twice that 
amount  in autumn.  Spring herbage  appears  therefore  to be able, not 
alone to produce  more gain per animal,  but is able also to support  more 
grazing  days per hectare  over a similar  time interval  due to the greater  
yield. In terms of variable  costs (e.g. N fertilizer)  spring grass has on 
average  over twice the value for beef production  as autumn  pasture  (28).
Table 4
The liveweight  gain, digestible  organic  matter  intake  and herbage  offered  over the 
grazing  season  on a highly  stocked  rotationally  grazed  system  of beef production.
Cycle ending  on 6/5 27/5 17/6 8/7 29/7 19/8 9/9 30/9
Kg LWG/animal/day 1.79 1.41 .92 .91 .49 .67 .46 .52
g DM offered/Kg  LW/ day 47.8 44.5 44.7 56.2 44.6 40.7 18.7 36.7
g DOMI/Kg  LW/day 45.3 29.7 19.4 22.2 16.5 17.5 15.7 13.8
g LWG/Kg  DM offered 153 116 68 51 44 48 69 39
DOMI/LWG 6.1 5.8 6.4 7.8 8.5 9.0 12.2 9.7
Factors  of management  origin  that affect  utilization
The achievement  of high animal production  depends  on three basic 
requirements  :
(a) The production  of large amounts  of high quality  food,  the seasonal 
distribution  of which  must match  the animals ’ requirements.
(b) Most of this forage  must be harvested  by the animal.
(c) The efficiency  of conversion  within  the animal  must be high.
It is apparent  that grazing  management  influences  these requirements  
and consequently  efforts have been made down through  the years to 
modify  uncontrolled  grazing  so that land resources  can be most efficiently  
utilized.
no
Stocking  rate
Since the first results  obtained  by Hancock  (29) in 1953 and further  
reported  by McMeekan  (30), increased  stocking  rates have led, almost  
always,  to increased  utilization  with a concomitant  increase  in milk  
production  or liveweight  gain per hectare.  This is usually  at the expense  
of production  per animal  however,  and the relationship  between  the two 
is shown  in Fig. 1. As the stocking  rate increases,  production  per animal  
decreases  linearly. At the same time, production  per hectare  increases  
until a point is reached  where production  per animal  decreased  to such 
an extent  that it cannot  be compensated  for by the increased  stock num ­
bers. At this point production  per hectare  also starts  to decline.
LWG/animal LWG/ha
Fig.l : Effect of stocking  rate on production  per animal  and per 
hectare
An example  of this can be seen in Table 5, where on increasing  the 
stocking  rate on a continuously  grazed  system,  production  per animal  
was depressed  to such an extent  (35%)  that it also reduced  production  
per hectare. On a rotationally  grazed sward, the high stocking  rate 
reduced  animal  performance  by only 18% and this led to an increase  in 
liveweight  gain per hectare  (48).
Ill
Table 5
Dry matter  production  and liveweight  gain under  continuous  and rotational  
grazing  systems  (average  3 years)
DM Production  
(kg/ha)Total LWG  
(kg/ha)LWG/Animal/Year  
(kg)
Continuous  grazing
LSR 9851 996 143
HSR 9115 940 92
Rotational  grazing
LSR 9997 1072 158
HSR 9244 1252 129
SE Mean and Significance  219.8* 33.9»** 4.07***
LSR = Low Stocking  Rate  
HSR = High Stocking  Rate 
LWG = Liveweight  gain
The level of production  per hectare  is vitally important  with dairy  
cows and can be increased,  without  impairing  the animal ’s health,  by 
increasing  the stocking  rate. However,  the accompanying  reduction  in 
animal  performance  may adversely  affect  the beef producer  by interfering  
with the “degree  of finish ” of the animal. U was found  that by reducing  
the stocking  rate mid-way  through  the grazing  season,  output  per hectare  
could be increased,  while still maintaining  an adequate  performance  (31). 
It is this system  of management  that we now use. It was later shown  
that maximum  liveweight  gains were obtained  at stocking  rates which 
were half those which  produced  zero liveweight  gain (31).
The situation  is more complex  however,  with dairy cows, where live- 
weight  changes  occur simultaneously  with changes  in milk production.  
In some situations  a dairy cow may produce  at a higher  level than her 
intake could justify,  by drawing  on her body reserves.  McMeekan  and 
Walsh (33) concluded  that the optimum  stocking  rate was one which  
reduced  piotential  production  per cow at a low stocking  rate by 10% to 
12%.
Grazing  systems
One of the first efforts  to control  grazing  was made as far back as 
1777, according  to Davies  (34), when a Scottish  agriculturalist  described  
a 15-20 paddock  system  which  was almost  identical  to the present  one- 
day paddock  system. Since then many different  types of controlled  
grazing  systems  have been researched  and used at farm level. The clas­
sical work of McMeekan  in the 1950s demonstrated  the importance  of 
stocking  rate in any form of grazing  management.  The results  of his 
experiments  showed that variation  in stocking  rates affected  animal
112
production  to a greater  extent than type of grazing  system. Emanating  
from his work was the realisation  that grazing  systems  could not be 
compared  without  the inclusion  of two or more stocking  rates, as there  
was a strong  interaction  between  the two components.
In a recent appraisal  summarising  the results  of nine different  experi ­
ments (35) it was concluded  that there was a benefit  of 1.55% for dairy  
cows and 6% for beef cattle by grazing  a paddock  system. The value of 
such comparisons,  where several experiments  from different  research  
workers  are combined,  is extremely  doubtful.  It is now accepted  that 
there is an advantage  to rotational  grazing  when the ratio between  the 
amount  of forage  produced  and the weight  of animal  grazing  this forage  
is low. This ratio will vary widely  with fertilizer  use, type of pasture,  
stocking  rate and possibly  paddock  number. In all assessments  these 
parameters  vary from experiment  to experiment.  With their inclusion 
into one assessment  therefore,  it would be most surprising  if any differ ­
ence was shown  between  the two systems  of grazing  management.
The first Irish work appeared  in 1937 when Drew and Deasy (36) 
reported  an increase  of 27% in terms of liveweight  gain per hectare,  
when store cattle were rotationally  grazed. More recently,  in a series of 
experiments  with beef cattle,  Conway  (37) showed  considerable  advant ­
ages from rotational  grazing.  A similar  advantage  from rotational  grazing  
has been found at Moorepark  for dairy cows (38).
In view of the profusion  of contradictions  in the literature  concerning  
the merits  of different  systems  of grazing,  it seems  important  to examine  
these systems  in detail and to identify  the criteria that lead to an 
advantage  of one system  over another.  Only then will it be possible  to 
provide  objectively  e.stablished  guidelnes  for the farmer.
Johnstown  Castle  results
With a view to the above,  detailed  measurements  of dry matter  pro­
duction,  liveweight  gain, herbage  intake, animal behaviour  and other  
parameters  were made on both a continuous  and rotational  system of 
grazing  for intensive  beef production  at two stocking  rates. The experi ­
ment was carried  out for three years on a newly  sown perennial  ryegrass  
(v. Cropper)  pasture  at Johnstown  Castle. Nitrogen  was applied  vearlv  
at the rate of 350 kg N ha“'.
The net herbage  accumulation  for the four treatments  is shown in 
Table 6. At both stocking  rates the rotationally  grazed  system  produced  
more dry matter  in 1979 but less in 1980. There  was no difference  how­
ever when the averages  for the two years were compared.  Stocking  rate 
in fact had a greater  effect  on dry matter  production  than grazing  system  
used—the high stocking  rate caused a reduction  of only 7.5% in both 
systems  of grazing.  This is in general  agreement  with the results  from  
similar  studies  (35) and supports  the conclusion  drawn  by Hodgson  and 
Wade (39) that herbage  accumulation  is insensitive  to variations  in 
grazing  management  or variations  in stocking  rate.
113
Table 6
Net herbage  accumulation  from continuous  and rotational  grazing  systems
1979Kg DM/Ha
1980 Mean
Continuous  grazing
Low SR 8,078 11,623 9,851
High SR 7,363 10,866 9,115
Rotational  grazing
Low SR 9,146 10,763 9,997
High SR 8,394 10,012 9,244
SE mean and significance 208.2* 386.0* 219.8*
Temperate  swards  adapt  to changes  in both stocking  rate and grazing 
system, by making  adjustments  in tiller density,  sward canopy and 
phctosynthetic  efficiency.  Swards  that are grazed  severely  tend to adapt  
a more prostrate  growing  habit, with a consequential  increase  in light 
interception.  This, combined  with an improvement  in the ratio of young 
to old tissue,  gives rise to an increased  photosynthetic  efficiency.  Tiller  
population  also tends to increase  as the frequency  of defoliation  increases 
as in continuously  grazed  .swards.
The aim of good sward  management  is the production  of pastures  with 
a good population  of tillers  and a high leaf area. While lax defoliation  
allows  the production  of large tillers  with high leaf area, it also depresses 
tiller numbers  and net herbage  accumulation  does not improve  due to a 
simultaneous  increase  in senescence.  Digestibility  may also increase. 
Therefore  the sward is well able to buffer itself against  quite a wide  
variety  of management  systems.  The production  of large quantities  of 
highly digestible  material  is a compromise  between  managements  that 
produce  a high tiller population  with low levels  of senescence  and those 
which  encourage  a high leaf area index.
The seasonal  pattern  of dry matter  production  was also affected  by 
stocking  rate (Fig. 2). The lax defoliation  at the low stocking  rate 
allowed  the grass to accumulate  rapidly  early in the season,  resulting  in 
an unevenly  grazed  tall open sward. The severe defoliation  at the high 
stocking  rate appeared  to depress  grass growth  early in the season,  while  
at the same time producing  a low dense sward having  a high percentage  
of leafy material  with good photosynthetic  potential.  Consequently,  the 
high stocking  rate treatment  out-yielded  the low stocking  rate treatment  
in the latter part of the season  by 33.6%.
This phenomenon  has a practical  application  at farm level in a 
rotationally  grazed system,  where it is difficult  to match  the amount  of 
herbage  on offer to the animal ’s requirement,  for all paddocks.  If the 
correct  balance  is reached  in the first paddocks,  then excess  herbage  will
114
kg/ha  accumulated
accumulate  in the later paddocks  in the rotation  before they can be 
grazed. Therefore,  the earlier paddocks  will be severely  grazed and 
simulate  a high stocking  rate effect on the dry matter  produced  for the 
remainder  of the season. The later paddocks  in the rotation  will be 
laxly grazed,  and consequently  dry matter  production  in the latter half 
of the season  will be impaired.
In the experiment  reported,  dry matter  production  was measured  in 
10 of the 20 paddocks  and the herbage  on offer for cycles 1, 5 and 9 are 
shown  for the high stocking  rate (Table  7). As expected,  during  Cycle 1 
there was significantly  more herbage  on offer in the later paddocks  (59%)  
when compared  with the earlier  ones. However,  as the season  progressed  
this trend was reversed  so that in Cycle 9 the later paddocks  had sig­
nificantly  less (35.8%)  herbage  on offer than the earlier  ones, and it is
115
obvious  that adequate  animal  performance  would not be achieved  by 
offering  animals  less than 1000 kg DM ha'^ One way to avoid an 
undesirable  accumulation  of dry matter  early in the season,  at farm level,  
would be to graze the more fertile paddocks  in the system  first. Alter ­
natively,  the time spent grazing  each paddock  might be varied at the 
start of the year, so that the later paddocks  in the rotation  would be 
grazed  sooner,  and thus prevent  a build-up  of dry matter.
Table 7
Herbage  on offer (kg/ha)
1,2,3Paddock  No.
7,8,9 14,15,16,17
Cycle 1 1647 1822 2620
Cycle 5 1282 1180 1474
Clyde 9 1432 1002 934
The continuously  grazed  pasture  had significantly  more perennial  rye­
grass tillers per unit area than the rotationally  grazed pasture  — 33% 
more at the low stocking  rate and 75% more at the high stocking  rate 
(Table  8). The severe  grazing  on the high stocking  rate treatment  caused 
a significant  (P>.001)  increase  in tiller density  on the continuously  grazed 
paddocks.  It is interesting  to note however,  that the treatment  with the 
greatest  number  of tillers produced  7% less dry matter  over the season.  
The point should  be made at this stage, that although  high tiller popu ­
lations are desirable,  they do not necessarily  guarantee  increased  dry 
matter  production,  and unless  tiller numbers  fall below a very low level,  
production  will not be impaired.
Table 8
Tiller  density  (Tillers  x lOOO/M ”)
Ryegrass AMG Total
Continuous  grazing
LSR 9.8(b) 2.6(a) 12.4(b)
HSR 14.2(c) 3.1(a) 17.3(b)
Rotational  grazing
LSH 7.1(a) 2.2(a) 9.3(a)
HSR 7.6(a) 2.3(a) 9.9(a)
Values  not having  the same subscript  are significantly  different  at P >.001  
AMG = Annual  Meadow  Grass
116
At the high stocking  rate there was an increase  of 33% in terms of 
liveweight  gain per hectare  (Table 5) when animals  were rotationally  
grazed  rather  than set stocked.  At the lower  stocking  rate the advantage  
was only 7.6%, and one would expect that if the stocking  rate was 
reduced  still further,  no difference  would be obtained  between  the two 
systems. The effect of stocking  rate varied with system of grazing. 
Increasing  the stocking  rate on the continuously  grazed  treatment  caused  
a reduction  in animal  production  per hectare,  whereas  on the rotationally  
grazed treatment  the same high stocking  rate caused a substantial  
increase  in production  per hectare. This was probably  caused by the 
large reduction  of 35% in liveweight  gain per animal  when the stocking  
rate on the continuously  grazed  system  was raised,  whereas  there was a 
reduction  of only 18% on the rotationally  grazed treatment.  Carcass  
weights  showed  the same trend as the liveweight  gains, with a slightly 
higher  percentage  killout  for the rotationally  grazed  animals  (Table  9).
The digestibility  of the herbage  on offer followed  similar  trends  for the 
three years  of the experiment  and the results  for 1980 are shown  in Fig. 3. 
The continuously  grazed  treatment  averaged  69.3%  OMD  for the grazing  
season  while the herbage  on offer on the rotationally  grazed  treatment  
had a significantly  higher  digestibility  of 76.6% OMD. There was no 
difference  however  in the digestibility  of the material  selected  by the ani-
Fig 3 : Digestibility  of Herbage  Offered  and Selected  (1980)  
7oOMD
mal from either  treatment.  Animals on the continuously  grazed  treatment  
selected  herbage  averaging  79.6% OMD and those on the rotationally  
grazed treatment  selected  material  averaging  80.7% OMD. It must be 
assumed  therefore  that the greater  degree  of selectivity  exercised  by the 
continuously  grazed  animals  probably  involved  longer  hours  of grazing.
Table 9
Carcass  weights  and percentage  kill out
Liveweight
(kg)Carcass  weight  
(kg)% Killout
Cont'nuous  grazing
LSR 393 204 51.7
HSR 337 177 52.7
Rotational  grazing
LSR 402 217 53.9
HSR 379 203 53.4
Standard  deviation 14.59*** 17.47*997***
Grazing  behaviour
Preliminary  measurements  of grazing  behaviour  (Table 10) show that 
the continuously  grazed  animals  were active for longer  periods  than the 
r^-tationally  grazed  animals.  The continuously  grazed  animals  grazed  for 
'0 9 hours;  on average  and very often when herbage  on offer was limited,  
gra^ine  time increased  to over 12 hours  per day. The rotationally  grazed 
a'^imals  grazed  for only 8 hours per day and did net increase  this time 
substantial'y,  even when herbage  on offer was very scarce. This is in 
agreement  with most studies  on animal  behaviour  where  it is found that 
the normal  rate of biting  is between  40 and 70 bites per minute,  the size 
of each bite depending  on the availability  of herbage  (39). As herbage  
becomes  limiting  bite size decreases,  and to compensate  for this the 
animal usually  increases  its rate of biting,  and if necessary  its grazing 
time. However,  the compensation  may be limited  as the number  of bites  
per cow per day rarely exceeds  36,000. This then effectively  sets the 
upper limit. Irrespective  of biting rate, grazing  time remains  relatively
Table 10
Grazing  time (minutes/day)  and herbage  offered  (Kg/Ha)
Grazing  period  
Afternoon  Morning TotalHerbage  
on offer
Continuous  grazing 341 313 654 1621
Rotational  grazing 319 159 478 2940
Se mean and significance 6.5 NS 9.5*** 11.9 137.3***
118
constant  on strip-grazed  or paddock  grazed swards. This seems to be 
partly  due to the animal  becoming  accustomed  to the pattern  of paddock  
change, and rather than continuing  grazing when herbage becomes  
scarce  he idles, anticipating  a change  to a new paddock.
The distance  walked  by animals  while grazing  showed  the same pattern  
as the time spent grazing  (Table 11). The continuously  grazed  animals  
walked  approximately  three miles per day, while the rotationally  grazed  
animals  only walked  for approx,  one mile per day. The distribution  of 
only walked  for approximately  one mile per day. The distribution  of 
distance  walked  between  the afternoon  and morning  grazing  periods  also 
followed  closely  the pattern  of grazing  time during the same periods.  
There  was no significant  difference  between  the two systems,  in the length 
of time the animals  spent lying down, but rotationally  grazed animals  
remained  standing  for more than twice the time of the continuously  
grazed  ones.
Table 11
Distance  walked  (metres)
Afternoon Morning Total
Continuous  grazing 2475 2610 5085
Rotational  grazing 1207 670 1876
SE mean and significance 93.3* 91.8** 156.1**
The energy  cost of these activities  has been calculated  using the data 
cf Graham  (40, 41). Although  these data refer to sheep  rather  than cattle,  
and consequently  may not give absolute  values  of energy  expenditure,  it 
should nevertheless,  allow a fair comparison  to be made between  the 
energy  expenditure  of the animals  on the different  treatments.  As can 
be seen (Table 12) the continuously  grazed  animals  expended  44% more 
energy  on grazing  activity  than the rotationally  grazed  animals.  It can 
be calculated  that if this difference  in energy  could be used to increase  
weight  gain, it would almost  totally  explain  the 0.25 kg animal"^  day~'  
difference  between  the two treatments.
Table 12
Grazing  behaviour  and its conversion  into energy  at high stocking  rates
Grazing  Walking  Standing  Lying  Energy
(min)  (metres)  (min)  (min)  (KJ/Kg/day)
Continuous
grazing 654 5085 94 691 39.4
Rotational
grazing 478 1876 197 765 27.3
SE mean and 
significance 11.9*** 156.1***
119
A summary  of the digestible  organic  matter  intake (DOMI)  and live- 
weight  gain over the three years  of the experiment  is shown  in Table 13. 
At the low stocking  rate the continuously  grazed animals  ate 7.7% 
(P > .001) more digestible  organic  matter  than the rotationally  grazed  
animals,  although  they put on 7.1% (P>.001)  less liveweight  gain. At 
the high stocking  rate, while the rotationally  grazed animals  ate 3.7%  
more,  they put on 38.7% (P>.001)  more weight.  Obviously  the rotation-  
ally grazed  animals  are more efficient  at converting  the food they ingest.  
The resultant  figures  for conversion  efficiency  show that this is so at both 
stocking  rates the continuously  grazed  animals  had to eat more to put on 
a unit of liveweight  gain than did the rotationally  grazed  animals —13.6%  
more at the low stocking  rate and 25.2%  more at the high stocking  rate.
Table 13
Digestible  organic  matter  intake  and liveweight  gain (average  of three years)
DOMI
(g/kg LW/day)(g/kg LW/day)  
LWG DOMI/LWG
Continuous  grazing
LSR 20.94 2.89 7.23
HSR 18.82 1.94 9.70
Rotational  grazing
LSR 19.44 3.11 6.25
HSR 19.52 0.69 7.26
SE mean and significance .247*** .077*** .381***
There  was quite a close correlation  between  intake  and liveweight  gain 
ever the 1980 season  on the rotationally  grazed,  high stocking  rate treat ­
ment (Fig. 4). During  that year there was very little drought  and any soil 
moisture  deficit  that arose came very early in the season  when adequate  
grass was available.  The moist conditions  of 1980 also led to the pro­
duction  of greater  amounts  of herbage  (Table  6) than in other  years,  with 
the result that the animals  always  had an adequate  supply  of herbage  
available  throughout  the year. This was evident  by comparing  the 
amounts  of herbage  on offer during  1979 and 1980 on all treatments.  On 
the rotationally  grazed  high stocking  rate treatment,  animals  were offered  
4.17% of body weight  on average  over the year, whereas  in 1979 the 
average  for the year was significantly  less at 3.19%. Other treatments  
showed  similar  trends. Consequently  in 1980, the animals  did not have 
to expend  large amounts  of energy  selecting  material  of high digestibility.  
This gave a high correlation  between  intake and liveweight  gain, and 
97% of the variation  in liveweight  gain could be explained  by variations  
in intake.
120
DOMI g/kg  LW/day
Fig. 4 iRelationship  between  Intake  and LWG CRptationally  grazed  HSR 1980)
In 1979 however,  the pattern  appeared  to be quite different,  in that 
very poor relationships  were obtained  between  intake  and liveweight  gain. 
At best only 59.2%  of the variation  in liveweight  gain could be explained
121
by changes  in intake (Fig. 5). When intake and liveweight  gain were  
compared  over the year, it was found that while there was a good 
correlation  for the first four and the last cycle,  there was a period  in the 
middle  of the grazing  season  where intake increased  while the animals  
lost weight. It is difficult  to find a rational  explanation  for this apparent  
contradiction,  but a possible  answer  may be that the substantial  soil 
moisture  deficit during  the middle  of the grazing  season led to sparse 
amounts  of pasture  with a high dry matter content. As the amount  
eaten is determined  by the volume  of what is ingested,  then an animal  
could increase  its intake  while grazing  such pasture.  Grazing  time may 
have to be increased  however  in order to achieve  adequate  intake. This 
increase  in energy  expenditure  during  the middle  of the grazing  season,  
when pasture  height  was only 5.6 cm may partially  explain  the decrease  
in liveweight  gain at this time.
Correlation  analysis  showed  that digestible  organic  matter  intake,  DM 
offered,  green  material  offered  and the digestibility  of the material  offered, 
were all significant  factors  affecting  liveweight  gain (Table 14). The
fig 5Relationship  Between  Intake and Liveweight  Gain  
(Continuously  Grazed  Low Stocking  Rate 1979)
DOMI  g/kg LW/day  
301
20-
10-LWG g/kg LW /day  
T
mm 
4+80
■70
3+60
-50
2- -40
-30
1-1-20
-10
0-*-0
4 6
Cycle
122
amount  of dry matter  on offer had the least influence  on the parameters  
presented,  whereas  the digestible  organic  matter  intake  had the greatest  
effect. However,  at best, only 66% of the variation  in liveweight  gain 
could be explained  by changes  in intake. Multiple  regression  analysis  
involving  the other  parameters  as well as digestible  organic  matter  intake,  
did not significantly  increase  the correlation.
Table 14
The influence  of intake  and the amount  and type of material  offered  on the 
liveweight  gain of animals  (R^ (average  of three years)
Continuous
LSRgrazing
HSRRotational
LSRgrazing
HSR
DOMI .637*** .662*** .545* .565***
DM offered .069 NS .484*** .058 NS .216 NS
Green offered .466*** .500*** .245* .268*
% DMD offered .560*** .313* .273* .281*
LWG expressed  as g LWG/kg  LW/day  
DOMI  expressed  as g DOM/kg  LW/day  
DM offered  expressed  as g DM/kg  LW/day
The energy  requirement  for maintenance  and activity  was calculated  
by converting  the digestible  organic  matter  intake  into total energy  and 
subtracting  from this the energy  requirement  for liveweight  gain. In all 
years, at both stocking  rates, the maintenance  energy  requirement  was 
lower  for the animals  on the rotationally  grazed  treatment,  by 18.2% at 
the low stocking  rate and 11.4% at the high stocking  rate (Table 15). 
Values  for 1978 and 1979 were quite similar  while those for 1980 were 
significantly  higher. A possible  explanation  for this discrepancy  may be
Table 15
Energy  requirement  for maintenance  and activity
MJ/animal/day
1978 1979 1980 Mean
Continuous  grazing
LSR 58.8 50.5 68.6 59.3
HSR 57.5 59.2 67.7 61.5
Rotational  grazing
LSR 45.4 46.2 54.1 48.5
HSR 50.3 51.2 62.1 54.5
SE mean and
significance 2.20** 1.74** 2.38** 1.26***
123
that in 1980 the cattle had been doubly implanted  with the growth 
hormones,  Finaplix  and Ralgro,  and had subsequently  displayed  quite  
abnormal  behaviour,  which in turn required  extra energy. TTie main ­
tenance  energy requirement  for indoor  fed cattle of the same weight  
would be 36 MJ/head.  A review of the literature  has shown that 
estimates  of the energy  requirement  of the grazing  animal  have varied  
widely  and values  ranged  from only slightly  higher  than those of housed  
animals  (40), to those which  were 2-3 times  as great  (41). The importance  
of the energy  expenditure  of grazing  activity  in animal  production  has 
been emphasised  by the work of McGraham  (42) who showed  that a 
sheep 5 km from water, grazing  sparse pasture  would need to eat 2.2 
times more than one grazing  good pasture to maintain  zero energy  
balance.
It is clear that pasture  not utilized  by the grazing  animal  will not yield  
animal products.  Consequently  in any grazing  study, the ability to 
measure  pasture  utilization  is almost  as important  as the ability  to meas ­
ure pasture production.  The disappearance  of grass, largely through  
animal  consumption  may be estimated  by direct  measurement  via sample 
cuts before and after each grazing  or from inside and outside  exclosure  
cages. Utilization  is expressed  as the amount  of dry matter  utilized  as a 
percentage  of that produced  (Table  16). Except  in 1978, utilization  was 
high in all treatments  but it seemed  to be mainly  affected  by stocking 
rate, higher  utilization  being obtained  with higher  stocking  rates. Over  
the three years  of the experiment,  using this evaluation,  it would appear  
that the best treatment  was the high stocking  rate of the continuously  
grazed  system,  with 93% utilization.  This treatment,  however,  produced  
the lowest  output  per hectare  in terms  of liveweight  gain (Table  5).
Table 16
Amount  of grass utilised  as a percentage  of that produced
1978 1979 1980 Mean kg LWG/100  kg DM
Continuous  grazing
LSR 76.9 95.3 84.3 85.5 11.5
HSR 92.2 94.2 92.5 93.0 10.2
Rotational  grazing
LSR 67.9 73.5 83.7 75.0 12.0
HSR 75.8 81.4 90.0 82.4 14.5
Similarly  higher utilization  figures  were obtained  from both contin ­
uously  grazed  treatments  although  less liveweight  gain was produced  from 
both treatments.  It appears  therefore  that this assessment  of utilization  
gives  a good indication  of the amount  of dry matter  eaten by the animal  
but dees not take into account  his efficiency  at converting  it into animal  
products.  Consequently,  it can be a misleading  figure in assessing  the 
value of different  grazing  systems.  A more meaningful  figure is where 
liveweight  gain is expressed  per unit of DM produced  (Table  16). From  
these figures  it can be seen that the most efficient  system  was the rotation ­
124
ally grazed high stocking  rate treatment  where more than 1.4 kg of 
liveweight  gain could  be produced  for every 10 kg of DM produced.
Future  trends
Before  one looks to the future it is often advisable  to first look back ­
wards and the following  is an excerpt  from a letter written by W. 
Dickinson  to Lord Portman  in London  in 1847 (43).
“I had a new method  of cultivating  a peculiar  plant  — Italian  ryegrass  
— the result  of which  was as startling  as it was new, whereby  nine or ten 
crops of excellent  green food had been obtained  between  March and 
December;  being cut in the former month and watered  with liquid  
manure,  consisting  of one-thrid  of pure horse urine and two-thirds  of 
water,  distributed  from a London  street water-cart  passing  once over the 
plant immediately  after the grass was cut, one watering  being sufficient  
for one crop”.
Under these conditions  Dickenson  was still able to obtain a yearly  
production  of up to 50 tons of grass per acre, which assuming  a dry 
matter  percentage  of 15% would  be equivalent  to 18.8 t dry matter  ha“*.
In modern  times,  levels of 25.2 t ba“' and 22.2 t ha' ‘ have been ob­
tained  in Wales  (44) and in the Netherlands  (45) respectively.  Maximum  
recorded  yields  of 16.9 t ha^' for permanent  pasture  (46) and 18.4 t ha’‘ 
for Italian  ryegrass  (47) have been obtained  in Ireland  under  high nitrogen  
fertilization  and cutting  conditions.  There  is however,  a large fluctuation  
from year to year and from place to place. It would appear  therefore,  
that no substantial  increase  in herbage  dry matter  production  has been  
achieved  in over a hundred  years. This may not be so surprising  as the 
maximum  potential  production  for temperate  grasses  in Western  Europe,  
assuming  a conversion  of up to 3% of the incoming  light over the whole 
year is only somewhat  over 20 t ha~'.
One could not expect such high levels of production  from grazed  
swards  as from cut swards,  and our yearly production  under grazing  in 
this country  is still very much less than those figures. While there is 
little evidence  to suggest  that grazing  management  can influence  annual  
rates of net herbage  accumulation,  it does affect sward structure  which 
is closely  involved  in maintaining  long-term  sward stability,  through  the 
maintenance  of high tiller populations.  Further  research  is needed  there ­
fore to define management  factors  that affect tiller and leaf turnover  
combined  with measurements  on tiller populations,  on sward structure  
and morphology  and on leaf density.
While  total annual  production  is important,  its seasonal  distribution  is 
probably  of equal  importance,  as fluctuations  serve to limit stocking  rates  
on a whole farm basis, and increased  animal  output  might be achieved  
if the amplitude  of these fluctuations  could be reduced.  There is now 
evidence  to suggest  that this could be achieved  by timely  applications  of 
N fertiliser  (47) or by the introduction  of new grass varieties.  This would  
allow greater  adaptability  for different  grazing  enterprises.  Perhaps  in 
this respect  we should  advocate  the implementation  of a definite  reseeding  
policy  at farm level, where  for example,  a .small proportion  of the farm  
would be reseeded  annually.
125
To derive  maximum  benefit  from our grasslands  it is necessary  that our 
soils be fertile. Consequently,  farmers  should  have a definite  policy  on 
soil analysis.  Again,  a percentage  of the farm could be analysed  each 
year. Intensive  grassland  production  has also led to seme problems  in 
animal health,  due to shortages  or imbalances  in trace elements.  In 
Ireland,  while there are no recorded  micronutrient  deficiencies  that affect  
grass growth  on mineral  soils, further  research  is needed  to ensure  that 
sufficient  levels are available  in the plant to meet the animal ’s require ­
ments. For example,  where sulphur  is applied,  care should  be exercised 
that the copper  level in the animal  is not affected,  particularly  on light 
textured  soils.
Further  research  must define accurately  the nutritional  requirement  of 
the animal  at all stages  throughout  the season,  and in turn we must be 
able to modify  management  to meet those requirements.  It would  be an 
advantage  therefore,  if we could predict  production  in advance,  so that 
the animal ’s requirements  could be matched  more accurately  to the 
available  herbage.  In this respect,  a definite  policy  on concentrate  feeding 
during  grazing  at stress  periods  would be of benefit. We also need to be 
able to cut smaller  quantities  of silage. In this area one feels that good  
silage quality  will not be consistently  obtained  until such time as the 
farmer  has control  of when the silage is cut, which ideally  means  having 
his own machinery.
It was not until recently  that animal  behaviour  was regarded  as being  
an important  factor  in animal  production  from grassland.  While  we have 
some preliminary  results  concerning  the energy  expenditure  of animals  
on different  grazing  systems,  it is desirable  that more detailed  measure ­
ments be made across the grazing  season,  so that a better picture is 
obtained  of the animal ’s total energy  requirement.  Only then will it be 
possible  to modify management  .so that these requirements  can be 
adequately  met.
References
1.Cooper,  J. P. (1970).  Potential  production  and energy  conversion  in temperate  
and tropical  grasses.  Herb. Abstr.,  40, 1-15.
Lee, J. (1983). Land evaluation  for grassland  in Europe.  Proc. EEC Seminar  
“Land Resource  Evaluation ”. Wageningen.
3. Lee, J. and Diamond,  S. (1972).  The potential  of Irish land for Livestock  
Production.  Soil Survey  Bulletin.  No. 26. Pub. An Foras Taluntais,  19 Sandy-  
mount  Avenue,  Dublin  4.
Baile, C. A. and Forbes,  J. M. (1974).  Control  of feed intake and regulation  
of energy  balance  in ruminants.  Physiol.  Rev. 54, 160.
5. Bines,  J. A. (1971). Metabolic  and physical  control  of food intake in rumin ­
ants. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 30, 116.
6. Bines, J. A. (1976). Regulation  of food intake in dairy cows in relation  to 
milk production.  Livestock  Prod. Sci. 3, 115.
Baumgardt,  B. R. (1970).  Control  of feed intake  in the regulation  of energy  
balance. In : “Physiology  of digestion  and metabolism  in the ruminant ”. 
Ed. Phillipson,  A. T., Oriel Press, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne,  235.
Campling,  R. C. (1970).  Physical  regulation  of voluntary  intake. In : “Physi ­
ology of digestion  and metabolism  in the ruminant ”. Ed. Phillipson,  A. T. 
Oriel Press, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne.  226.2.
4.
7.
8.
126
9. Forbes,  J. M. (1970).  The voluntary  food intake of pregnant  and lactating  
ruminants  : A review.  The Brit. Vet. J., 126, 1.
10. Waite, R., MacDonald,  W. B. and Holmes,  W. (1951). Studies  in grazing  
management.  Part 3. J. Agric. Sci., Camb.,  41, 163.
11. Martin,  G. C. and Donker,  J. D. (1966). Animal  excretement  as a factor  
influencing  acceptability  of grazed forage. Proc. 10th Int. Grassld.  Congr.,  
Helsinki.  359.
12. Macdiarmid,  B. N. and Watkin,  D. L. (1972).  The cattle dung patch. 3. Dis­
tribution  and rate of decay of dung patches  and their influence  on grazing  
behaviour.  J. Br. Grassld.  Soc. 27, 48.
13. Norman,  M. J. T. and Green,  J. O. (1958).  The local influence  of cattle dung  
and urine upon the yield and botanical  composition  of permanent  pasture.  J. 
Br. Grassld.  Soc., 13, 39.
14. Greenhalgh,  J. F. D. and Reid, G. W. (1968).  The effect of grazing  intensity  
on herbage  consumption  and animal production.  III. Dairy cows grazed at 
two intensities  on clean and contaminated  pastures.  J. Agric. Sci. Camb.,  72, 
111 .
15. Milne,  J. A., Bagley,  L. and Grant,  S. (1979).  Effect of season and level of 
grazing  on the utilization  of heather  by sheep. 2. Diet selection  and intake.  
Grass and Forage  Sci., 34, 45.
16. Bines, J. A. (1979). Voluntary  food intake. In : “Feeding  strategy  for the 
high-yielding  dairy cow”. Eds.: Broster,  W. H. and Swan,  H. London,  Gran ­
ada. 23-48.
17. Milne,  J. A., Hodgson,  J., Thompson,  R., Souter,  W. G. and Barthram,  G. T. 
(1982).  The diet ingested  by sheep  grazing  swards  differing  in white  clover  and 
perennial  ryegrass  content.  Grass and Forage  Sci., 37, 209.
18. Arnold,  G. W. (1960). Selective  grazing  by sheep of two forage species at 
different  stages of growth.  Aust. J. Agric. Res., 11, 1026.
19. Van Dyne, G. M., Brockington,  N. R., Szocs, Z., Duek,  J. and Ribic, C. A. 
(1980). 4. Large herbivore  subsystem.  In ; “Grassland  systems  analysis  and 
man”. Eds.: A. I. Bremerger  and G. M. Van Dyne. Int. Biol. Prog. 19. 
Cambridge  University  Press. 269.
20. Blaxter,  K. L., Wainman,  F. W. and Wilson,  R. S. (1961).  The regulation  of 
food intake by sheep. Anim. Prod., 3, 51.
21. Conrad,  H. R., Pratt,  A. D. and Hibbs,  J. W. (1964).  Regulation  of food intake  
in dairy cows. I. Changes  in importance  of physical  and physiological  factors  
with increasing  digestibility.  J. Dairy Sci., 47, 54.
22. Hodgson,  J. (1977^  The relationship  between  the digestibility  of a sward and 
the herbage  consumption  of grazing  calves. Proc. Int. Meeting  on Animal  
Prod, from Temperate  Grassld.  Ed. B. Gilsenan,  Dublin,  An Foras  Taluntais.  
70.
23. Demarquilly,  C. and Weiss, Ph. (1970). Tableaux  de la valeur alimentaires  
des fourages  : Ministere  de I’Agriculture  Institute  National  de la Recherche  
Agronomique  Servier  d’Experimentation  et dTnformation  l.N.R.A.  Versailles.  
65.
24. Minson,  J. (1963).  The effect of pelleting  and wafering  on the feeding  value  
of roughages —a review.  J. Brit. Grassld.  Soc., 18, 39.
25. Laredo,  M. A. and Minson,  D. J. (1973).  The voluntary  intake,  digestibility  
and retention  time by sheep of leaf and stem fractions  of five grasses.  Aust.  
J. Agric. Res., 24, 875.
26. Jamison,  W. S. (1975). Studies  on the herbage  intake and grazing  behaviour  
of cattle and sheep. Ph.D.  Thesis,  University  of Reading.
27. Verite, R. and Journet,  M. (1970). Influence  de la teneur en sau et de la 
deshyration  de I’herbage  sur sa valeur alimentaire  pour les vaches laitieres.  
Ann. Zootech.,  19, 255.
127
29.
3028. March,  R. (1975).  A comparison  between  spring  and autumn  pasture  for beef 
cattle at equal grazing  pressures.  J. Br. Grassld.  Soc., 30, 165.
Hancock,  J. (1953). Studies  in monozygotic  cattle twins. VII. The relative  
importance  of inheritance  and environment  in the production  of dairy cattle.  
N.Z. J. Sci. Tech.,  35, 67.
McMeekan,  C. P. (1956).  Grazing  management  and animal  production.  Proc.  
7th Int. Grassld.  Congr.  146.
31. Conway,  A. (1968). Grazing  management  in relation  to beef production  4. 
Effect of seasonal  variation  in the stocking  rate of beef cattle on animal  
production  and on sward  composition.  Ir. J. Agric.  Res., 7, 93.
32. Jones, R. J. and Sandland,  R. L. (1974).  The reaction  between  animal  gain 
and stocking  rate. Derivation  of the relation  from results of grazing  trials.  
J. Agric. Sci., Camb.,  83, 335.
33. McMeekan,  C. P. and Walsh,  M. J. (1963).  The inter-relationships  of grazing  
method  and stocking  rate in the efficiency  of pasture utilization  by dairy  
cattle.  J. Agric. Sci., Camb.,  61, 147.
34. Davies,  T. H. (1976).  The evolution  of modern  dairy cow grazing  systems. 
ADAS  Quat. Rev., 22, 275.
35. Ernst,  P., Le Du, Y. L. P. and Carlier,  L. (1980).  Animal  and sward  production  
under rotational  and continuous  grazing  management  — a critical  appraisal.  
Proc. Int. Symp.  Eur. Grassld.  Fed. on the role of nitrogen  in intensive  grass ­
land. Wageningen,  119.
36. Drew,  J. P. and Deasy,  D. (1937).  An investigation  into the intensive  system 
of grassland  management.  J. Dept. Agric. Dublin.  24, 3.
37. Conway,  A. (1963). Effect of grazing  management  on beef production.  11. 
Comparison  of three stocking  rates under three systems  of grazing.  Ir. J. 
Agric. Res., 2, 243.
38. McCarthy,  D. (1979). Milk production  from grassland.  In ; Proc. of Milk 
Production  Seminar,  Moorepark,  Ireland.
39. Holmes,  W. (1980). Grazing  management.  In : “Grass, its production  and 
utilization ”. Ed. W. Holmes.  Blackwell  Scientific  Publications,  London.  125.
40. Corbett,  J. L., Langlands,  J. P. and Boyne,  W. A. (1961).  An estimate  of the 
energy  expended  for maintenance  by strip-grazed  dairy cows. Proc. VIII Int. 
Congr.  Anim. Prod. 245.
41. Coop, I. E. and Hill, M. K. (1962).  The enregy requirements  of sheep for 
maintenance  and gain. II. Grazing  sheep.  J. agric. Sci., Camb.,  58, 187.
42. Graham,  N. McC. (1964).  Maintenance  requirements  of sheep indoors  and at 
pasture.  Proc. Aust. Soc. Anim. Prod.,  5, 272.
43. Dickinson,  W. (1847).  On a variety  of Italian Ryegrass.  J. Roy. Agric. Soc.,  
8, 572.
44. Cooper,  J. P. (1969).  Potential  forage  production.  Occas.  Symp.  5, Br. Grassld.  
Soc. 5.
45. Alberda,  T. (1968). Dry matter production  and light interception  of crop 
surfaces.  IV. Maximum  herbage  production  as compared  with predicted  
values.  Neth. J. Agric. Sci. ,16, 142.
46. Ryan, M. (1974).  Grassland  Productivity.  1. Nitrogen  and soil effects  on yield 
of herbage.  Ir. J.. Agric. Res. 13, 275.
47. Culleton,  N. and Culleton,  J. (1981).  Evaluation  of silage cutting  systems  on 
Italian  ryegrass.  An Foras Taluntais,  Soil Research  Report.  22.
48. O’Sullivan,  M. (1983).  Measurement  of grazing  behaviour  and herbage  intake  
on two different  grazing  management  systems  of beef production.  EEC Sem-
I inar : “Beef Production  from Grass ”, Wye College,  Kent.
128
