
€1.5 million is to be allocated towards the introduction of a Fodder Import Support measure, which will operate through dairy co-ops. 
Additional flexibility for Fodder Transport Scheme and GLAS measures also announced.
Fodder import subsidy details
The fodder import measure is being introduced with immediate effect to reduce the cost to farmers of imported forage (hay, silage, haylage etc.) from outside the island of Ireland.
Full terms and conditions of the scheme are available here.
It will cover forage imported by the co-ops from 5th April 2018 to 30th April 2018 and will be subject to EU State Aid (de-minimis) rules.
It is intended that support under the measure will reduce the cost to farmers of imported fodder by approximately one third. The initial allocation will support the importation of up to 20,000 tons of fodder into the country and this will be kept under ongoing review until the current crises is over.
Application forms and terms and conditions will be made available through co-ops and on the Department of Agriculture website from tomorrow.
How do farmers apply?
Farmers should contact their local participating co-op indicating their intention to purchase and volume of fodder requested.
How will payment be made?
The Department will pay the participating co-op a standard contribution towards the cost of transport which in turn will be reflected in the ultimate price to the farmer. This transport contribution to the import cost will amount to approximately one third of the total cost of the fodder.
Which are the participating co-ops?
A full list of participating Co-ops will be made available on the Department’s website, or from ICOS
Fodder transport scheme changes
Additional flexibility has been introduced to the Fodder Transport Support scheme introduced last January . The scheme will now apply to all counties with immediate effect,  the need for a fodder budget will be removed, and the minimum distance requirement is reduced to 50 km.
GLAS measures
Regarding GLAS measures, an extension has been announced to the closing date for grazing livestock on land containing the Traditional Hay Meadow action under the scheme. Grazing by livestock is now permitted up to 1st May this year.
 
