
Activity since last National Council
The following updates relate to Farm Safety:There have been 3 farm fatalities officially recorded by HSA to date. To keep up to date on farm fatalities click here. The HSA launched a campaign in April on the safe use of farm vehicles with specific emphasis on tractors and quad bikes/ATVs. There has been 40 vehicle related fatalities on Irish farms over the last 5 years.The 2022 Farm Safe Schools programme ran from February – May 2022. The IFA as a partner organisation liaised with National Schools in their respective counties to encourage them to participate. The 2022 regional winners were as follows:Leinster: Ruby Boland, Gaelscoil Nas na Riogh, Naas, Co. Kildare.Munster: David Long, Grange National School, Clonmel, Co Tipperary.Ulster: Ben Lynch, Mullahoran National School, Co Cavan.Connacht: Conor O’Grady, Kiltormer National School, Ballinasloe, Co Galway.
 For more information on the Farm Safe Schools programme, click here.  
IFA prepared a presentation on April Farm Safety Focus for the County Executives the topics covered included; silage safety and slurry safety.IFA met with Farm Safety Foundation to start discussion on Farm Safety Week which will take place from the 18th to 22ndJuly 2022. SunSmart launched their 2022 campaign – Be SunSmart, Protect your skin. The key message from the campaign for farmers are: If you work outdoors, you are exposed to 2-3 times more UV radiation from the sun than people who work indoors, putting you at a higher risk of skin cancer. You can reduce your risk of skin cancer and eye damage by protecting your skin and eyes from the sun.Unprotected exposure to the sun’s ultraviolet rays can cause skin damage.A short video is available online here.IFA made a submission to An Garda Síochána’ s Older Person Strategy. The following proposals were among those raised in the submission:Increased level of community engagement in rural areas.Increased community policing and crime prevention initiatives.Development of a channel of communication and a register of older people in the community who may be vulnerable.Increased accessibility and improved response time in rural communities.Greater visibility of an Garda Siochana especially in areas affected by rural crime.IFA attended a meeting with National Safeguarding Advisory committee to discuss assisted decision making for older people.IFA held an online webinar on the Fair Deal scheme in partnership with the HSE on Tuesday, 22nd March. Ultan Hynes, Head of Service, Nursing Homes Support Scheme with the HSE provided an overview of the scheme and the requirements for farmers to qualify for the “three-year cap” an facilitated a question-and-answer session. A recording of the presentation can be viewed online here.  IFA met with Minister Heydon to discuss the Green Cert qualification requirement for the 60% TAMS grant for women farmers.IFA met with Teagasc to discuss an education review on topics including Green Cert student placements.The priority closing dates for the SUSI grant are Thursday, 9th June for grant renewal applications and Thursday, 7th July for new grant applications. The SUSI Support Desk is open Monday to Friday (9.00am – 5.30pm), excluding public holidays. They can be contacted by phone on 0818 888 777 or by email on [email protected].IFA wrote to the National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA) to request a meeting to discuss new Climate Action and Sustainable Development leaving certificate subject which is due to be launched in 2024.IFA made a presentation on Climate Anxiety: A Farmers’ Perspective to an online workshop organised by Department of Sociology & Criminology in UCC.IFA are in the process of developing a plan for the Green Ribbon campaign, which will take place in September 2022.IFA are in the process of reviewing the IFA mental health leaflet and updating it to support farmers to reduce stress and signpost them to local health services. IFA attended Women in Agriculture Stakeholders’ Group (WASG) meetings to discuss CAP measures, supports for women farmers and the future structure of the stakeholder group.IFA attended the International Women’s Day celebration in Aras an Uachtarain.IFA made presentations at the Carlow, Wicklow and Limerick County Executives and Farm Family meetings in Laois Waterford and Wicklow.The Farm Family and Rural affairs committee met on the 2nd March. The election for Vice Chair and Management Committee was held. The results of the election were as follows: Vice Chair: Teresa Roche (Galway).Munster: Mary Breen (Limerick).Connacht: Mary McGovern (Leitrim).South Leinster: Ann Jennings (Wicklow).Ulster North/Leinster: Elizabeth Tilson (Cavan).Additional member: Amy Mulchrone (Mayo).
Any EU/COPA developments
IFA will attend online the Copa-Cogeca Women’s Committee meeting in Brussels on the 17th May, where the Women in Agriculture campaign and measures in the measures taking by Member States in relation to supporting women farmers and rural women in CAP Strategic Plans will be discussed.   
Upcoming issues
IFA will be finalising a plan for Farm Safety Week on the 18th to 22nd July. IFA will be finalising a programme of walks as part of Green Ribbon campaign in September.  
