29 January 2018  
The details of the fodder transport scheme to provide support to farmers affected by fodder shortage have been announced by the Department of Agriculture.
The scheme will provide targeted support to farmers in the West/North-West addressing a significant, verified forage shortage on those farms.
Through the scheme, a financial contribution towards forage transport costs in certain circumstances in the period ending 20th April 2018. The measure is operated by the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, through the Co-operative organisation.
Download full details and an application form 
Department of Agriculture Frequently Asked Questions on the Scheme
Who is eligible to apply for the Fodder Transport Support Measure?
Farmers primarily in the West/ North West who are experiencing a significant forage shortage on their holding.
What are the cut-off dates for the scheme opening, before which fodder is ineligible for the scheme?
Forage purchased prior to the 29th January is ineligible for the scheme.
How do I know if I have a significant forage shortage?
Farmers must contact a Farm Advisory Service (FAS) approved advisor who will carry out a forage assessment.
Where will I source the additional Forage?
Co-op’s in the West/North West will be facilitating the Fodder Transport Support Measure.
When and where will application forms be available?
Application forms were available from 27th January. They can be downloaded from DAFM website. They can be located under the Farming Schemes and Payments link.
What paper work is involved?
The following documentation needs to be submitted in order to make a valid application:
1. A completed forage assessment form signed by a FAS advisor.
2. A completed application form signed by the farmer.
3. A completed Co-op declaration form signed by the co-op.
What is the financial transport contribution available under the measure?
A 4 X 4 bale of silage/haylage will receive €12 in transport contribution.
4 X 4 bale of straw/hay will be eligible for a transport contribution of €8 per bale.
Transport contribution on other standard size bales will be calculated pro rata.
Is pit silage eligible for the measure?
Pit silage is not covered by the measure and is restricted to bales of hay, silage, haylage and straw for feeding.
How soon will payment be made to farmers?
Payments can only issue once a valid application has been received and all the necessary checks have been carried out
Where do I submit my completed application?
Completed applications are to be submitted to the following address:
Fodder Transport Support Measure,
Direct Payments Unit,
Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine,
Old Abbeyleix Road,
Portlaoise,
Co. Laois
Is there a limit to the amount of funding an individual can receive?
Eligibility to receive funding under the Fodder Transport Support Measure 2018 is dependent on the applicant remaining within the €15,000 individual aid limit in the 2016-2018 fiscal years, as set out in Commission Regulation (EU) 1408/2013. Where any aid awarded exceeds this amount, no payment will issue.
